
                               1 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 1, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

VIETNAM AND TERRORISM ASSAILED BY SPEAKERS AT THE UNITED NATIONS

BYLINE: By HOWARD W. FRENCH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 426 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 30


Prince Norodom Sihanouk head of an exiled coalition fighting to oust the
Vietnamese from Cambodia, denounced Vietnam today for its ''illegal occupation''
of his country.

The Prince, the first of 11 speakers today before the General Assembly, credited
international support for the coalition fighting the Vietnamese-backed
Government of Heng Samrin with preventing ''more than 70,000 Vietnamese
settlers'' from making his country ''vanish from the world map.''

The Foreign Minister of Thailand, Siddhi Savetsila, also condemned Vietnam's
''illegal occupation.''

The Israeli Foreign Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, said that the only way to achieve
Middle East peace is through ''direct negotiations'' with Israel, not an
international conference. Mr. Shamir's appearance on the podium prompted the
usual walkout of a number of Arab and other delegations.

Terrorism Condemned

Austria's Foreign Minister, Peter Jankowitsch, deplored the use of violence in
the resolution of international disputes, calling terrorism ''the new and brutal
form of violence.''

Hungary's Foreign Minister, Peter Varkonyi, said it is in the ''vital interest
of all member states'' that conflicts be settled through negotiation.

Albania's Foreign Minister, Reis Malile, assailed the ''two superpowers,''
saying, ''They are constantly in a fever to invent, produce and deploy
qualitatively new weapons with ever greater power of extermination.''

The Foreign Minister of Belize, Dean O. Barrow, said that his country ''welcomes
the return to civilian rule'' in neighboring Guatemala ''as a forerunner to the
normalization of relations between our two countries.''

Qatar's Foreign Minister, Sheik Ahmed Bin Saif al-Thani, called for a
strengthening of the United Nations, urging that members ''abide by the
principles'' of the Charter.

President Denis Sassou-Nguesso of Congo, speaking on behalf of the Organization
of African Unity, said the two priorities for Africa were economic development
and the abolition of apartheid in South Africa.

Jamaica's Foreign Minister, Oswald G. Harding, condemned South Africa's ''latest
attempts designed to further entrench its illegal presence in Namibia,'' also
known as South-West Africa.

Zaire's Foreign Minister, Mandungu Bula Nyati, criticized the economic measures
proposed by the International Monetary Fund. He said I.M.F. policy should ''take
more into account the needs of economic and social development of our countries
rather than pursuing a policy which could at present be construed as a new form
of colonialism.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 18, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A United Nations dispatch on Oct. 1 about a speech by Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
who heads the exiled coalition fighting to oust the Vietnamese from Cambodia,
misstated the figure he used for Vietnamese settlers in Cambodia. He said there
were more than 700,000.

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 1, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REPORT SAYS AMERICANS MAY BE IN INDOCHINA

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 485 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 30


The Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency said today that there was a
''strong possibility'' that some Americans remain alive in Indochina 14 years
after the end of American participation in the Vietnam war.

But in a news conference at the Pentagon, the Director, Lieut. Gen. Leonard H.
Perroots, said that ''I have no credible evidence, no strong compelling
evidence'' to sustain the possibility.

The general declined to speculate on whether the Americans were being held
prisoner or had remained in Indochina of their own will.

General Perroots appeared to be less positive in his assessment of the
possibilities than Lieut. Gen. Eugene F. Tighe Jr. in an interview on Monday
night.

General Tighe recently led a task force that reviewed all information pertaining
to the issue of the missing Americans. He said last night that ''a large volume
of evidence'' pointed to the conclusion that some Americans were still alive in
Indochina.

Thousands Unaccounted For

The Pentagon said that 2,387 soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen, plus 42
civilians and 1 person from the Coast Guard remain unaccounted for after the war
in Vietnam.

General Perroots, an Air Force officer, said he was being cautious in his
assessment ''to avoid giving false hope to those who have placed their trust in
us.''

The issue of possible prisoners of war or people listed as missing in action
still being in Indochina is among the most emotional questions remaining from
the war in Vietnam.

Not only are some families still without definite word but some veterans
organizations have asserted that the Government has not done all it could to
determine the fate of those listed as missing.

The group led by General Tighe, a former Director of the D.I.A., reported that
''there was no evidence of a coverup'' by anyone in the Government, General
Perroots said. #91 'Live Sightings'

He said the possbility that live Americans remained in Indochina was based on 91
''live sightings,'' mostly reported by Vietnamese refugees, over the last 14
years, 12 of which occurred from 1982 through 1985.

General Tighe also noted, General Perroots said, ''that significant information
remains in the hands of the Indochinese Governments.'' The United States does
not have diplomatic relations with the Government of Vietnam.

Among the recommendatons from General Tighe's group were that more analysts be
added, that all files be automated, and that intelligence from all agencies be
better integrated.

Basically, General Perroots said his statements today did little to advance
American knowledge about possible prisoners or others living in Indochina. ''I'm
not sure that it has moved,'' he said.

But, he added, ''actions to investigate live-sighting reports as well as other
information will continue to receive necessary priority and resources based on
the assumption that some Americans are still held captive.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 1, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FATHER OF 6-YEAR-OLD TESTIFIES IN FILM DEATHS TRIAL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 382 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES Sept. 30


The father of a 6-year-old girl who was killed while filming a scene for
''Twilight Zone: The Movie'' testified today that he had not been told his
daughter would be filmed amid explosions and beneath a hovering helicopter.

The man, Mark Chen, said his brother, Peter, who was a friend of the husband of
Donna Shuman, a production secretary for the movie, approached him in July 1982
about an appearance in the movie by his daughter, 6-year-old Renee Shinn Chen.

Mr. Chen said that in his first meeting with George Folsey Jr., the associate
producer, he was told only that his daughter would be carried across a river by
an actor.

Mr. Chen said John Landis, who directed the movie, approved of hiring Mr. Chen's
daughter and a 7-year-old boy, Myca Dinh Le, who were to appear in a scene with
the actor Vic Morrow, by looking them over on the set and saying, ''It's good,
it's fine.''

Scene Filmed Several Times

The children returned for filming, accompanied by their parents, but the scene
had to be filmed several times because the children kept giggling, Mr. Chen
said. He said Mr. Folsey informed the parents that the children would have to be
brought back for another night of filming.

''He said 'It will be very simple' '' Mr. Chen said, referring to Mr. Folsey.
Mr. Chen said that Mr. Folsey also told him that he would not have to accompany
his daughter during filming of the scene in the post-midnight hours of July 23,
1982.

Mr. Chen said he and his wife were given $500 in cash and told they would get
more when they returned.

Mr. Chen began to cry on the witness stand when he recounted his last visit to
the set where his daughter was to be filmed in a scene with Mr. Morrow. After a
long wait for the scene to start, Mr. Chen said, someone from the film company
came to get the children from a trailer where the family had been sleeping.

The children and Mr. Morrow, who was 53, were killed as they crossed a stream
amid special effects explosions in filming of a Vietnam war scene. The filming
took place at a remote location about 40 miles from Los Angeles.

Mr. Landis, Mr. Folsey, Dan Allingham, the unit production manager, Paul
Stewart, the special effects coordinator, and Dorcey Wingo, the helicopter
pilot, are charged with involuntary manslaughter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 1, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Diego J. Lopez Is Dead at 41; Ex-Director of AIDS Program

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 179 words


Diego J. Lopez, a social worker and psychotherapist, and a former clinical
director of Gay Men's Health Crisis, an AIDS service and educational
organization, died Monday at the New York University Medical Center of
complications related to acquired immune deficiency syndrome. He was 41 years
old and lived in Manhattan.

Mr. Lopez developed a training program for Gay Men's Health Crisis volunteers
that has been used as the model for AIDS service agencies in other cities. He
was also a member of the advisory board of the New York State AIDS Institute.

Born in the Bronx, Mr. Lopez was a graduate of Parsons College in Fairfield,
Iowa, and the Hunter College School of Social Work. He earned a master's degree
in personnel administration at New York University.

He was a veteran of the Vietnam War, in which he served as a corporal in the
Marine Corps from 1966 to 1968.

He is survived by his mother, Anna, of the Bronx; three sisters, Margarita Lopez
of Brooklyn, and Linda Lopez and Gloria Maldonado, both of Staten Island, and a
brother, Manuel, of the Bronx.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 1, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'TELEVISION'S VIETNAM,' A DOCUMENTARY ON 31

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 707 words


TO begin with the critical point, there is no very good reason why
''Television's Vietnam: The Impact of Media'' should not be shown. The one-hour
documentary, on Channel 31 at 8 o'clock tonight, became controversial when the
Public Broadcasting Service turned it down. Subsequently, a number of
public-television stations, acting independently of PBS, have chosen to show it
anyway. They should. It is a provocative documentary.

''Television's Vietnam'' is produced by Accuracy in Media, or AIM, the
conservative organization that looks for liberal bias in the press. The strength
of the documentary, however, is not that it says reporting in Vietnam was
liberal or left-leaning; it does some heavy breathing here, but pretty much
leaves that alone. Its strength is that it says some of the reporting was not
very good.

This reflects AIM's own conservative position, or, if you will, its bias.
Charlton Heston, the narrator, states the documentary's case: ''There is no
single answer'' to the question of why the United States lost in Vietnam, ''but
many believe that our will to win was eroded by the way our media, especially
television, reported the war.''

How did it report the war? The documentary builds its case around the coverage
of the Tet offensive in late January 1968, when the Vietcong began a series of
attacks on the major cities of South Vietnam. The Vietcong and their North
Vietnamese sponsors admitted later that they suffered a military defeat. On
American television, however, it sometimes looked as if they had won.

The documentary uses old television footage to show how the attack on the United
States Embassy in Saigon and the battle for Khe Sanh were reported. It also
notes that television did not report the massacre of civilians by the Vietcong
in Hue. This last is a more serious indictment than the first two.

The documentary shows that some correspondents, television and print, reported
incorrectly that a Vietcong detachment had broken into the Embassy on Jan. 31;
the Vietcong only penetrated the wall around the Embassy. It also shows that
correspondents too easily drew comparisons between Khe Sanh and the 1954
disaster inflicted on the French by the Vietminh at Dien Bien Phu.

Nonetheless, the incorrect reporting on the Embassy incident was not a major
lapse; that the Vietcong were only on the grounds and not inside the Embassy was
not a significant issue. It should also be noted now that not only the press was
gripped by comparisons between Khe Sanh and Dien Bien Phu; the Johnson
Administration was gripped, too.

It seems improbable, meanwhile, that the reporting on either of these incidents,
or even on Tet at large, was in itself sufficient to erode ''our will to win.''
Vietnam was a steady accretion of mishaps. Indeed, it seems likely that the
television reporting of domestic American protest was far more instrumental than
the Vietnam reporting in shaping that ''will.''

The Hue massacre was a different issue. Reed Irvine, the chairman of AIM, notes
in the documentary that when the bodies of some 3,000 murdered South Vietnamese
were exhumed after the Tet offensive, television ignored the story. Robert
Elegant, a reporter then for The Los Angeles Times, says in an interview that
other correspondents had ''a psychological disinclination'' to believe the
massacre happened.

Whether it was psychological disinclination, carelessness or dereliction is
unproved. The point is that Americans did not get an accurate picture of the
Communist Vietcong. The boat people who fled Vietnam in the 1970's had to fill
in the blanks.

Meanwhile, the documentary is entirely persuasive in suggesting that television
journalism is a flawed instrument. It does not deal in complexities. It is more
interested in theater, life and death played out in living color. AIM's
conservative prejudices notwithstanding, this is useful to know.

In the best tradition of public television, meanwhile - even in the absence of
PBS - ''Television's Vietnam: The Impact of Media'' is followed by a 30-minute
discussion. Experts, including Mr. Irvine, discuss the documentary. Feel free to
miss this. The documentary is flawed, even as television journalism is flawed,
but it does speak for itself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Allons, Enfants, to the Linguistic Barricades

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 264 words


To the Editor:

I found it amusing to read of France's measures to restrict the playing of pop
music with English lyrics on its air (news story, Sept. 11), considering the
relentless efforts of French governments to impose their language on people all
the way from the African continent to the Middle and Far East in the last 200
years and, let us not forget, inside France today.

France's rulers never thought there was anything wrong or immoral about imposing
their language through economic and political favoritism on the elites of the
lands where they sent their armies or their gendarmes - lands and people in an
inferior position economically and militarily, but in no way linguistically.

How many languages have been lost or are on their way to extinction because of
French imperialistic attitudes toward cultures they decided were less worthy
than their own? And we do not even need to leave French territory for examples.
At the French Revolution, less than one-fourth of French territory was actually
French speaking (see, e.g., Eugen Weber's descriptions in ''Peasants Into
Frenchmen,'' Stanford University Press, 1976), and therefore it wasn't any more
French than let's say the ''French'' Congo or Vietnam.

The three small Basque regions in the Pyrenees, for instance, definitely did not
speak French at the time, but through the efforts of the centralizing
governments in Paris, this ancient language, which had survived all of the
Indo-European invasions of 3,000 years, is today threatened with extinction.

JON ASKE
  Oakland, Calif., Sept. 15, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

JURY SEES FOOTAGE OF DEATHS FROM 'TWILIGHT ZONE'

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 337 words

DATELINE: BEVERLY HILLS, Calif., Oct. 1


The jury in the manslaughter trial arising from the filming of ''Twilight Zone:
The Movie'' went to a theater today to view film of the helicopter crash that
killed the actor Vic Morrow and two children.

The 30-minute film sequence, shot from six different camera angles, including
one from inside the helicopter, showed the aircraft, crippled by a
special-effects explosion, plummeting onto Mr. Morrow, 53 years old, Renee Chen,
6, and Myca Dinh Lee, 7.

The film was shot July 23, 1982, in a Vietnam War sequence.

In one sequence the helicopter was seen spinning out of control and crashing
onto the three actors as Mr. Morrow waded across a river with the two children
in his arms.

John Landis, the director of the movie, and four associates are on trial in
Superior Court for involuntary manslaughter. The screening was held during a
formal court session at the 1,100-seat Samuel Goldwyn Theater at the Motion
Picture Academy of Arts and Sciences.

Prosecutor Lea Purwin D'Agostino said the film was ''clearly the best evidence
to show the incredible enormity of the violence of that scene - to show how low
the helicopter was, how huge and powerful the explosions were.''

''The filmmakers put two tiny babies in there and an adult,'' she told
reporters. ''It's the best evidence. There won't be any better evidence ever.''

Leonard Levine, the lawyer one of the defendants, told reporters that the film
clearly supports the defense position.

Mr. Landis was seen near the three actors during much of the filming. The
defense has asserted that had the helicopter fallen at a different angle it
would have struck the director.

Last week the defense tried unsuccessfully to persuade Judge Roger Boren to show
the film in the courtroom, rather than in the Academy Awards theater, arguing
that the special showing would overemphasize the dramatic.

But Judge Boren approved the use of the theater, noting that ''in light of the
unique nature of this film it is appropriate to see it in a professional
setting.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By James Chace

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 904 words


THE WISE MEN: Six Friends and the World They Made. By Walter Isaacson and Evan
Thomas. Illustrated. 853 pages. Simon & Schuster. $22.95.

ON March 26, 1968, the elder statesmen of American foreign policy were called in
by President Johnson to report on how they evaluated the progress of the war in
Vietnam. The United States commander in Vietnam, Gen. William C. Westmoreland,
had requested 200,000 more troops; the extent and fury of the enemy's Tet
offensive at the beginning of the year had shocked the American public.

Six months earlier, the President had assembled the so-called wise old men and
had heard them urge him to stay the course. Now their advice was to withdraw
from Indochina. And the man who was the dominant force at that meeting, as he
had been before, was President Truman's Secretary of State, Dean Acheson.
Indeed, when one hawkish member of the group protested that the summary being
presented to Mr. Johnson did not accurately represent the group's view, Mr.
Acheson cut him off with the withering comment: ''It represents my view.''

In their engrossing narrative about the creators of the postwar American world
order, Walter Isaacson and Evan Thomas, both editors at Time magazine, have
chosen six men who can be said to have incarnated the American establishment. By
far the most commanding figure was Dean Acheson, whose sense of how to construct
a world favorable to American interests was without ambiguities. Impressive in
quite another way was George F. Kennan, once Mr. Acheson's chief of policy
planning, whose vision was the most prophetic (he warned against engagement in
Vietnam as far back as 1948), but whose advice after the cold war was well under
way was too often disregarded.

Their other choices are fairly made. Most senior was W. Averell Harriman, who
first visited Russia in 1899 and later became Franklin D. Roosevelt's special
envoy to Churchill and Stalin and headed the doomed 1968 negotiations with the
North Vietnamese to end the war in Vietnam. Their other ''wise men'' include
Robert A. Lovett and John J. McCloy, both of whom first came to prominence under
Roosevelt's Secretary of War, Henry L. Stimson, when he chose them as Assistant
Secretaries. Like Mr. Harriman, they came from Wall Street. After the war Mr.
McCloy was head of the World Bank and High Commissioner to Germany. Mr. Lovett
went on to become Mr. Truman's Under Secretary of State and Secretary of
Defense.

The most surprising choice for inclusion in ''The Wise Men'' is Charles E.
(Chip) Bohlen. Trained with Mr. Kennan as a Soviet expert before World War II,
Mr. Bohlen never left the Foreign Service, rising to become Ambassador to the
Soviet Union. The authors suggest that he was almost as influential as Mr.
Kennan in persuading those architects of the postwar world that the Soviet Union
was a predatory ally.

In one salient episode, Mr. Bohlen urged the Eisenhower Administration to take
advantage of the new winds that were blowing out of Moscow just after Stalin's
death, when Georgi M. Malenkov took over, perhaps to set up a summit meeting.
Secretary of State John Foster Dulles dismissed Mr. Bohlen's suggestions and
kept him from talking directly to Mr. Eisenhower, who liked Mr. Bohlen and
suggested his appointment to Moscow. In later years, according to the authors,
Mr. Bohlen believed he should have been more forceful, for it was likely that
the Malenkov period offered the last chance for a reunified, neutral Germany.

The authors of ''The Wise Men'' take a relatively balanced view of the world the
''wise men'' tried to establish when the United States emerged from World War
II. With the United States and the Soviet Union the clearly dominant world
powers and Stalin in his final paranoid phase, it would have been astounding if
the two countries had not become adversaries. But Mr. Isaacson and Mr. Thomas
are sensible enough not to lay all the blame on the Russians. The nuances of
Soviet behavior were often lost when these same ''wise men,'' who prided
themselves on being realists, became victims of their own rhetoric. As the
authors explain it: ''To win Congressional support, Truman's men consistently
oversimplified and overstated the truth, and in so doing made anti-Communism
dangerously rigid and U.S. commitments overly sweeping.''

Nonetheless, they were acutely aware of the need to balance commitments and
capabilities, and the economic order established at Bretton Woods in 1945
favoring an expanding American economy open to world trade made the global
American role possible. Regrettably, the authors scant the economic dimension in
their portrayal of American security concerns. Dean Acheson, surely the most
gifted Secretary of State since John Quincy Adams, turned against the Vietnam
War largely because he was, in the authors' words, ''a pragmatist, not an
ideologue.'' He deeply believed in the world order he had helped create, which
was based on a strong alliance with Europe and Japan. In this respect, Vietnam
was always of marginal strategic significance. ''A war without end,'' as the
authors put it, ''was too high a price to pay for South Vietnam's freedom,
especially since the South Vietnamese were so incapable of defending it
themselves.'' By then, ends and means were no longer in balance. It was for that
reason that the ''wise men'' turned against the Vietnam War and that their
postwar order was so profoundly shattered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Walter Isaacson and Evan Thomas (Ted Thai)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

New Envoy to Ghana Named

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 62 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 2


President Reagan said today that he would nominate Stephen R. Lyne, a Foreign
Service officer, as Ambassador to Ghana. Mr. Lyne, 51 years old, has held posts
in Cambodia, Vietnam, New Zealand, Gabon, Algeria, Australia and Lebanon and
since last year has been diplomat-in-residence and an adjunct professor at
Boston University's Center for International Relations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 4, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRAT TURNING UP THE HEAT IN NORTH CAROLINA SENATE RACE

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words

DATELINE: RALEIGH, N.C., Oct. 2


Terry Sanford is a courtly man, given to understatement, not hyperbole.

At 69 years of age, after a lifetime in politics and education, including 16
years as president of Duke University, Mr. Sanford, a moderate Democrat, is
seeking the Senate seat held since July by James T. Broyhill. Mr. Sanford's
easygoing personality, plus the memory of the savage 1984 Senate battle in this
state, had led him to conduct a low-key campaign, refraining from attacks on Mr.
Broyhill's record and from negative tactics in general.

But at a news conference here Wednesday he changed his approach sharply,
asserting that Mr. Broyhill, a 59-year-old Republican, was ''no friend of
education'' and promising more tough talk later. The outcome of the contest
could hinge on the success or failure of the new Sanford strategy, and the race
here is one of the handful that will decide which party controls the Senate for
the Reagan Administration's last two years.

As things now stand, the Broyhill-Sanford race is close. A poll for The News and
Observer in Raleigh and The Winston-Salem Journal late last month showed 43
percent of 602 probable voters preferred Mr. Broyhill and 40 percent preferred
Mr. Sanford, with 17 percent undecided. With a margin of sampling error of plus
or minus four percentage points, the Republican's lead was statistically
insignificant.

Role of President Unclear

A senior Broyhill strategist took comfort from the fact that the trend in the
polls was in his man's favor, Mr. Broyhill having started out well behind,
pulled even and now taken a slight lead. One of Mr. Sanford's managers asserted,
on the other hand, that his man was doing better than could have been expected,
having done almost no television advertising until last week and still staying
within reach.

Mr. Broyhill's own polls, according to sources in his campaign, show he has been
helped considerably by his appointment to the Senate last summer. Gov. James G.
Martin, a Republican, named Mr. Broyhill, a 23-year veteran of the House who won
the Republican Senate primary, to the Senate seat a few days after Senator John
P. East, a Republican who had been planning to retire, committed suicide.

Here, as in other close races around the country, the Republicans hope some of
President Reagan's popularity will rub off. Mr. Reagan attended a rally at
Greensboro Coliseum on June 4, raising more than $600,000, a record for North
Carolina, and he will be in Raleigh for a rally next Wednesday.

But the new poll raised questions about the President's ability to help Mr.
Broyhill, with 55 percent saying Mr. Reagan's endorsement would have no effect
on their votes, 21 percent saying it would help Mr. Broyhill and 18 percent
saying it would hurt him.

'Now It's My Turn to Hit'

One major reason for that may be the plight of the state's textile industry,
which has been devastated by cheap imports. Mr. Broyhill has tried to distance
himself from the Administration's free-trade policies, but Mr. Sanford hammers
away at the issue with the slogan ''Save textile jobs - vote Democratic.'' He
said in an interview that Mr. Broyhill had been unable to dissuade Mr. Reagan
from vetoing a bill aimed at protecting such jobs.

''He went to bat for North Carolina and struck out,'' Mr. Sanford added. ''Now
it's my turn to hit.'' The Broyhill-Sanford race is taking place against the
backdrop of the 1984 contest between Senator Jesse Helms, a hero of the
Republican right wing, and James B. Hunt Jr., a popular Democrat then ending his
second term as Governor. It was so bitter and so expensive, costing more than
any other Senate race in history, that the whole state is still suffering from a
kind of electoral hangover, veteran politicians here say.

Mr. Broyhill spent the summer running television commercials designed to make
him better known statewide, and Mr. Sanford spent it traveling through 100
counties to silence suggestions that he was too old to run and to reawaken
Democratic organizations in rural areas. He told local politicians that if they
did not win this time, after a string of Republican successes, they might not
win a statewide campaign for the next generation.

''I think he's got them ready to work hard,'' said a leading Republican, who
asked not to be identified, ''and it could make the difference. Another thing:
For the first time, we're running candidates for judgeships and other local
offices, and that may prove to have been a mistake in the short run, because a
lot of dozy old boys that have never had opposition are working hard to save
themselves, and that will bring out Democratic votes for Terry.''

Ad on Food Tax Prompted Shift

But that sort of retail politics counts for less these days than television and
its ability to generate abiding impressions of candidates. In this state the
candidate who comes across on television as the more conservative almost always
wins, unless there is an overriding issue such as Watergate or Vietnam or
recession.

No such issue is on the horizon this time, and Mr. Broyhill is working hard, and
with some apparent success so far, to picture Mr. Sanford as an old-style
liberal ''spender.'' It was a Broyhill commercial attacking Mr. Sanford for
imposing a sales tax on food when he was Governor from 1961 to 1965 that
prompted Mr. Sanford to change his campaign tactics.

At his news conference, Mr. Sanford gave a long justification for the tax,
noting that it was used to improve education in the state and specifically to
build community colleges and technical institutes. North Carolinians, Mr.
Sanford argued, ''have benefited more from that single act than any oither
political decision in the state's history'' because it helped lift education
here from ''the bottom of the heap'' nationally and eventually to attract
high-technology laboratories and industries.

TV as 'Electronic Shield'

The explanation sounded plausible, but it may be harder to put across on
television, with what Mr. Sanford himself described as its ''30-second
electronic shield'' that makes anything but the simplest of political messages
very difficult to deliver.

In addition, Mr. Broyhill will benefit from long-term changes in the state's
electorate. There are twice as many registered Democrats in North Carolina as
registered Republicans, but in surveys in which voters asked to describe
themselves, about the same number call themselves Republicans as call themselves
Democrats. Also, the Republicans are more likely to vote, in most circumstances,
which could be decisive in a close contest like this.

The major groups that often stay home, unless they see a special reason to vote,
are blacks, who are predominantly Democratic, and fundamentalist Christians, who
are heavily Republican. Their performance on Nov. 4 remains an open question.

So does the discrepancy in fund-raising. Mr. Sanford thinks he will have enough
money to be ''competitive'' in broadcast advertising in the campaign's final
month, but Mr. Broyhill is expected to outspend him by at least 2 to 1.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of James T. Broyhill and Terry Sanford (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'CURTAIN' OF WAR SLOWING CAMBODIA REFUGEES

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 25, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 4


Nearly two years after Vietnamese forces began sealing the border between
Cambodia and Thailand, Cambodian refugees fleeing their homeland say escape
overland has become increasingly dangerous and expensive, forcing more to try to
leave by sea. They join Vietnamese ''boat people'' heading for eastern Thailand
or drift into the open South China Sea.

Exiles reaching Site II, a camp of 130,000 displaced Cambodians on the Thai side
of the border, say the $500 payment made to a private ''guide'' to be smuggled
out of Phnom Penh along contraband trade routes has risen to $1,000 over the
last few months. Government officials are reported to demand two or three times
that figure to arrange an illegal exit.

But while civilian Cambodians are having a harder time reaching Thailand across
a new Asian ''curtain'' of earthenworks, fences and minefields, guerrillas
battling the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh are continuing to attack
targets throughout the country, according to refugees and foreigners who live in
the Cambodian capital.

An official of an international agency said he recently witnessed a guerrilla
attack at Kampot, not far from the Vietnamese border. Other foreigners say
Cambodian Government workers have been called from their jobs or asked to work
on days off to clear underbrush from riverbanks around the capital to remove
cover for guerrillas.

Bases Inside the Country

Cambodian exiles say an unknown number of guerrillas from the three armies
loosely joined in a resistance coalition under Prince Norodom Sihanouk now
operate from bases inside the country. All three groups insist their supply
routes from Thailand are still open, but are now more risky.

Most of the guerrilla activity inside Cambodia is thought to be the work of the
Khmer Rouge, which has the largest and best-equipped army. They are reported to
be supported by informers and sympathizers within villages.

Diplomats questioned on why the Khmer Rouge, which under Pol Pot were
responsible for the deaths of hundreds of thousands of Cambodians, would have
any support in the countryside say that the organization is ultranationalist and
can play on traditional anti-Vietnamese sentiment. #140,000 Troops in Country
Vietnam, which invaded Cambodia in 1978, has what Western officials now
calculate at about 140,000 troops there. There are also a large number of
advisers attached to Cambodian departments, foreigners working in Phnom Penh
say. Major decisions appear to be made only with Vietnamese consent.

Some diplomats in Hanoi and Bangkok have suggested that a rift is growing
between the Vietnamese and their Soviet backers that may be related to Moscow's
moves to improve ties with Peking. But others, including Thai Foreign Ministry
oficials, disagree, saying Vietnam is too dependent on Moscow to risk a break
and the Soviet Union will not endanger its presence in Vietnam, where it now has
its largest warm water port at Cam Ranh Bay.

China continues to arm, train and support the Khmer Rouge financially, and
Vietnam often portrays its war in Cambodia as part of a two-frontier war with
China. Chinese leaders also say that Soviet backing for the Vietnamese
occupation of Cambodia now remains a stumbling block to friendship.

Peking has recently backed what Prince Sihanouk calls his coalition government's
final proposal for a negotiated solution to the Cambodian conflict, involving
the Phnom Penh Government along with the three resistance groups. Vietnam has
rejected this, saying it would leave the Khmer Rouge a way to regain power.

But Cambodian officials and the Vietnamese would like to bring Prince Sihanouk
back into a Cambodian Government in some role because the Prince has a loyal
following in the country as well as among the many exiled Cambodians who might
return if the Prince were to go home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN BROADWAY PARADE, KOREANS MARK HERITAGE

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 42, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 420 words


White-clad Korean athletes shadowboxed down Broadway. Courtly Korean bankers
waved fans at the Garment District. Deft Korean gong-players brought the music
of Seoul to Herald Square.

Thousands of Koreans and Korean-Americans - members of one of the
fastest-growing ethnic groups in the New York area - surged through midtown
Manhattan yesterday as the city's seventh annual Korean Parade moved south down
Broadway from Times Square.

''We are proud of being Koreans, and proud of living here,'' said the parade's
leader, Cho Byong Chang, who is president of the Korean Association of New York.


A Growing Community

Mr. Cho, an importer of ladies' fashion accessories, said about 200,000 Koreans
now live in and around the city. An aide to Mayor Koch calculated recently that
the city's Korean community has grown by roughly 60 percent in the last six
years.

Officially, the parade commemorated the day - 4,3l9 years ago Friday - when,
according to Korean myth, a king from heaven founded the Korean nation.

But unofficially, the 2,000 marchers and the thousands of Koreans among the
8,000 to 10,000 onlookers were savoring their good feelings about themselves,
their heritage, and their adopted hometown.

''I like the tall buildings - and there are so many people here,'' cried Cho
Chusa, a 72-year-old resident of Astoria, Queens, who was visiting the Times
Square area for the first time. She wore a jade green hanbock, a traditional
Korean dress.

While she spoke, a martial note was added to the parade by a 30-piece United
States Marine Corps Band, one of the 90 marching groups, which played marine
music and the Korean marines' hymn.

Pressing close to the marine band, which is based in Quantico, Va., was a group
of retired Korean marines.

One of them, former Captain Ki Jung Lee, now a delicatessen owner in Bergen
County, N.J., recalled his service with the South Koreans in the Vietnam War.
''We think the U.S. Marines are just like our brothers,'' he said softly. ''We
fought together to keep freedom.''

On the other hand, Hakjong Riew, a vice chairman of the parade committee, made a
strongly civilian impression in his 15th-century Korean gentleman's attire,
consisting of a blue silk jacket, silk vest and trousers.

''Agriculture is the foundation of the nation,'' he said, repeating a
traditional Korean watchword that was emblazoned on parade banners in exuberant
Korean characters. But then he grinned and added, ''since the 1960's we are a
high-tech country. Isn't that ironic?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of marchers in the annual Korean Day Parade (NYT/Dith Pran)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SCHOLAR'S TENURE DENIAL STIRS HARVARD DISPUTE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 54, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Oct. 4


A decision by Harvard University to deny tenure to a popular and widely
respected junior professor of American history has touched off a dispute among
faculty members and students over the university's promotion system.

The scholar, Alan Brinkley, an associate professor who is 37 years old, teaches
by far the largest course in Harvard's history department and won an American
Book Award in history in 1983 for his study of Huey Long and the Rev. Charles
Coughlin. A majority of the history department actually voted to grant him
tenure, or a lifetime appointment, but their decision was overturned last week
by A. Michael Spence, the Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences.

Mr. Spence's action came despite his own announcement last spring of a major new
policy to promote more of Harvard's own junior faculty.

Harvard has traditionally recruited the bulk of its tenured professors from
outside the school, as part of an effort to insure that its teachers were the
best in the world. But Harvard has faced increased difficulty in attracting top
scholars in recent years with the rise in competition from other first-class
colleges and the prevalence of two-career families.

'A Tragic Mistake,' Professor Says

''The university's decision to override the history department vote is
inexplicable and a tragic mistake,'' said Prof. David H. Donald, one of the
nation's leading authorities on 19th-century American history, who supported Mr.
Brinkley. ''Alan Brinkley is a splendid young scholar and a superb teacher.''

He called Mr. Brinkley one of the best young American historians in the country.

Another member of the history department, who spoke on the condition that he not
be identified, contended that the decision not to grant tenure to Mr. Brinkley
was only the latest in a series of failures by the department to find a scholar
of 20th-century American history. He said it grew out of a snobbish belief by
some professors that no young scholar is good enough for Harvard.

''We have been stymied for years in trying to make appointments by this
perfectionism,'' he asserted, ''and the result is that Harvard is losing its
place as a center for the study of American history.''

The professor said that he had calculated that the average age of scholars
teaching American history at Harvard had now reached 61 and that there were
serious questions whether the department would be able to replace its aging
members without a significant gap.

Third Such Denial Since April

Charles E. Cohen, a senior majoring in American history who has taken two
classes with Mr. Brinkley, said: ''I did my best writing in Brinkley's courses
because of his ability to infuse his subjects with energy and enthusiasm.
Harvard cannot claim to be committed to undergraduate education and continually
deny tenure to teachers of Brinkley's caliber.''

Mr. Brinkley was the third popular junior professor to be denied tenure since
Mr. Spence proclaimed his new policy last April. One of the others, Bradford A.
Lee, is also a historian of 20th-century America, and won a prize for excellence
in teaching. The other, Robert N. Watson, an associate professor of English, was
approved unanimously for tenure by the English department but was rejected by
Harvard's president, Derek Bok. Mr. Watson has since accepted a tenured post at
the University of California at Los Angeles.

Under Harvard's complex process for appointing a tenured professor, the
individual department first votes on a candidate and its decision is then passed
on to the dean, Mr. Spence. There is no rule requiring a unanimous vote or even
a two-thirds majority by the department, university officials say. If the dean
approves, he then selects a committee of distinguished scholars in the same
field from outside Harvard to consider the candidate, and the committee's
opinion is passed on to Harvard's president, who makes a final decision.

Dean Declines to Comment

Mr. Spence declined to comment on why he had not accepted the history
department's favorable recommendation. Mr. Brinkley, the son of David Brinkley,
the television commentator, received 13 favorable votes out of 24, with the rest
split between abstentions and negative votes, several professors reported.

A university spokesman said Mr. Spence would not discuss any details relating to
a tenure decision. But several members of the history department charged that
Mr. Brinkley's opponents had visited Mr. Spence over the summer and pressured
him not to accept the department's vote, which was taken in June.

Mr. Brinkley, who earned his Ph.D. at Harvard, teaches a sequence of three
courses on United States history from 1890 to the present, in addition to
specialized classes on Reconstruction in the South after the Civil War and a new
course on the Vietnam War. His course on post-World War II America is
oversubscribed, and the 500 places are determined by a lottery.

Mr. Donald said he believed Mr. Brinkley had probably taught one-third of all
Harvard undergraduates.

Advice to Junior Faculty

Mr. Brinkley said that after his experience, ''I wouldn't advise any junior
faculty member to come to Harvard to get tenure.'' He said he did not have any
regrets about the time he has spent teaching at Harvard, ''but it is clear that
Spence's new policy of more promotion from within is not going to be easy to
implement.''

Mr. Brinkley, who will teach at Harvard this academic year, said he was not sure
what he would do next.

In the case of Mr. Watson, the associate professor of English, one of Harvard's
most renowned Shakespearean scholars, Walter Kaiser, said that Mr. Bok had
''effectively repudiated'' the new promotion plan by not approving the English
department's unanimous recommendation. Mr. Kaiser also criticized Mr. Bok before
500 students attending the opening lecture of a course he and Mr. Watson were to
have taught together.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONSTITUTION GETS LIBERAL THUMBS UP

BYLINE: By E. R. SHIPP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 55, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 814 words


The message on fliers distributed for this ''Unconventional Constitutional
Convention'' recalled words written more than 200 years ago.

''We the serious thinkers of the universal community,'' it began, ''in order to
form a more perfect union, to provide equal justice, to insure international
peace, to promote the general welfare and human rights, and to secure the
blessings of the minimal economic needs of food, clothing and shelter, do
ordain, consecrate and invite each other to establish a meaningful contemporary
Constitution for the United States of America.''

But a panel of people chosen for their generally liberal political leanings
declined the opportunity to toss out the 199-year-old Constitution and replace
it with a ''meaningful contemporary'' one when given the chance at a mock
Constitutional Convention at the Cooper Union Great Hall in Greenwich Village
this week.

The panelists included former Senator George S. McGovern, Betty Friedan, the
feminist author, and Theodore W. Kheel, the labor lawyer. And a majority of them
agreed with John Buchanan, a former member of Congress, that the Constitution is
''one of the great political documents of human history.''

War Clause a Concern

Mr. McGovern, who desribed the Constitution as ''a brilliantly conceived
document that's guided and enriched American democracy for two centuries,'' said
he believed in its ''essential soundness.''

But he, like the other panelists, found fault with one aspect of the
Constitution - or rather its interpretation by a succession of Presidents since
1950: the war powers clause, which states that only Congress has the power to
declare war.

Mr. McGovern said that ''the Korean War and the Vietnam War, plus the conflicts
in the Middle East, the Caribbean, Central America and Grenada, more
specifically, have stood the war clause of the Constitution on its head.''

But instead of a Constitutional Convention to rectify this problem, he said,
''What I call for is a new assertion by the American public and the Congress
that Presidents be forced to abide by the Constitution in the nuclear age.''

Most panelists who participated in the forum expressed a fear that, should there
be an actual Constitutional Convention in the near future, it might be dominated
by conservative ideologues and religious fundamentalists who would encumber the
document with their own political agendas.

A Male Work, Friedan Says

As Mr. McGovern put it: ''We are not likely to be so fortunate the second time
around. So, at least at the moment, I'm not inclined to take a chance on a
second convention.''

Ms. Friedan noted that the Constitution was ''written of, by and for the people
that were men,'' but she too said she would not ''throw it out.''

One of two self-styled anarchists who participated in the forum, John Cage, a
philosopher and noted composer of electronic music, said: ''I have no confidence
in government, nor did Thoreau. Thoreau said the best form of government is no
government at all. I have no confidence in the Constitution nor in laws.''

Though most of the panelists would leave most of the Constitution intact, the
panelists had diverse ideas about how it should be amended. Among them were
suggestions for an equal rights amendment to protect the rights of women,
another to require the United States to participate fully in all activities of
the United Nations and one to have governments continuously construct new
prisons to keep apace with their burgeoning inmate populations.

Suggestions From Audience

In addition, Ms. Friedan suggested an amendment to guarantee all Americans
''some sort of minimal quality of life,'' including the right to shelter and
food.

Mr. Buchanan, who is an ordained Baptist minister as well as national director
of the People for the American Way - a lobbying group founded six years ago by
Norman Lear, the television producer - focused on religious liberty. He said he
would make it clear in the Constitution ''that what was intended was absolutely
a wall of separation between church and state for the sake of religious liberty,
and not any of the watered-down versions or interpretations that are common
today among certain television evangelists and with the Attorney General of the
United States.''

When the discussion was opened to members of the audience, there were additional
suggestions that included barring the accumulation of ''great wealth'' by any
individuals and guaranteeing health care for every person within the borders of
the United States, whether they are citizens or not.

All these proposals prompted Olga Mahl, a member of a team of lawyers that ruled
on the amendments proposed by the panelists and the audience, to remind them to
take into account the cost of putting such proposals into effect.

''It comes down to the bottom line: are we going to be willing to pay for it?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOWARD THE SUMMIT;
FACE TO FACE: Moscow and Washington at the summit

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 265 words


July 1955,
Geneva
Eisenhower, Bulganin and
Khrushchev
Main topics: Aerial
surveillance, East-West
relations, the reunification of
Germany

September 1959,
Camp David
Eisenhower and Khrushchev
Main topics: Disarmament,
scientific and cultural
exchanges

May 1960,
Paris
Eisenhower and Khrushchev
Main topics: Berlin,
disarmament, East-West
relations; meeting breaks up
after downing of U.S. U-2 spy
plane over Soviet Union

June 1961,
Vienna
Kennedy and Khrushchev
Main topics: Nuclear test ban
treaty, war in Laos, Berlin

June 1967,
Glassboro, N.J.
Johnson and Kosygin
Main topics: Middle East,
Vietnam war, nuclear arms

May 1972,
Moscow
Nixon and Brezhnev
Main topics: Strategic arms
agreement, antiballistic missile
treaty

June 1973,
Washington
Nixon and Brezhnev
Main topics: Arms treaty,
trade, agricultural research,
cultural exchanges,
transportation, oceanography,
nuclear energy research

June and July 1974,
Moscow and Yalta
Nixon and Brezhnev
Main topics: Treaty banning
underground nuclear weapons
tests, 10-year economic pact

November 1974,
Vladivostok
Ford and Brezhnev
Main topic: New strategic arms
treaty

August 1975,
Helsinki
Ford and Brezhnev
Main topics: European
security, strategic arms treaty

June 1979,
Vienna
Carter and Brezhnev
Main topic: Strategic arms
treaty

November 1985,
Geneva
Reagan and Gorbachev
Main topics: Nuclear arms
reduction, cultural and
educational exchanges

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of American and Russian leaders (Sygma/J.L. Atlan; AP; Pictorial
Parade; Gamma-Liaison/Michel Laurent; UPI)

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
More Uncertainty About P.O.W.'s

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim and James F. Clarity

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 285 words


For the first time in years, a Defense Department investigation has found that
Vietnam may indeed still hold American prisoners of war. At least that is the
assessment of Lieut. Gen. Eugene F. Tighe Jr., a former Director of Defense
Intelligence who headed a five-month review of intelligence files on the issue.
The general said last week that ''a large volume of evidence'' - mainly ''live
sightings'' reported by Vietnamese refugees - points to the likelihood that
Americans are still imprisoned by Hanoi.

But the current Director of Defense Intelligence was more cautious. At a news
conference a day after General Tighe's remarks, Lieut. Gen. Leonard H. Perroots
contended that, while the investigation pointed to the ''strong possibility''
that some Americans remain alive in Vietnam 14 years after the United States
pulled out, there was no ''strong compelling evidence'' to prove it. And General
Perroots, who appointed the investigative panel, refused to speculate on whether
Hanoi still holds Americans prisoner or whether Americans had voluntarily
remained in Southeast Asia.

Veterans' groups and families of the missing have argued that Washington has not
done enough to find out what happened to the 2,430 Americans who remain
unaccounted for in Indochina. Although the Vietnamese Government has repeatedly
denied holding prisoners, it said earlier this year that Americans may be living
in remote parts of the country.

The Pentagon announced late last week that American and Vietnamese officials
would meet in Hanoi this week to talk about the missing Americans. It will be
the fourth such conference this year and the eighth since the Vietnamese agreed
in March 1985 to discuss the issue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Russia in the Pacific

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 155 words


I do not wish to speculate on whether the buildup of Soviet naval power in the
Pacific is meant for defense or offense, or mainly to satisfy Soviet
nationalistic feelings. However, it appears to me that, in some respects, United
States' policies have contributed to the problems - real or imagined - that
Washington now envisions.

Take, for instance, our policy vis-a-vis Vietnam and the Hanoi regime. After the
end of hostilities, we should have established diplomatic relations with this
former enemy, at least to keep a foothold in an area in which so much American
blood was shed.

Mr. Haberman mentions the Soviet presence at the former United States Navy base
at Cam Ranh Bay, which is now ''home port'' for the Soviet fleet. I leave it to
your readers to form an opinion as to the benefits for our national interests
had we established an American presence in Vietnam.

WALTER A. SHELDON
  Lido Beach, L.I.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT HAVE THEY DONE WITH THEIR PEACE?

BYLINE: BY R.W. APPLE; R. W. Apple is the chief Washington correspondent of The
Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


BITTER VICTORY By Robert Shaplen. 309 pp. New York: Harper & Row. $16.95.

ROBERT SHAPLEN came to Indochina sooner than most of us, and he has stayed with
it longer than most of us, too. He first visited Saigon in 1946 for Newsweek
magazine; he was among the last Americans to leave the city in 1975, with the
Communists at its gates; and he was permitted by the authorities in Hanoi to
spend five weeks traveling in Vietnam and a week traveling in Cambodia in the
autumn of 1984. ''Bitter Victory'' is an account of what he saw and heard on
that journey, reporting for The New Yorker, as well as an analysis of the
complex political and economic situation in Southeast Asia. It is enriched by
the kind of perspective that few writers and even fewer policy makers can bring
to the subject.

In Ho Chi Minh City, as Saigon is now known, Mr. Shaplen encountered numberless
Amerasian youngsters, many of them teen-agers, who were ostracized by the
Vietnamese. Under the present quota approved by the United States of only 250 a
month, it will take more than a decade for all of these children of Vietnamese
mothers and American fathers to reach the United States. North of the capital,
Mr. Shaplen visited the area that we used to call the Iron Triangle because it
was so strongly fortified. (It was there, on Christmas Day, 1966, that Bob Hope
entertained troops of the United States 25th Infantry Division while directly
beneath him, in the tunnels that underlay the entire district, a Vietnamese
singer entertained enemy guerrilla units.) Local officials told how they foiled
each new American effort to uncover the tunnels, using pepper, for example, to
drive away the dogs the G.I.'s used. And in Danang, the old Marine base in
central Vietnam, which had shrunk to half its wartime size, Mr. Shaplen made the
somehow pleasing discovery (to me, anyway) that our ramshackle press camp has
been turned into a shrimp cannery.

It was in Hanoi, however, that Mr. Shaplen's trip paid its richest rewards, for
he was able to talk at length not only to Le Duc Tho, the number two man in the
party hierarchy - who told him that he was the first American he had met since
concluding his negotiations with Henry Kissinger in Paris in 1972 - but also to
a number of other Vietnamese who had played key roles during and since the war.
On the basis of those conversations, the author concluded that the leadership in
Hanoi has decided it must wind down the war in Cambodia if it is to achieve what
he terms its two greatest goals - a rapprochement with the United States that
would lessen the country's almost total dependence on the Soviet Union, and an
easing of tensions with China. He also concluded that the precarious economic
and social situation the Vietnamese find themselves in, a decade after the end
of the war, is mostly their own fault, the result of what he terms ''a crippling
inability to create unity among themselves and to reach out to others, including
their neighbors in Southeast Asia, in a spirit of friendship and compromise.''
More than anything else, Mr. Shaplen argues, it is Hanoi's failure to adjust to
postwar reality that has doomed the Vietnamese to the abysmal poverty they also
knew 10 and 20 and 30 years ago, despite all their sacrifices during the last 40
years and all the potential riches of their country.

Yet despite his title, Mr. Shaplen also sees scattered signs of hope. The
(temporary?) ascendancy of the pragmatists over the ideologues in the Vietnamese
Politburo, he thinks, offers at least a chance of resolving the conflict between
the ''soft'' south and ''hard'' north, and perhaps even of evolving a variant of
socialism as well adapted to the individualism of the Vietnamese as the Kadar
version is to the energy and acquisitiveness of the Hungarians. He is too
optimistic; by this spring, inflation was once again rampant, pork and rice were
scarce and industry was running at less than half capacity because of energy
shortages. MUCH the most gripping part of a book that sometimes loses its way in
the fogs of diplomatic speculation, especially where Cambodia is concerned,
deals with the Vietnamese view of the war against the Americans. It is
fascinating, for example, that the senior military historian in Hanoi argues
that the two key battles in that conflict took place before the arrival of the
first United States combat units in 1965; and it is stirring, whatever one's
attitude to the war, to read of the sustained heroism that made possible the
construction, expansion and operation of the Ho Chi Minh trail. The details are
awesome: 30,000 men at work on the trail at its busiest, 10,000 tons of freight
carried every week, thousands of miles of roadway completely covered by trees
and vines braided to form a canopy. Without the trail, the Vietnamese say, they
would have lost.

The generals to whom Mr. Shaplen talked all but admitted that, as the American
command contended at the time, they suffered disproportionate and temporarily
crippling losses in the 1968 Tet offensive, but they considered them acceptable
because of the political victory represented by President Johnson's subsequent
decision to leave office.

Mr. Shaplen for the most part dismisses the revisionist view that earlier or
bolder attacks on Cambodia or Hanoi or the Ho Chi Minh trail might have changed
the outcome of the war. His most telling witness is retired Maj. Gen. Dinh Duc
Thien, the wartime North Vietnamese logistics chief, who is quoted as having
told the author: ''Even if you had destroyed Hanoi, bombed it flat, we would
still have gone into the countryside. . . . An industrial country cannot defeat
an agricultural nation by bombing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robert Shaplen

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 691 words


One of the more successful series of recent years has featured Brady Coyne, the
Boston lawyer. It started in 1984 with ''Death at Charity's Point,'' and now
comes THE MARINE CORPSE (Scribners, $13.95), the fourth in William G. Tapply's
series. Coyne is a lawyer to the very rich and very aristocratic. The police
find a derelict frozen to death on the streets and put the death down to natural
causes. But it turns out that the man was a Coyne client and the nephew of a
United States senator. He was researching a book, this time a serious one. His
previous novel had been so deliriously bad it had become a best seller.

Of course, it turns out the young man was murdered. He left some papers, which
are missing. There also is a missing diary. Coyne has his work cut out for him.
But this is not one of the better Tapply books. By the time the end draws near,
there can be only one solution. The finale, in addition, is conventional. How
many times in mystery fiction has the hero prompted the murderer to talk while
the police listen to the bug with which he is wired? In all fairness to Mr.
Tapply, it should be added that the last chapter takes the conventional ending
one step farther, so at least there is something of a surprise.

Thin plotting or not, the book is redeemed by its style. Mr. Tapply is an
assured, graceful writer who can create believable and sympathetic characters as
well as the kind that is not an entire credit to the human race. There is an
unusually relaxed quality to his writing; he is not out to shock or win points
by sexual titillation (though there is a romance in the book) or to create
scenes of mayhem. Mr. Tapply reads as though he is a proper, intelligent, rather
quizzical Bostonian. May he thrive.

The British spy story has an articulate exponent in Ted Allbeury, who continues
to turn out a superior product, as witness MISSION BERLIN (Walker, $15.95). The
book starts near the end of World War II, when a British intelligence officer
and a German one are thrown together under unusual circumstances. Working as a
team, they find some important Nazi files. A friendship develops, and the Briton
is able to do a real favor by arranging the German's marriage.

Years go by. Suddenly the Briton, now a civilian, is approached by his old
service. He has to get some information from his old friend, who is now high up
in the Bonn hierarchy. It appears that some old Nazis are planning mischief.
They are indeed, and a bloody (literally) bad time is had by all. Mr. Allbeury
is a fine entertainer as well as a most knowledgeable chronicler of espionage.
It is part of his background as a former counterintelligence officer.

There's a lot of spy stuff too in BLOOD OF THE ALBATROSS by Ridley Pearson (St.
Martin's, $16.95). The C.I.A. and F.B.I. play a part, and so does an innocent
sailor and jazz musician from Seattle, hired to teach a beautiful, mysterious
woman to sail. We all know about beautiful, mysterious women. They bring nothing
but grief. The sailor, inexperienced as he is, never-theless manages to outwit
and overcome professionals. As you can see, there is nothing new here, but the
writing is ebullient, the author has a good time with the conventions, and so
should the reader.

To continue the titular blood motif, there is BLOODY MURDOCK by Robert Ray (St.
Martin's, $15.95). This is of the California school. A girl on the make dies in
an automobile accident, along with a movie actor. But the accident, of course,
was murder. Matt Murdock, a Vietnam veteran and now a private eye, is hired to
look into it. Attempts are made on his life, he gets fired, and yet, noble
knight that he is, he continues on his own. Routine but competent.

As for MURDER IN C MAJOR by Sara Hoskinson Frommer (St. Martin's, $14.95), it is
a chatty, easygoing and conventional first novel. University town; widow who is
amateur violinist in local orchestra; murder of unpleasant oboist onstage
(cyanide); local cop. She plays detective and is instrumental in cracking the
case. Why C major? Because Schubert's Ninth Symphony, with its great oboe solo
in the second movement, is integral to the story.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of comedian Rip Taylor (NYT/Peter Freed)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AT HIS BEST IN WAR

BYLINE: BY ROBERT SHERROD; Robert Sherrod has written five books about World War
II, including ''Tarawa: The Story of a Battle.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1078 words


IRON EAGLE The Turbulent Life of General Curtis LeMay. By Thomas M. Coffey.
Illustrated. 474 pp. New York. Crown. $18.95.

Gen. Curtis E. LeMay was one of the great Army Air Force commanders in World War
II, perhaps the greatest, as Thomas M. Coffey maintains in this new biography.
Only General LeMay led important forces in the European theater of operations
(1942-44), the China-Burma-India theater (1944-1945) and finally in the Pacific,
where his crowning achievement was to send his B-29's from their Marianas bases
to reduce the cities of Japan to ashes.

Mr. Coffey, the author of ''Hap,'' a biography of Gen. Henry H. Arnold, and
other Air Force books, has written a comprehensive volume with the cooperation
of General LeMay, now 79 years old and living in retirement in California. He
has also attempted to change the image of the general, who has often been
represented as a gang-busters, shoot-'em-up, bomb-everything belligerent.
Despite his record, ''General LeMay is not a popular figure,'' Mr. Coffey says
at the outset. Much of this impression rests on his prescription for the North
Vietnamese - ''bomb them back into the Stone Age'' - as quoted in ''Mission With
LeMay,'' the General's 1965 autobiography, published soon after his retirement
as Chief of Staff of the Air Force. The trouble, Mr. Coffey says, is that
General LeMay didn't write the book; his collaborator, MacKinlay Kantor, did,
and the general ''failed to catch'' the phrase in the manuscript. Surely some
proof is in order, but none is forthcoming. Mr. Coffey doesn't quote General
LeMay himself as denying the quotation, nor does he provide any documentation.
We don't learn why 21 years elapsed before the Stone Age quotation was disowned.

''Iron Eagle'' often ponders how a small-town Ohio boy from a dirt-poor family
could reach the heights that Curt LeMay scaled. He worked his way through Ohio
State University but flunked his senior year and had to go back three years
later, after he became an Army Air Corps pilot, to earn his civil engineering
degree. By hard work he got a reputation in the 1930's as the best navigator in
the Air Corps, but he was still rated only an average pilot when World War II
started just after he turned 35. He was then a major.

Like Herman Wouk's naval officer, Pug Henry, in the novels ''The Winds of War''
and ''War and Remembrance,'' General LeMay had a way of turning up where the
action was - for example, at the 1948 Berlin airlift and the 1962 Cuban missile
crisis, when President Kennedy resisted the suggestion of General LeMay (now Air
Force Chief of Staff) to invade Castro's island. In October 1942 he led one of
the first bomb groups of B-17's to England and became known as a hard driver,
tough but fair, who ordered his crews to practice gunnery, navigation and
bombing up to 90 hours a week. AS commander of the Third Air Division in August
1943, he led his 146 Flying Fortresses in the costly attack on Schweinfurt and
Regensburg, Germany, and lost 24 of them; the First Division lost 36 of 230. A
hundred other B-17's were shot up so badly they would never fly again. But he
and other commanders persisted until the arrival of long-range P-51 fighters
that could escort the B-17's all the way to Germany. That was the turning point
in the air war over Germany. In 1944 General LeMay, at the age of 37 the
youngest major general in the Army, moved to China to take over the fledgling
B-29 effort to bomb western Japan.

Curtis LeMay had never met his commanding general until the month after
Schweinfurt, but he soon impressed General Arnold as a man who could get things
done. In early 1945 Arnold was in trouble: his reputation and job depended on
the B-29's, and their record was mediocre or worse. Again the order went out,
''Send Curt,'' and Curtis LeMay moved 2,000 miles to the east as B-29 commander
in the Marianas.

One theme that runs through Mr. Coffey's portrait is what an innovator General
LeMay was. In England he invented a staggered formation so that his B-17's could
protect one another better against German fighters; he ordered his pilots to
ignore the customary dipsy doodle called evasive action and to fly straight and
level for 5 to 10 minutes before bombs away and thereby vastly improved bombing
accuracy. IN the Marianas General LeMay made a historic decision: to forget
about the Air Force's holy writ, which ordained that bombing be done in daylight
for the sake of precision and from high levels for safety. Not only did General
LeMay order the B-29's to come down from 35,000 feet to 5,000 to 8,000 feet at
night and to use incendiary bombs but he also removed guns and gunners,
increasing bomb capacity by five or six tons. And he decided against telling
General Arnold what he was doing -an audacious move, considering that he might
lose his whole command in a night. LeMay says he reasoned: ''If I set up this
deal, and Arnold okays it beforehand, then he would have to assume some of the
responsibility. And if I don't tell him, and it's all a failure, and I don't
produce any results, then he can fire me.''

In this case General LeMay's gamble worked fantastically well. The first
firebomb raid, on March 9 and 10, 1945, burned out 16.8 square miles of Tokyo;
subsequent raids brought the total square mileage for six Japanese cities to
105.6. If allowed to continue, he claimed, he could have forced Japan into
surrendering without having to use atomic bombs.

It was after the war that General LeMay began having the publicity problems Mr.
Coffey seeks to correct. He spent the last eight years of his career in perilous
Washington as Deputy Chief of Staff and then Chief of Staff of the Air Force.

In 1968, in an episode worthy of comic opera, he agreed to run for Vice
President on George Wallace's American Independent Party ticket, ''to try to
keep [Hubert] Humphrey from being elected.'' At a joint press conference General
LeMay said that he would prefer not to use any weapons at all in Vietnam but
that if he thought it necessary he would use anything we had, ''including
nuclear weapons.'' Mr. Wallace then said, ''General, we got to go.''

Thomas Coffey tries hard to change General LeMay's image, but he is only partly
successful. He even appears to realize this when he concludes, ''The American
people still think he advocated a preemptive war, and all the denials in the
world won't change that.'' But this is an interesting biography of a major
military figure.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PASSPORT TO MEMORIES

BYLINE: BY SUSAN SHEEHAN; Susan Sheehan's book ''A Missing Plane'' has just been
published (Putnam).

SECTION: Section 10; Page 35, Column 2; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1267 words


It is a hot Sunday afternoon in Washington, and I am engaged in one of my
favorite pastimes - wishful thinking. I am thinking wishfully that I would
rather be on another continent; Europe would do nicely.

Travel is my very favorite pastime. I have never been airsick or frightened in a
plane -not even during the year I spent flying around South Vietnam, when tracer
bullets streaked alongside the C-130's and the Caribou transports reporters
commuted on. I haven't been seriously ill abroad, nor am I subject to the state
of mind called homesickness. Instead, on days like today when events have
conspired to keep me at home, I suffer from wanderlust.

Experience has taught me that the best treatment for this affliction is to open
a manila folder labeled ''Passports, Old and Current'' and leaf through the
pages of the passports it contains. There are six - two green, two slate blue,
two dark blue.

The photograph attached to page four of the first passport issued to me by the
State Department in the mid-1950's shows a girl beaming at the camera, and no
wonder. I was 15, a year too young to work, and my parents were treating me to a
grand tour of Europe. Along with 13 other privileged young women and a
chaperone, I left Hoboken on a Dutch student ship on July 1 and was passed
through my first port by Rotterdam's Rivierpolitie on 10 Juli. For the next two
months our tour group wended its way through a seemingly endless supply of
castles, cathedrals, catacombs, chateaus, canals, coliseums, Cezannes and crown
jewels in nine countries in Western Europe. Today, some 30 years later, I
reflect that this is the longest vacation I have ever had and the greatest
concentration of sightseeing-in-step that I am ever likely to do.

My first green passport expired in two years. It could have been renewed for
another two, but it wasn't. Summers between college years I worked to earn money
for books and other expenses. In April 1960, not long after I graduated, I got
my second green passport. There were a few revisions in the passport bearer's
''descriptive data.'' My formerly blond hair had darkened to brown; my
occupation had changed from ''student'' to ''editorial assistant-writer.''

A travel agent had hired me to watch over 20 youngsters bound for three Swiss
summer camps on a nonstop flight from New York to Geneva. My job was to make
sure that the 12-to 15-year-olds were met in Geneva by the camps'
representatives and to visit the Alpine camps a few days later to ask the
campers if they were content. I was rehired for three additional summers and
each summer airmailed an identical dispatch stating that the American kids
missed their bacon and eggs, cereal, milk and orange juice, but appeared likely
within a month to adjust to the croissants and cafe au lait they were being
served for breakfast. My pay for this service was a roundtrip ticket to Europe.

In 1963, I went alone to Spain and Portugal for two weeks. In 1964, I
accompanied my parents to Poland, where my stepfather had been born, to visit
his sister, her husband and their daughter, who still lived there. It was my
stepfather's first trip home in more than 40 years and the first time I saw
tears in his eyes. On this day in Washington 22 years later, I note that my 1953
passport was not valid for travel to Albania, China, the Soviet Union or five
other Eastern European countries, including Poland. By 1960, only Albania, Cuba
and ''Communist controlled portions of China, Korea and Vietnam'' were off
limits, but I remember it still seemed daring to venture behind the Iron Curtain
then.

In February 1965, two months before my second passport was to expire, I replaced
it and flew to Indonesia to marry a newspaperman I had met in New York the
previous September. After five months in Jakarta, we were sent by his paper to
Vietnam for a year. Getting shot at had an unexpected fringe benefit: We were
treated to a week of Rest & Recuperation every three months and spent it in Hong
Kong, Bangkok and Singapore shopping for clothes, seeing the latest American
movies and telephoning home - simple pleasures that weren't simple in Saigon. By
1965, occupations were no longer listed on passports, so we were able to say we
were students and procure visas for Cambodia, whose Royal Government didn't
readily grant visas to journalists. Angkor Wat was worth more than a fib.

My husband was transferred from Saigon to Washington in August, 1966. He had
five weeks of vacation time due and a pair of plane tickets that enabled us to
stop off in as many countries as we chose along the way. We flew to India, Iran,
Lebanon, Egypt, Turkey and Britain. During that time I saw the Taj Mahal and the
Red Fort, the mosques of Isfahan and the temples of Baalbek, the Pyramids and
the Sphinx, the Hagia Sophia and St. Paul's Cathedral, and three or four
obstetricians: I was pregnant with our first child. In 1986, I look back 20
years and marvel at our good fortune. Few young couples in the 1960's ever saw
so many architectural wonders in such a short period of time. Few would find it
prudent to venture into Iran or Lebanon now.

In November 1966 we bought a house. Our first daughter was born in 1967, our
second daughter in 1969. I got my fourth passport in August 1971, a year and a
half after my much-used third one had expired, and used it once in 1971 for a
monthlong holiday in Austria and Greece and twice in 1975. When it expired, I
didn't apply for another. My husband had left daily journalism to write a book
and any money we might have allocated to an occasional trip went to
orthodontists and summer camps and literally down the drain: an old well in a
neighbor's backyard was flooding our basement and we had to put in a $10,000
drainage system.

Between 1975 and 1980, by which time our old enemy Red China had become our new
friend the People's Republic of China and half our friends were sending us
postcards from Shanghai saying ''Wish you were here,'' I wished I was there too.
I wished in vain. I spent those years researching magazine stories and books in
tenements on the Lower East Side, in maximum-security prisons and in mental
institutions. Being threatened by junkies, harassed by inmates and guards and
physically and verbally abused by mental patients never flustered me, but being
without a passport made me unreasonably sad. I thought of 1975 to 1980 as the
years of the missing passport and took what comfort I could from the memories of
earlier visits to faraway places I had seen in what often seemed like someone
else's lifetime.

I got my fifth passport in the spring of 1980. Our daughters were going to
France as au pair girls that summer, and if they fell ill I wanted to be able to
join them. They returned to France many times, but they stayed healthy and I
stayed home. Just possessing a passport again raised my spirits, and in 1983 I
thought of a series of articles that would require my presence in Papua New
Guinea. That July I had an adventure in the Owen Stanley mountains comparable to
any I'd ever had.

In 1985, I got my sixth passport. It is the second of the dark blue models but
the first of any color that is valid for 10 years, and on this hot afternoon in
Washington I have glorious plans for this passport. It will take me back to some
of the places I have loved best - to Vienna with its educated white stallions;
to Agra and the dream in white marble built by Shah Jahan for his favorite wife,
and to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, if the authorities there will grant me
a visa to see in peace that beautiful land I saw in the grief of war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Taos

SECTION: Section 10; Page 24, Column 5; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 418 words


To the Editor: Having just returned from a refreshing late summer visit to Taos,
we were pleased to find Jeanie Puleston Fleming's ''What's Doing in Taos'' in
the Sept. 7 Travel section. This guide provides a solid basis for enjoyable Taos
exploration.

For those with a car and a day to spare, we would like to suggest the Enchanted
Circle drive north of Taos, which gives the flavor of the high country of
northern New Mexico and which is especiallly beautiful in the autumn. Take
Highway 64 from Taos to Angel Fire through the cottonwoods and aspens and over
Palo Flechado Pass at 9,107 feet for an introduction to the Sangre de Cristo
mountains, which are seen at a distance from all around Taos.

Just before reaching the ski center and community of Angel Fire, you should turn
off and visit the spiritual and powerful Vietnam Veterans National Memorial on a
promontory overlooking the Moreno Valley. The memorial and chapel were begun by
Dr. Victor Westphall and his family in honor of their son David, who was killed
in Vietnam. The complex has now been taken over by the Disabled American
Veterans and it has become a national memorial for veterans of the Cambodia,
Laos and Vietnam era, and a very moving one at the edge of the sky.

After visiting the memorial, continue on Highway 64 to Angel Fire and take a
drive around the ski area. Then stay on Highway 64 for a few miles through the
valley, around Eagle Nest Lake and to the small town of Eagle Nest, with its one
wide open street and Wild West air. Here take Highway 38 up through higher
mountains with more pines and firs, over Bobcat Pass at 9,620 feet, up to the
town of Red River and its ski area.

Red River has more of an Alpine air, with many of the buildings and homes in
chalet style. After lunch or snacks at any one of the several inviting looking
restaurants in Red River, continue on Highway 38 through the mountains, for more
beautiful scenery and a stream that nicely leapfrogs the road, to the town of
Questa. At Questa take Highway 3, which starts gently back down to the Taos
Valley. On this road you can make short detours to various spots of interest,
including the Red River Trout Hatchery, the D. H. Lawrence ranch, the village of
San Cristobal, where many artists live in unusual homes they have built
themselves.

If you've calibrated things just right, you should be approaching Taos in the
late afternoon, which is one of the best times to appreciate its marvelous
light.

MARTHA PATTILLO SIV
  New York

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABZUG AND DIOGUARDI ON ROAD TO NOVEMBER

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1718 words


REPRESENTATIVE Joseph J. DioGuardi was walking the streets of Bronxville last
Sunday, accompanied by campaign workers carrying yellow balloons and a portable
sound system that would be recognized as a ''ghetto blaster'' anywhere else.
Here it was playing a political jingle about the ''common sense Congressman,''
who was seeking election support.

He stopped a pedestrian, Jonas Kopper of Yonkers, and asked for his vote in
November. ''Well, you're in favor of sanctions,'' Mr. Kopper observed, ''and
that will bring chaos in South Africa.'' Mr. DioGuardi, a Republican, began to
explain his position, when Mr. Kopper offered a reassuring observation:

''But I couldn't vote for your opponent under any circumstances,'' he said.

Mr. DioGuardi's Democratic opponent in the race for the 20th Congressional
District seat is Bella S. Abzug, the former three-term Representative, and the
comment underlined a point that comes up frequently in campaigning by both
candidates: few people seem neutral about Ms. Abzug's candidacy.

Several times during Mr. DioGuardi's hourlong tour of Pondfield Road and
surrounding streets, shoppers and patrons coupled expressions of support with
unsolicited criticism of Ms. Abzug. One man said, ''I hope you beat that
carpetbagger lady,'' a reference to her long association with Manhattan, where
she served the former 17th Congressional District on the Lower East Side and the
old 20th District on the West Side.

A contrasting view was apparent two days earlier at the Harrison station of the
Metro-North Communter Railroad, where Ms. Abzug was greeted warmly by many
morning commuters and enthusiastically by some. ''I couldn't vote for you in the
primary,'' a young woman with a briefcase said, shaking the candidate's hand,
''but you've got my vote in November.''

''I don't have enough hands for you, Bella,'' said a man wearing a business suit
and sneakers and loaded down with newspaper, coffee and a briefcase, ''but I'll
vote for you, anyway.''

Another commuter, apparently Japanese and one of scores of Asians coming through
the station during the two-hour commutation period, seemed puzzled as Ms. Abzug
confronted him with an outstretched hand and her usual, ''I'm Bella Abzug,
running for Congress.'' He stopped, smiled, and bowed slighly from the waist.

Ms. Abzug put her hand down and also bowed slightly. Then she resumed her
routine with other commuters, telling an aide, ''I'm really into it.''

Both candidates are, indeed, into it, with only one month to go before the Nov.
4 election. Ms. Abzug spends most of each day attending fairs and other public
functions, visiting centers for the elderly and nursing homes, talking to
political and other groups and systematically greeting commuters at each of the
21 railroad stations in the district.

Mr. DioGuardi, who is now working a full legislative week in Washington as
Congress presses toward an October adjournment, concentrates his activities on
the weekend, combining walking tours and attendances at fairs and public
functions with fund-raising events and other meetings.

In most races, it is the incumbent who is known and the challenger who struggles
for recognition, but that is not necessaily the case here. Ms. Abzug is quickly
identifiable while Mr. DioGuardi is still less familiar to some voters, although
in Bronxville he met dozens of people who either knew him personally or were in
the same party organization.

While Republicans acknowledge Ms. Abzug's visibility, they say it can also work
against her. One party leader who attended a fund-raising event for Mr.
DioGuardi last Sunday featuring Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas and the
majority leader, said: ''She'll get the vote out, but we believe a lot of it
will be to vote against her.''

The DioGuardi campaign said a poll conducted Sept. 13 and 14 - or soon after the
Democratic primary -showed the Congressman with an 11.2 percent lead over Ms.
Abzug. The results, with a 5.8 percent margin of error, were: Mr. DioGuardi,
44.2 percent; Ms. Abzug, 33 percent; ''undecided,'' 20.5 percent and ''don't
know,'' 2.3 percent.

The poll was conducted for the National Republican Congressional Committee by
Arthur J. Finkelstein Associates of Irvington, according to Kieran Mahoney, the
DioGuardi campaign mananger, with 303 registered voters selected at random.

Mr. Mahoney said, ''We're pleased with the results.'' The primary ''should have
created a halo effect, and we expected to find Ms. Abzug leading,'' he said,
''but this shows she's running in the wrong district.''

Ms. Abzug said she ''doesn't care about the numbers.''

''From my information,'' she said, ''I'm leading and I'm going to win this
race.''

Josh Kurtz, a campaign spokesman for Ms. Abzug, said, ''We're conducting polls
but we don't expect to be releasing the results. They're for internal
consumption.''

Senator Dole, in addressing last Sunday's $250- to $500-a-plate dinner at the
Crowne Plaza Hotel in White Plains, acknowledged that Ms. Abzug ''is a very
visible lady, but let's look at our product,'' he said, referring to Mr.
DioGuardi. He lauded the Congressman, a former accountant, for his knowledge of
tax matters and for his enthusiasm and called for his support ''in this highly
visible race.''

Mr. DioGuardi then assailed Ms. Abzug for co-sponsoring a bill in 1974 that he
said would have legalized marijuana. ''She'd encourage our children to take the
first steps down the road to disaster,'' he said, asserting that ''the ideas of
Greenwich Village in the 60's are not those of Westchester in the 80's.''

He said she also sought to oppose creation of the Drug Enforcement
Administration in 1973, was seeking to avoid the subject now and, in general,
was ''A.W.O.L. in the war on drugs.''

Ms. Abzug responded sharply the next day, saying she ''not only voted for
appropriations'' for the Drug Enforcement Agency, ''but worked with it in the
Golden Triangle of Laos, Thailand and Cambodia to stop the production'' of
drugs.

''I personally have been opposed to any kind of legalization of any drug,'' she
said. The bill in question, which would have amended the Controlled Substances
Act, ''was Ed Koch's bill,'' she said, referring to the former Congressman who
is now Mayor of New York City, ''and it never went anywhere.'' Ms. Abzug, a
co-sponsor of the bill, said it would have decriminalized the use of three
ounces or less of marijuana.

''Lots of kids were being picked up and sent to jail for smoking a joint,'' she
said, ''and we were trying to say the police should be going after the drug
trade.'' She added that Mr. DioGuardi, meanwhile, ''has not been heard from
except to go along with President Reagan in cutting funds for drug-control
programs.''

Mr. DioGuardi denied that, saying he voted for the Omnibus Drug Act, which
includes $114 million for the D.E.A. He has also been associated with Phoenix
House, a drug-treatment center, for 10 years and recently initiated a federally
financed program to train Westchester police officers in drug enforcement.

About 20 of the more than 100 Republicans at the dinner were ethnic Albanians,
Mr. DioGuardi noted as they applauded enthusiastically, a connection he said
originated with his father, who was born in Italy of Albanian background. The
Congressman and Senator Dole are sponsoring a bill that would condemn the
Government of Yugoslavia for repression of ethnic Albanians.

An hour before the DioGuardi fund raiser, Ms. Abzug was engaged in a similar
effort, welcoming more than 100 guests who had paid $250 to $1,000 each to come
to the home of former Judge Jacob D. Fuchsberg in Rye. There, the singer and
actress Barbra Streisand appeared briefly to speak in support of the Democratic
candidate.

The performer, reading from index cards, said she began supporting Ms. Abzug 16
years ago on the back of a sound truck. ''Bella was the first to speak out
against the war in Vietnam, on women's rights, civil rights and support for
Israel,'' Miss Streisand said. ''If there was ever a time to send her back, it
is now.''

Also making an appearance was Bianca Jagger, who called the candidate a ''great
woman who's going to make a great difference.''

Ms. Abzug said she was ''back in Westchester, where I started,'' a county of
''enormously progressive people.'' Then, with the touch of an experienced
politician, she singled out other candidates and political leaders in the room,
some of whom had opposed her candidacy in the Democratic primary.

She also lauded Ms. Streisand, saying, ''a person with your talent shouldn't
have to do anything; coming to Westchester is the final test.''

Earlier, at the Harrison railroad station, she had stood on the platform
greeting commuters and bantering with some.

''I see you've got your hat,'' said a conductor. ''You, too,'' she replied.  An
elderly man shook her hand and whispered conspiratorially in her ear. ''He says,
'I know you're going to win,' '' she reported.

Some commmuters begin to greet her before they reach the platform landing;
others stride by stony-faced, ignoring the outstretched hand. One man, seemingly
unaware of Mr. DioGuardi's incumbency, asked if she was running for ''Dick
Ottinger's seat,'' referring to Richard L. Ottinger, who represented the
district for 16 years until 1984.

Mr. DioGuardi, in Bronxville, was greeted warmly by many and when some stopped
to ask questions about the issues, the Congressman was only too happy to oblige.

''He'd talk for 10 or 15 minutes in the 1984 campaign,'' said an aide who
encourages him to move on, ''but he's doing better now.''

As a man shouted greetings across Pondfield Road, Mr. DioGuardi said, ''Two
years ago people wouldn't recognize me; now they wave from across the street.''

A woman with a young daughter told Mr. DioGuardi that ''you must beat Bella
Abzug; I don't want this area to go Democratic.'' She told the Congressman she
is a former Manhattan resident.

When Tommy Musarra of the Towers Barber Shop encouraged the legislator to ''get
rid of drugs,'' Mr. DioGuardi replied that he had started a neighborhood ''crack
watch'' in the county.

Mr. Musarra said Mr. DioGuardi has ''12 votes in my house,'' and a man outside
the shop, apparently unable to match such domestic unanimity, said: ''You've got
my vote, anyway.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bella S. Abzug on the campaign trail; Photo of Representative
Joseph J. DioGuardi in Bronxvile; Photo of Barbra Streisand with Bella Abzug;
Photo of Senator Bob Dole with DioGuardi (NYT/Suzanne DeChillo)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT BOOKS

BYLINE: By Shirley Horner

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 26, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 826 words


WHEN Joan Schulhafer of Bloomfield, a public-relations writer, wrote to this
column recently to praise a new author, she omitted a vital fact.

It turns out that Col. Tom Cooper, the author of ''Triad of Knives'' (Worldwide
Library, 300 East 42d Street, New York 10017, $3.50) and also a resident of
Bloomfield, is the letter writer's husband and that the book played a part in
their courtship two years ago.

Recalling the events that led to her marriage in 1985 to Colonel Cooper, a
veteran of 24 years of Air Force service, Mrs. Cooper described in a recent
interview how she first met her husband-to-be while she worked as a publicity
director for Silhouette Books.

''As liaison, I was helping an author appear at several Air Force bases in the
Washington, D.C., area,'' she said, ''and Tom was the Air Force's director of
internal information.''

A native of Linden, Mrs. Cooper recalled lamenting afterward to a friend:

''Why is it that the wonderful men you meet live hundreds of miles away?''

As their romance progressed in spite of distance and to the accompaniment of
what Mrs. Cooper calls ''astronomical phone bills,'' she learned that Colonel
Cooper also was an aspiring novelist and had already completed a book that drew
on his first-hand knowledge of events in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War.

Although ''I believed in his novel,'' Mrs. Cooper said, the colonel's
manuscript, like those of many new authors, found no ready takers until Kate
Duffy, editor-in-chief at Worldwide Library, recommended its acquisition.

Dicussing his book, Colonel Cooper admitted that ''Triad of Knives,'' a
paperback generously endowed with steamy love scenes, easily fell into the
category of romantic adventure, ''the kind of book, I believe, to be read by
mostly women readers, who buy millions of them each year.''

Still, there is an exciting tale here. Realistically set in Southeast Asia and
Washington, it is about a group of air commandos (the ''knives'' of the title)
who fought heroically in Vietnam.

The war over, their lives proceed in mixed directions, intricately affected by
their combat experience.

The hero, Brad Gaelman, now a security specialist and seeking the killers of his
former buddies, turns up on the trail of malevolent drug smugglers operating
under a legitimate cover. They claim to know where those missing in action are
being held.

Not surprisingly, the novel's military and political tactics are vivid. This is
because Colonel Cooper has handled publicity for many breakthrough events,
including the Gemini VIII splashdown, Operation Homecoming for returning Vietnam
prisoners of war and the B-1 bomber program for the Pentagon.

Conceding that ''a popular romance is not the kind of book that one familiar
with my background would expect me to write,'' Colonel Cooper, who retired in
May, contends that he had no desire to write nonfiction ''because I was
impressed by the overwhelming numbers who are drawn to popular fiction.''

''And,'' he added, ''I felt that I wanted to say something different about
veterans. The stereotyped picture of a veteran is one in a hospital bed or
wheelchair. But there are many of us who, on the contrary, run counter to that:
We are successful, well-adjusted people.

''Like my hero Brad, whom I can identify with, we have not forgotten the scenes
of war. Flashbacks and painful memories still visit us. The public, in spite of
our silence, should be aware of these lasting effects that continue to trouble
us and should adopt attitudes of greater understanding.''

If the popular ''Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous'' by Robin Leach (Doubleday,
New York, $24.95) leaves one bedazzled by its expensive layouts, the next book
to open should be ''Decorating with Fabric: A Design Workbook with More than 200
Beautiful Projects to Sew for Your Home'' (Clarkson N. Potter, New York,
$24.95).

Although the authors, Donna Lang of Chatham and Lucretia Robertson of Montclair,
had both previously worked for Vogue Patterns, it took a chance meeting in Cedar
Grove 11 years ago to bring them together and open Lang/Robertson Ltd., their
own design company in Montclair.

Their well-illustrated book makes it seem entirely credible, as is claimed, that
anyone with fundamental sewing skills can create tablecloths, bedspeads,
slipcovers and pillows, for example, and, ultimately, interiors as splendid as
those of the mega-moguls.

After taking the photographs for ''New Jersey: A Scenic Discovery,'' published
in 1981, Walter J. Choroszewski became so thoroughly enamored of the state that
a year ago he moved from New York City to Branchburg in Somerset County.

''The Pride Of New Jersey, 1987,'' a 16-month calendar with color photographs by
Mr. Choroszewski and text by John T. Cunningham of Florham Park, (Aesthetic
Press Inc., P.O. Box 5306, North Branch, N.J. 08876, $7.95) begins with this
month and thus becomes an up-to-date reminder of New Jersey's panoramic beauty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Col. Tom Cooper with Joan Schulhafer

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'CATCH-22': CADETS HAIL A CHRONICLER OF THE ABSURD

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

DATELINE: COLORADO SPRINGS, Oct. 4


It was love at first sight.

The first time the cadets at the Air Force Academy saw Joseph Heller walk into
the cavernous auditorium. they fell madly in love with him. Nearly 900 future
officers stood as one to applaud the white-haired author as he arrived to begin
a weekend-long celebration.

The occasion was the 25th anniversary of the publication of ''Catch-22,'' the
novel that captured the insanity of war and the human condition while adding a
phrase to the English language.

The audience in blue uniforms rose again to applaud and cheer when the author
introduced the movie based on his book. The cadets applauded during the movie
credits, after the movie and after he thought he was finished answering
questions.

Then they mobbed him down front with more questions, asked for autographs and
followed him out to a waiting car for more talk about the evil Colonel Cathcart,
who kept raising the number of bombing missions necessary for rotation home,
Major Major, who would only see people in his office when he wasn't in, and Milo
Minderbinder, the mess officer who could see a profit in almost anything.

'An Intoxicating Experience'

''For me,' said the 63-year-old author, ''this is an intoxicating experience
unlike any other I've ever had. I don't want to take it in stride. I want to
revel in it.''

As part of the celebration, there was a 25th birthday cake for Yossarian, the
book's puzzled protagonist. There were academic papers presented on the
theological, cultural and social significance of ''Catch-22.'' And there were
big smiles on the faces of the Air Force Academy's English department, which
sought to introduce the man who made fun of an insane military bureaucracy to
future members of a military bureaucracy.

''We want these men and women to be a thinking part of a large military
bureaucracy,'' said Col. Jack Shuttleworth, head of the English department, ''We
don't want them to be victims of the Colonel Cathcarts of the world. To put it
bluntly, you don't want dumb officers out there protecting your country.''

Since its publication, ''Catch-22'' has been an informal part of the military
education of many soldiers. And it was occasionally used in some senior classes
here. But in recent years it has become a staple taught by a self-confident
staff of teachers whose military experiences included tours in Vietnam, where
the historical distinctions between good guy and bad guy were fuzzed and, as
Colonel Shuttleworth put it, ''The enemy was everywhere and nowhere.''

Mutual Admiration Builds

''We oversimplify our military,'' said Mr. Heller, who as a World War II
bombardier lieutenant flew 60 missions in the Army Air Corps. ''We think they
have one mind. But they are very educated today and they want their families and
students to be well educated. The degree of acceptance here, maybe even love,
for the book is very surprising, and gratifying.''

Likewise, the cadets learned that an Olympian author can also be accessible.
''He seems like a nice guy,'' said Corey Keppler, a sophomore from Smithtown,
L.I., ''I read parts of the book in high school. Now I'm going to finish it.''

Mr. Heller also shared several confidences with his young admirers, none of whom
was born when he wrote the book. They learned that the book was originally
titled ''Catch-18,'' but the imminent publication of Leon Uris's ''Mila 18'' and
the repetition of the number two in Mr. Heller's book suggested the change.

The cadets also discovered that Milo's car in the movie really did belong to
Mussolini. They laughed when the author told why he sold the movie rights: ''I
wanted the money.''

A Catch That Defies Explanation

And the author tried once again to explain why he can never define catch-22.
''It doesn't exist,'' he said, ''That's the catch. If it existed in writing or
something, we could change it.''

Then he sought to give an example. ''I understand the Air Force Academy has a
catch-22,'' he said, ''To repair a uniform it must be freshly cleaned. But the
cleaning staff has orders not to clean any uniform needing repairs.''

''That's some catch,'' says Yossarian in the movie.

''It's the best there is,'' replies the doctor.

There were, of course, serious moments in the celebration, which the academy
advertised with a sketch of a naked Yossarian in a tree looking out over the Air
Force school. In one paper presented, Stuart James of Denver University praised
the book's ''narrative knots and sheer fantasy'' as ''a mirror image of the
madhouse world of lonely psyches that we all inhabit.'' Joan Robertson of the
academy's faculty analyzed the author's depiction of women in ''Catch-22'' as
undemanding, compliant, often not even worthy of a proper name, and thus adding
a needed gritty edge to his portrayal of men.

Frederick Kiley of the National Defense University even wrote another chapter to
''Catch-22'' in Mr. Heller's style about the brave young men who went off on the
dangerous missions they did not have to fly but could not get out of.

'I'm Sure Milo Would'

The author himself said he was surprised by the lasting impact of Milo
Minderbinder, a product of the capitalist system. ''I don't understand the
merger mania sweeping American business,'' said Mr. Heller. ''But I'm sure Milo
would.''

The author said he was not surprised, however, when catch-22's kept popping up
in real life. In a speech tonight he quoted one United States Army briefing
officer in Vietnam telling reporters, ''I'm happy to announce our casualties
have increased greatly and are now on a level with those of our Marines.''

Mr. Heller said he was stunned with the strength of continuing interest in his
book. He confided plans to cancel the Friday evening showing of the movie if
only a few teachers attended. Instead, it was the largest crowd he has ever
addressed.

All of which put the author in his own catch-22 - the more he enjoyed the
weekend, the faster it went, and the less he could enjoy it.

''I'm as happy as a lark,'' said Mr. Heller, who expects to complete his next
novel, ''Poetics,'' this winter. ''All my fantasies have been fulfilled. The sad
part to me is that now I'll have to wait another 25 years to come back.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Joseph Heller (NYT/John Morgan)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 7, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PACIFIC NATIONS, AT U.S., CRITICIZE FRENCH POLICIES

BYLINE: By HOWARD W. FRENCH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 6


Pacific island nations, speaking in the General Assembly, continued to criticize
France today for its failure to grant independence to New Caledonia and for its
nuclear testing in the region.

After the Assembly speeches critical of France delivered last week by the
Foreign Ministers of Australia and New Zealand, the head of the Vanuatu
delegation, Robert F. Van Lierop, said today that his country would ''not be
intimidated'' by threats ''that economic aid will be terminated if we persist in
bringing the question of New Caledonia to the United Nations.''

Referring to France as the ''administering power,'' Mr. Van Lierop said that
''it can blame no one but itself'' for the attention the United Nations has
given to the question of independence for New Caledonia. He added that France
had chosen ''not to proceed with what it had promised the colonized people of
New Caledonia.''

Nuclear Testing an Issue

The Deputy Prime Minister of Fiji, Mosese Qionibarawi, condemned France for its
continued nuclear testing program carried out on the Pacific island of Mururoa
despite the ''strong and unanimous opposition'' of the countries in the region.

''How much longer can a country which professes to be a leader in its respect
for international law and obligations continue to act so arrogantly?'' he said.
''If, as France maintains, nuclear testing is so vital to the security of the
Western alliance, perhaps the United States might consider allowing France to
use the Nevada test site. On the other hand, if the tests are as safe as
claimed, then there is good reason to move testing to the Mediterranean island
of Corsica, or to mainland France itself.''

The Foreign Ministers of Botswana, Swaziland, Central African Republic,
Guinea-Bissau, Chad and Bhutan called for an end to apartheid and urged greater
economic aid for African nations.

Dr. Gaositwe K. T. Chiepe, Foreign Minister of Botswana, said that ''the major
trading partners of South Africa who can but will not impose sanctions'' on
South Africa ''must not use us as an excuse for their inaction.''

She said that although Botswana could not afford to impose sanctions upon South
Africa itself, it would not ''stand in the way of those who can and decide to do
so.''

Swaziland's Minister of Works, K. M. Mtetwa, said that the ''people of Swaziland
abhor apartheid and believe that it must be dismantled.''

Swaziland and Botswana, along with Lesotho are members of a regional custms
union with South Africa and are highly dependent on trade and investment from
that country.

'Greatest Moral Issue'

In perhaps the strongest denunciation of South Africa before the Assembly today,
the Foreign Minister of Guyana, Rashleigh E. Jackson, called apartheid ''the
greated moral issue, bar none, ever faced by mankind.''

He said that it was a ''situation in which millions of black peoples are
brutalized from birth, corralled in a slave society and wantonly exploited to
swell many a coffer.''

The Foreign Minister of Chad expressed thanks for ''the precious aid given to
our country during height of the drought and famine.''

Jean-Louis Psimhis, the Foreign Minister of the Central African Republic, also
spoke of the negative effect of the fall in commodity prices on his country's
economy.

The Chadian Foreign Minister accused Libya of harboring a ''permanent plot to
destabilize our country,'' and said that the most recent example of Libya's
''criminal tactics'' was the ''recent attack against the capital of Togo by a
commando force sent from abroad.''

The Foreign Minister of Guinea-Bissau, Julio Semedo, also condemned apartheid,
and he asked for greater economic support for Africa's efforts for economic
recovery. The Foreign Minister of Bhutan, Dawa Tsering, called the problems of
sub-Saharan Africa ''a striking example of the fundamental injustice of current
international economic relations.''

The Foreign Minister of Vietnam, Vo Dong Giang, said his country was ''ready to
turn to a new chapter and to facilitate the development of the relations of
friendship and cooperation'' with the United States. He also expressed
solidarity with ''the Libyan people who are engaged in a valiant struggle
against the policy of state terrorism pursued by certain imperialist forces.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 7, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT BOSTON;
'ALTERNATIVE' PAPER, 2 DECADES OLD, DONS BLACK TIE

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 915 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 6


The Boston Phoenix, in its origins a prototype of the ''alternative'' weekly and
enfant terrible of a rather proper city, does not want to be an adolescent any
more.

So the newspaper, which in its early days suggested sending legions of American
volunteers to North Vietnam to repair the damage of continuing bombings, is
declaring that this is its 20th birthday, and giving itself a black-tie
reception Oct. 28 with a guest list fit for a cotillion.

The Phoenix has undergone a transition, according to its public relations
agency, to become ''a valued and highly respected information source in our
community,'' with journalism awards from such pillars of the Establishment as
the American Bar Association.

''Its evolution into one of the most respected and successful weeklies in the
country reflects the changing values of the last two decades,'' according to a
background letter; the agency also points out that the newspaper grosses $10
million a year.

It is the Marxist dialectic, in a way; thesis and antithesis yielding to
synthesis. Here in the city that fancies itself the youth capital of the United
States, it is also in character.

Boston has grown older, more affluent, and even outside its Brahmin precincts,
more establishment. And The Phoenix's readership, said by the newspaper to
number 300,000, mirrors the city. According to the newspaper, it consists of
''highly educated, upwardly mobile, active professionals,'' with a median age of
30 and predominantly single or childless, a description that fairly screams
''yuppie.''

''The central issue for alternative papers,'' said Paul Solman, who once edited
one of The Phoenix's predecessors, ''is do you get one year per year older, with
the sensibilities of your readership, or do you stick to the market segment you
were originally conceived to serve? Do you do Twisted Sister, or do you keep
reviewing Paul Simon?''

Mr. Solman, who is now a lecturer at the Harvard Business School, said that in
fact alternative newspapers, of which The Phoenix is the sole survivor of a
once-flourishing field in Boston, had no choice but to follow their original
readership.

''It was a creature of the baby boom generation,'' said Martin Linsky, who
edited The Real Paper, a competitor, for four years, ''and it has followed that
generation as that generation has grown up.''

Many changes appear to have been dictated by the times. The scores of street
hawkers are gone, for example, mainly because the street-people culture of the
1960's and 1970's is gone. The Phoenix placed a notice in its pages to invite
the former hawkers to the anniversary celebration, and found that those who
answered had become doctors, lawyers and financial vice presidents, according to
Richard Gaines, the editor.

Many of the staples of the newspaper in the 70's are missing, too, and not
because of editorial decisions. There is no longer a war around which the
newspaper could maintain a telephone ''clearing house'' for information on
protests and advice on tactics. There are few parallels for the prison
interviews with the Rev. Philip Berrigan; headlines such as ''Back to the Stone
Age: Starving the North,'' over photos of an American warplane and cowering
Vietnamese civilians.

'' 'Underground' hasn't existed since the end of the Vietnam War - it died,''
Stephen Mindich, the publisher, said in an interview. But The Phoenix and one of
its predecessors, Boston After Dark, an arts publication founded in March 1966,
were never truly underground anyway, he said, being involved in the arts and a
variety of political issues.

Mr. Mindich is acutely aware of the changes. In an office decorated with ceramic
Disney figures, a Mr. Potato Head doll and a variety of modern paintings, he
speculated on how far the trend could logically go.

Banks, fitness centers and computer stores now advertise in its tabloid pages,
along with the splashy displays for rock concerts and consumer electronics. Toys
'R' Us makes an occasional appearance.

The idea that a newspaper like The Phoenix eventually sells out to the
Establishment is not new. A 1977 film, ''Between the Lines,'' begins with the
mythical ''Back Bay Mainline,'' loosely based on The Phoenix and similar
newspapers, struggling along with the editor manhandling the ad manager to get
sufficient pages, and the receptionist keeping the underpaid rock critic
supplied with marijuana cigarettes. But the newspaper is eventually bought by a
chain.

The Phoenix, Mr. Gaines argues, ''is an alternative, but it isn't scruffy and
disorganized any more.'' In fact, its texture is still quite different from
Boston's daily newspapers, with an article that refers to an accused confidence
man as ''charming and chutzpatic,'' or another calling Harvard's recent 350th
anniversary ''an overreported, self-promoted, giant pat on the back that ranks
as a nonstory with all of Evel Knievel's soft-headed stunts, the Statue of
Liberty boondoggle, and anything uttered by a Republican politician in
Massachusetts.''

''If we denied that we could put on a black tie and have a party, it would
almost be affected,'' said Mr. Mindich. ''Why can't you go to a Grateful Dead
concert, and to a black tie? No reason.''

The guest list includes the Governor, the Mayor, and other movers and shakers.
The idea, said Mr. Mindich, was taken from a similar celebration held for The
New Republic.

''We seek and need to be established, but that doesn't mean we need to be the
Establishment,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Stephen Mindich reading paper (NYT/Rick Friedman)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 7, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EXTREMIST FINDS CABLE TV IS FORUM FOR RIGHT-WING VIEWS

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: FALLBROOK, Calif.


Rules that require cable television systems to offer access to local residents
are enabling a former Ku Klux Klan leader here to promulgate his racist and
radical views in a number of towns and cities around the country.

''Three years ago when cable was getting off the ground, I realized that public
access channels were perfect for views like mine that were having trouble
getting expressed,'' Tom Metzger said in an interview in his office here, 25
miles north of San Diego.

Mr. Metzger's program, called ''Race and Reason,'' has prompted controversy in a
number of places where it is telecast. It consists of interviews by him with
people whose views are at least somewhat similar to his own.

He calls himself ''a racialist'' and says he opposes abortion ''because we have
lost a whole generation of white children to abortion since it became legal.''

On Blacks and Abortion

He says, ''I understand the black experience as well as any white man could, but
I don't sympathize to the point I want the white race pushed off this continent
by the rising black birth rate.''

''We support anybody who is against the system,'' he said.

He said his television programs attracted protest when ''some Klan or Nazi''
group would ''hit on deporting Jews'' or speak of the alleged genetic
inferiority of blacks or urge racial separation.

Mr. Metzger directs the White Aryan Resistance, which publishes WAR, a newspaper
that calls itself ''The Newspaper of the International White Racist.'' Each
edition lists cable systems that carry ''Race and Reason.''

There are now 35 of the 30-minute ''Race and Reason'' programs in circulation.
More are made each month as Mr. Metzger, or occasionally a substitute, conducts
interviews.

It is produced in a studio in Fullerton, Calif., provided to him by a cable
television company that is required by its franchise to give such service to
people who ask for it.

Controversy in Idaho

The most recent controversy created by his programs came in mid-September when a
cable system in Pocatello, Idaho, carried its first ''Race and Reason'' program.

The program was one of the few that did not feature Mr. Metzger. He said Roy
Frankhauser of Reading, Pa., interviewed Richard Barrett, a Mississippi lawyer.
Problems of racial conflict in Philadelphia were discussed, and Mr. Barrett
spoke out for a return to racial segregation and racial separation.

The Pocatello Human Relations Council had previewed the tape and decided that it
was unable to block the telecast, because the franchise agreement between the
city and the cable company forbids only the use of the public access channel for
advertising commercial products or displaying pornography.

So the council conducted a call-in program that ran for 90 minutes after the
Metzger tape was played. Forty people called, and 39 of them protested, The
Associated Press reported.

Mr. Metzger said conflicts occurred when the program was first shown in Austin,
Tex., and in Corvallis, Ore., but have been resolved by opponents creating their
own programs that run before or after his.

Hitler Birthday Cards

''Race and Reason'' is no longer shown in Corvallis. It ceased after 16 tapes
were shown because the local sponsor, Richard Masker, one of Mr. Metzger's
followers, moved away without renewing for 16 additional weeks.

''He lost his job, his wife divorced him and he said 'to hell with it' and moved
to Arkansas,'' Mr. Metzger said.

The Corvallis Gazette-Times reported that Mr. Masker lost his job after he
mailed Hitler birthday cards to many Jewish residents of Corvallis. The cards
said: ''May his memory refresh your soul and give you inspiration. Heil
Hitler.''

Mr. Metzger said sometimes he has had ''historical revisionists on my show.'' He
said ''they do not deny that some Jews got hurt'' in Nazi Germany in the Hitler
years, ''but they say not so many were killed as the numbers they claim.''

Mr. Metzger grew up in Warsaw, Ind., attended high school, and spent three years
in the Army, which taught him electronics.

Earlier Days in Politics

He came to California in 1961. Anti-Communist luncheon meetings sponsored by the
Douglas Aircraft Corporation, where he worked, led him to politics. He joined
the John Birch Society, became a Goldwater precinct worker in 1964, moved to
Fallbrook in 1968 and supported George C. Wallace for President.

His 1972 tax protest over the Vietnam War wrecked his thriving television
business but introduced him to other tax protesters who, he said, were ''atheist
racists, Christian Identity racists, Nazis, all kinds of people.''

In 1975 he joined the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, and soon became the Grand
Dragon for California. He left the Klan in 1980, he said.

He managed to win the Democratic nomination to the House of Representatives in
1980 in a district with a strong Republican incumbent and low Democratic
registration, causing an outcry. He was disavowed by the state Democratic
organization. The district is heavily Republican, and he lost by a margin of 7
to 1.

He lives and operates his television repair business from a house on a back
street here. He said all the other people on the street were Mexican immigrants.

While he gets along with them, he said, ''I would just as soon they were still
back in their own country.''

Range of TV Viewers

The television program is broadcast, Mr. Metzger said, to one million
subscribers of the Group W cable network in Pennsylvania alone, as well as many
more in San Francisco, San Diego, Memphis, Pocatello, Austin, Atlanta, parts of
Los Angeles, and nine smaller southern California cities.

Most cable franchises require the operators to provide a channel for public
access, and some require maintenance of production facilities that must be
provided free of charge. These rules derive from the 1972 Federal Communications
Commission rules on cable TV.

While the requirements at the Federal level were removed by court decision in
1979, they live on in the local franchises.

''We haven't got on in New York yet because cable access is so crowded,'' Mr.
Metzger said. ''But we will.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN IS CAPTURED AFTER PLANE IS DOWNED IN NICARAGUA TERRITORY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7


An American-built cargo plane that was shot down over southern Nicaragua on
Sunday was operated by a private group led by a retired United States Army major
general, Reagan Administration officials said today.

The officials said the plane was operated by an organization headed by the
retired general, John K. Singlaub, and had taken off from El Salvador. It had
flown down the Pacific coast of Nicaragua and turned inland to deliver
ammunition and supplies to rebels seeking to open a southern front against the
Sandinista Government in Managua.

Spokesmen for the Administration, the State Department, the Central Intelligence
Agency and the Department of Defense all emphatically denied that the flight was
in any way connected with the United States Government.

Statement by Nicaragua

In Managua, Government officials showed reporters a man whom they identified as
Eugene Hasenfus and whom they described as an American captured from the downed
plane. They also gave the names and showed identification cards of two other
American citizens they said died when the plane was shot down. [Page A8.] The
Defense Department said Mr. Hasenfus, 45 years old, had served in the Marine
Corps from 1960 to 1965, reaching the rank of corporal.

One official in Washington said General Singlaub was here last week but was
believed to be in El Salvador today. General Singlaub is head of the United
States Council for World Freedom, an organization based in Phoenix.

A spokesman for the general, Joyce Downey, relayed a statement from him saying:
''I've been informed about the situation. We know nothing about it. It has
nothing to do with the United States Council for World Freedom.'' Ms. Downey
said General Singlaub was not in Central America but was on a plane back to the
United States.

An Anti-Communist Leader

A senior American official said that a company set up by General Singlaub in El
Salvador had been used for C.I.A. operations in the past but that this
particular flight was not a Government operation.

General Singlaub drew public attention in 1979 when he criticized President
Carter's plan to reduce the number of American troops in South Korea, where the
general was chief of staff of United States forces.

He was subsequently reassigned to the United States and then retired. General
Singlaub formed the United States Council for World Freedom in 1981; it is
affiliated with the World Anti-Communist League, of which he is the current
chairman.

Through the council, he has been reported to have raised perhaps $10 million
privately to provide military and other supplies to the insurgents in Nicaragua,
known popularly as the contras. While on duty in Vietnam from 1966 to 1968,
General Singlaub headed a covert unit that specialized in terrorist and
guerrilla operations.

The Nicaraguan Defense Ministry announcement said that a plane, possibly a
C-123, was shot down with a surface-to-air missile at 12:45 P.M. on Sunday north
of San Carlos in Rio San Juan Province near the border with Costa Rica.

The statement said 50,000 rounds of ammunition for Soviet-built AK-47 automatic
rifles, plus rifles, grenades and boots, were aboard the plane.

The C-123, a twin-engine turbo-prop built by Fairchild in the 1950's, was used
by the Air Force to carry cargo and to drop paratroopers and their equipment.
Only a few remain in Air Force service.

''The intruding aircraft was hit by our air defense when it tried to carry out a
supply mission to mercenary forces that operate from abroad against our
country,'' the Defense Ministry statement said.

The secretary general of the Nicaraguan Foreign Ministry, Alejandro Bendana,
said in a television interview, ''The facts are that there was a plane shot
down, that it had an American crew on it.''

He said: ''We're talking about a U.S. plane. We're not saying U.S. Army plane
but this is obviously a C.I.A. operation with C.I.A. operatives; whether they
are U.S. Army personnel or not, it's almost beside the point.''

Secretary of State George P. Shultz, appearing on a United States Information
Agency broadcast, said: ''It was, for all we know, a plane hired by private
people, apparently some of them American. They had no connection with the U.S.
Government at all.''

George Lauder, the chief spokesman for the C.I.A., said the agency had no link
with the flight of the plane.

He also said the agency has reviewed its files and could find no connection with
the man whom the Nicaraguan Government claimed to have captured.

DETAILS ON SURVIVOR

MARINETTE, Wis., Oct. 7 (AP) -The American who survived having his supply plane
shot down by Nicaragua is a Vietnam veteran who worked for a Florida air freight
company, relatives and acquaintances said today.

I. W. Stephenson, a retired pilot and aviation executive, said Mr. Hasenfus told
him 20 years ago that he was going to work in Vietnam for Air America, then a
C.I.A. proprietary corporation.

''He said he was going back to work for Air America as a loadmaster,'' said Mr.
Stephenson, who lives in Menominee, Mich. A load master readies supplies for
airdrops.

William Hasenfus, 47, of Oshkosh, said his younger brother was an aircraft load
master in the Marines in Vietnam. The two once ran a parachuting school and both
are ardent sky divers, he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Eugene Hasenfus (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FALLEN WAR CORRESPONDENTS JOIN TROOPS

BYLINE: By DAVID SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 602 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va., Oct. 7


An oak tree was dedicated and a plaque was unveiled in Arlington National
Cemetery today to honor the more than 200 war correspondents who have been
killed while reporting to the American public on the far-flung battles of the
last 100 years.

Some died alongside soldiers in World War I and II. Others were hit by stray
bullets in the Middle East, were killed by mines in Central America or simply
disappeared while driving down roads in Cambodia. All ''have given their lives
while pursuing the truth,'' said Steve Bell of ABC News, the master of
ceremonies, who covered the Vietnam War.

It was the first time that a memorial to war correspondents had been installed
at Arlington. The sapling was placed at the edge of a grassy hillside marked by
ranks of soldiers' tombstones. At its foot lay a stone, carved in the shape of
an open book, inscribed with the words: ''One who finds a truth lights a
torch.''

''These men and women gave their lives in the cause of truth,'' said Thomas K.
Turnage, head of the Veterans Administration. He read a brief message from
President Reagan hailing the correspondents who ''shared the danger of our
combat forces to bring the news to the American people.''

It was a crisp, clear autumn day. Floods of sunlight warmed the gathering of
about 200 people - children who had barely known their fathers, grandchildren
who had only heard their names, widows and friends and colleagues whose grief
was too old and whose tears were too deeply buried to come easily to the surface
now.

It was a reunion with mixed feelings. Correspondents who had not seen each other
since an earlier war made their reacquaintance, pumping hands, inquiring about
careers and families. Those who had reported on World War II tried to trace
mutual friends. Those who had been based in Saigon talked fondly about going
back to Vietnam.

Cause for Celebration

''This is a solemn occasion, but it should not be one of sorrow,'' said Drew
Middleton, who covered World War II for The New York Times. ''It should be one
of celebration,'' he said, for the war correspondents ''are at long last being
honored for what they did.''

The ceremony was sponsored by the Overseas Press Club; the National Press Club;
Sigma Delta Chi, a society of journalists, and No Greater Love, a group that
provides programs for children of Americans killed by war or terrorism.

The Pledge of Allegiance was led by Pat Hangen, the widow of Welles Hangen of
NBC, missing in Indochina since 1970. Relatives of the dead were asked to stand;
among them was John Darnton, deputy foreign editor of The New York Times, whose
father, Byron, was killed in New Guinea in 1942 while covering the war in the
Pacific for The Times.

The veil covering the plaque was removed by James and Sarah Burrows, ages 7 and
3 respectively, grandchildren of Larry Burrows, a Life photographer killed in
Laos in 1971, and by David Ulizio, 7, grandson of James J. McElroy, killed in
Iwo Jima in 1945.

Tributes were spoken by Howard K. Smith, a CBS correspondent in World War II;
George Herman, who reported on the Korean War for CBS; George Esper of The
Associated Press, who reported from Saigon, and others.

''We are all slightly crazy,'' said Georgie Anne Geyer, the columnist who has
covered wars in Central America, Indochina and the Middle East. ''When I think
back on my years as a foreign correspondent, I'm amazed at how happy we were.''

In Vietnam, she recalled, American troops ''would look at us and say, 'My God,
what are you doing here? You don't have to be here.' That's what distinguished
us: We didn't have to be there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Alice Ducq, David Ulizio, James Burrows, Sararh Burrows and
Ted Yates (NYT/Al Stephenson)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WEINBERGER IS OFF ON A WORLD TRIP

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN JR., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 383 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 7


Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger arrived in the Chinese capital today on
the first leg of a round-the-world-trip that will also include consultations
with military leaders of India, Pakistan, Egypt and the European allies.

The 19-day trip gives Mr. Weinberger an opportunity to firm up ties with Asian
powers that have fragile relations with each other and to counter a Soviet
regional diplomatic effort.

As Mr. Weinberger arrived in Peking, where he will stay for three days before
visiting a military region near the Vietnamese border, a Soviet Deputy Foreign
Minister, Igor A. Rogachev, was wrapping up his own talks here.

The modernization of the Chinese military, although a lower priority than
improvement of industry, agriculture and technology, is an important part of the
Chinese leadership's plans. Assistance from the United States, which is
supplying such goods as artillery shells, torpedoes, and electronic equipment
for fighter aircraft, will be discussed in meetings this week, officials on Mr.
Weinberger's plane said.

Another topic of discussion in China will be the issue of plans for the first
call by an American naval vessel to a Chinese port since the Communist seizure
of power in 1949.

Recent reports that obstacles to such a port call have been fully cleared were
premature, Mr. Weinberger told reportrs traveling with him today. But he said,
''We'll try to see if we can't get that completed'' this week.

Mr. Weinberger stressed that the main goal of his trip is to counter the
diplomatic effort mounted by the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, in a
speech in Vladivostok this summer in which he proposed security talks in the
Pacific region.

''Nations of the region understandably feel threatened by the continuing
militarist posture of Vietnam, North Korea, and the Soviet Union, and by the
past and present use of those forces to expand their territory and control,''
Mr. Weinberger said in Alaska on his way to Asia last Saturday.

Mr. Weinberger said the Reagan-Gorbachev meeting in Iceland would be among the
topics in his meetings with Chinese officials, who include Deng Xiaoping, the
paramount leader, as well as Defense Minister Zhang Aiping, Yang Dezhi, the
Chief of the General Staff of the armed forces, and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Conviction on Abortion Ads

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 357 words

DATELINE: FORT WORTH, Oct. 7


A pregnancy center and its founder were convicted of deceptive trade practices
today and fined $39,000 for falsely advertising as an abortion clinic, then
trying to persuade pregnant women to have their babies.

The Texas Attorney General's office said the civil court trial was the nation's
first against a pregnancy center for deceptive trade practices.

A jury of five women and seven men deliberated eight hours before voting 11 to 1
to convict the center, the Problem Pregnancy Center of Fort Worth, and its
founder, Charles Pelletier, of violating the Texas Deceptive Trade Practices
Act.

The attorney general's office said the center, run by volunteers, falsely
advertised as an abortion clinic when its purpose was to keep women from having
abortions.

Steve Gardner, an assistant attorney general, said the verdict ''sends a strong
message to clinics across the country - don't lie to pregnant women in the names
of facts, in the name of help, in the name of God or anybody.''

Mr. Gardner said the center was fined $9,000 for violating the state consumer
law and $30,000 for violating a temporary injunction issued July 8 that limited
its activities. The jury also assessed $70,000 in attorneys' fees.

Mr. Pelletier said he would appeal the ruling. He said the verdict could
restrict free speech in churches, nonprofit organizations and other
organizations beyond anti-abortion groups.

Shelby Sharpe, the center's attorney, argued that the center was not a
commercial operation because it did not charge women for advice and pregnancy
tests. It, therefore, should not be held accountable under the act, he said.

But the state attorney, Eliot Shavin, said the pregnancy center advertised as if
it sold a service and attracted customers seeking a service.

''The defendant testified that fetuses have a right to life,'' said Mr. Shavin.
''In order to convince others of their belief, they further assert they have a
right to lie. They have no such rights.''

Mr. Pelletier, a disabled Vietnam veteran who founded the center in 1984, said
employees purposefully avoided telling women that the center did not perform
abortions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OUTSPOKEN GENERAL: A FAST FRIEND TO CONTRAS

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 525 words


John K. Singlaub, who heads a private group that reportedly operated the
American-built cargo plane shot down over southern Nicaragua on Sunday, was an
outspoken figure even before he retired as an Army major general.

General Singlaub, who has played a major role in advising and raising money for
the Nicaraguan rebels known as contras, was relieved as chief of staff of the
United States forces in South Korea in 1977 after publicly criticizing President
Carter's tentative decision to reduce the number of troops there. The troop
withdrawal decision was later reversed.

After being transferred to another position, General Singlaub criticized
President Carter again, that time for deciding not to produce a neutron bomb. He
was asked to resign from the military.

General Singlaub, 65 years old, fought in three wars and was wounded in two.

He now heads two anti-Communist groups: the World Anti-Communist League and the
United States Council for World Freedom.

He said last year that the council, the league's American affiliate, had not
supplied the contras with any funds for weapons. ''Our contributions have been
only for nonlethal supplies - medical equipment and the like,'' he said.

The Council was granted tax-exempt status in 1982 after its treasurer pledged
that it would never provide ''materiel or funds to any revolutionary,
counterrevolutionary or liberation movement.''

But after the council boasted that it had raised as much as $300,000 for the
contras, General Singlaub said he was unaware of the pledge to the Internal
Revenue Service. #4-Day Conference in Dallas Last year the general invited
several multimillionaires to the League's International Freedom Fighters Dinner,
which marked the conclusion of a four-day conference in Dallas. Some 60 to 70
Texans mingled with delegates and representatives of guerrilla armies under the
crystal chandeliers of a Dallas hotel ballroom.

A few days later, General Singlaub said one of his projects was to raise
$100,000 to buy a used helicopter and $35,000 to restore it.

He named the helicopter Lady Ellen after Ellen Garwood of Austin, Tex., who gave
$65,000 to recondition the helicopter. General Singlaub said the helicopter was
to be used for medical evacuation.

In 1977, when he was removed as the third-ranking Army officer in South Korea,
General Singlaub had a reputation as a ''soldier's soldier'' - dignified, gutsy
and, until he criticized President Carter, unknown outside the military.

General Singlaub, who studied at the University of California at Los Angeles for
three and a half years and left before graduating, began his 34-year Army career
on Jan. 14, 1943, when he was commissioned as a second lieutenant. Within 10
months, he had been assigned to the Office of Strategic Services, the wartime
predecessor of the Central Intelligence Agency.

He won 29 medals during his Army career, including two Purple Hearts for World
War II and the Korean War. He also served in Vietnam. In the Korean War, he was
assigned as deputy chief of the C.I.A.'s mission in Korea and served as a
battalion commander in combat, for which he was given the Silver Star.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 961 words


CITIES ON A HILL. A Journey Through Contemporary American Cultures. By Frances
FitzGerald. 414 pages. Simon & Schuster. $19.95.

THE title of Frances FitzGerald's new book comes from a declaration John
Winthrop, the founder of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, made to his followers
some four centuries ago: ''We must consider that we shall be a City Upon a
Hill,'' he said, ''the eyes of all people are upon us.'' As Ms. FitzGerald
argues in these pages, such visionary impulses not only helped found this
country, but they have also endured in Americans' continuing efforts to reinvent
themselves, their untarnished belief in the possibility of starting over.

This view of Americans as a people pitched on the edge of a spiritual frontier,
of course, is hardly new - it's been invoked and revised countless times since
the historian Frederick Jackson Turner first articulated it nearly a century
ago, and drawn upon by Ms. FitzGerald herself in ''Fire in the Lake,'' her
Pulitzer Prize-winning study of Vietnam. In ''Cities on a Hill,'' however, Ms.
FitzGerald attempts to flesh out this proposition with some fresh reports from
the contemporary front. She has taken four highly disparate communities that
embody the visionary impulse, and in describing them she has tried to
demonstrate the ways in which they reflect both larger, historical patterns and
specific conditions wrought by the social, political and cultural upheavals of
the 1960's.

The four communities Ms. FitzGerald has chosen are: the Castro, a San Francisco
district that became the first homosexual neighborhood in the country; the
Liberty Baptist Church, Jerry Falwell's home base in Lynchburg, Va.; Sun City, a
self-contained retirement town in Florida, composed almost entirely of people
over the age of 60, and Rancho Rajneesh, a New Age commune, complete with
restaurants, an airstrip, a shopping mall and a disco, established in Oregon by
the Indian guru Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh.

''Four different social experiments, then, and four very different new
communities,'' writes Ms. FitzGerald. ''Looked at in one way, they formed a kind
of parallelogram: two religious movements and two social groups; two sixties
communities and two groups with conservative views.'' Two of them appear to
build upon territory initially annexed by the youth movements and the Left,
while two appear to provide refuges from the ''anarchy of modern America.'' In
addition, each community provides the author with a window that opens out onto
an important social issue of the day - respectively, the consequences of the
sexual revolution; the growing appeal of conservative churches and the
politicization of the fundamentalist movement; the isolation of the elderly in
our youth-oriented society, and the residual allure of ideas and life styles
popularized by the American counterculture and the human potential movement.

On the surface, certainly, the four ''cities'' in this book may strike the
outsider as oddly hermetic worlds, exotic if not extreme in terms of their
rituals and mores, and Ms. FitzGerald duly chronicles many of their more
anomalous aspects. She writes about the ascendency of the ''clone style'' of
dressing in the Castro during the late 70's (''the look was cowboy or bush
pilot: tight blue jeans, preferably Levi's with button flies, plaid shirts,
leather vests or bomber jackets, and boots''). She describes the Liberty Baptist
Church's specific prescriptions for dress, child rearing and the conduct of a
marriage (the Bible, warns a family guidance manual, commands ''the husband to
love his wife! Being a leader is not being a dictator, but a loving
motivator''). She notes the class divisions at work in Sun City (''there are,
generally speaking, three social groups: the golfers, the 'cultural set,' and
the people who take craft classes and go to potluck suppers at the Town Hall'').
And she reports on the more sinister goings-on among the Rajneesh followers
(''Beginning in the spring of 1984, disciples, using their sannyasin or their
given names, had gone to arms dealers in cities across the country; by the fall
they had, according to The Oregonian, amassed an arsenal that included at least
twenty-eight semiautomatic weapons'').

If Ms. FitzGerald approaches these communities with the watchful eye of an
anthropologist, however, she also writes with lucid sympathy for her subjects.
There is nothing judgmental about her accounts; rather, she attempts to
understand the ideals of each community, the motivations and dreams that brought
individual members into their folds. She examines the emotional arc (mainly
downward from ardent idealism) traced by each community, and she explores, too,
the shifting dynamic between these communities and the outside world - for
instance, in the case of Jerry Falwell, she argues that his growing visibility
and political power posed him a choice between ''the genial Republican
businessmen and his 'disciplined, charging army,' '' a choice between moderation
and continued adherence to absolutist ideals.

Unfortunately, ''Cities on a Hill'' ends up reading less like a ground-breaking
social history than like four separate reports on four separate subjects -
sandwiched between introductory and concluding chapters. Attempts to find
connections between the groups are sporadic and somewhat perfunctory in tone,
and lengthy digressions on subjects familiar to followers of the news (Jerry
Falwell's rise to prominence during the 1980 elections, the murder of Harvey
Milk, the arrest of the guru Rajneesh) tend to clog up the book's narrative flow
- worse, they obscure the author's efforts to address broader themes. The result
is a well-written, well-documented book that fails to live up to its own highest
aspirations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Frances Fitzgerald (Linn Sage)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

RABBI ABRAHAM L. FEINBERG

SECTION: Section D; Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 308 words


Rabbi Abraham L. Feinberg, who led demonstrations against the Vietnam war and
the arms race in the United States and Canada, died of cancer Sunday in Reno,
Nev., where he lived for the last 10 years. He was 87 years old.

From pulpits in Manhattan, Denver, Niagara Falls and Toronto, he championed the
cause of minority groups and individual liberties. He was always ready to march,
lend his name or send a telegram if there was a protest for disarmament or for a
treaty on a nuclear test ban, or against racism in South Africa, radicial
injustice in America and United States policy in Vietnam.

In 1967, Rabbi Feinberg made a visit to Hanoi with two other members of the
clergy. They returned with what was viewed as a symbolic invitation from
President Ho Chi Minh of North Vietnam to President Johnson to visit Hanoi for
peace talks.

Rabbi Feinberg was born in the Ohio mining town of Bellaire, the son of a
Lithuanian cantor. He was graduated from high school at 14 and from the
Universty of Cincinnati, Phi Beta Kappa, in 1920. He was ordained a rabbi in
1923 at Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati.

In 1930, he took radio singing jobs in New York under the name of Anthony Frome,
and for several years was heard over WJZ on Sunday afternoons and on the
National Broadcasting Company network four nights a week. He returned to the
rabbinate during the rise of Adolf Hitler in Germany.

He was Rabbi Emeritus of the Holy Blossom Temple in Toronto and
Rabbi-in-Residence of the Center for Religion and Life at the University of
Nevada and Temple Sinai, both in Reno.

His first wife of 40 years, Ruth Katsh, died of cancer in 1971.

He is survived by his second wife, Patricia Blanchard of Reno, whom he married
in 1983; a daughther, Sarah Jane Growe of Toronto; a son, Dr. Jonathan Feinberg
of San Mateo, Calif., and four grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Calls Off Talks On Missing Americans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 78 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 8


Vietnam, without any explanation, has called off talks scheduled for this week
on accounting for the nearly 1,800 Americans missing in the Vietnam War, an
American official said today.

The Vietnamese Embassy in Bangkok told American officials on Tuesday that the
talks must be temporarily postponed, the official, Col. Joe Harvey, said.
Colonel Harvey was to lead a four-man team of American military specialists to
the talks in Hanoi that were to begin today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN CALLS PLANE'S CREW A NEW LINCOLN BRIGADE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 836 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 8


President Reagan strongly suggested today that he approved of efforts by private
American citizens to help Nicaraguan insurgents fighting the Sandinista
Government, including those Americans who sent in a cargo plane that was shot
down on Sunday.

But Administration officials disclosed that the Federal Bureau of Investigation
had opened what was decribed as a ''preliminary investigaton'' of those private
activities as possible violation of American neutrality laws.

Even so, President Reagan compared the efforts of private citizens at this time
to those of Americans who joined the Abraham Lincoln Brigade in the 1930's to
fight alongside Spanish Republican soldiers against Franco and his rightist
insurgents.

'We've Been Aware'

Referring to the Nicaraguan insurgents by their popular name, contras, the
President said that ''we've been aware that there are private groups and private
citizens that have been trying to help the contras to that extent.''

''But we did not know the exact particulars of what they're doing,'' he said.

Before leaving on a campaign visit to North Carolina, Mr. Reagan was asked
whether he approved of efforts by private American citizens to help the contras.
''We're in a free country where private citizens have a great many freedoms,''
he replied.

The President and other senior Administration officials repeated denials that
the American-built C-123 cargo plane that was shot down was on a United States
Government mission. But Mr. Reagan said he did not know whether it had been
privately sent by a retired Army major general, John K. Singlaub, as reported
Tuesday by Administration officials.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, the deputy chairman of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, expressed skepticism about the Administration's
position. He said in a broadcast interview that the Administration might be
encouraging private operations ''with a wink and a shrug.''

Link to Southern Air Seen

Meanwhile, evidence emerged today that linked the C-123 to Southern Air
Transport, a charter airline with offices in San Antonio and Miami that was
owned by the Central Intelligence Agency from 1960 to 1973. The agency then sold
the airline to a private investor, but an Administration official said it had
continued to fly covert missions for the agency.

C.I.A. spokesman have emphatically denied any connection with the plane shot
down over Nicaragua.

An Federal Aviation Admnistration official said the plane was owned by Doan
Helicopter Inc. of Daytona Beach, Fla., ABC News tonight broadcast footage shot
a year ago of a C-123 aircraft bearing the same identification number as that on
the downed aircraft. The plane was parked in space owned by Southern Air
Transport, ABC said.

On Tuesday a company spokesman, William Kress, denied any connection with the
plane. Today, he issued a statement acknowledging that one of the Americans
killed in the crash, Wallace Blaine Sawyer, had been a pilot for Southern Air
until 1985. He also said that Southern Air had done maintenance on the plane.

Another of the dead Americans, William J. Cooper, was found with a Southern Air
identity card.

'Hero and a Patriot'

Wallace Blaine Sawyer Sr., the father of one of the dead Americans, said today
that his son was a ''hero and a patriot'' who had served in the Air Force during
the Vietnam War. He said that his son's frequent trips had aroused speculation
in his home of Magnolia, Ark., that he worked for the C.I.A.

''I asked him about it, and he said he was not,'' said Mr. Sawyer.

The third person killed in the crash was identified today as a member of the
contra forces by a Washington spokesman for the United Nicaraguan Opposition.
The spokesman said he did not know the name of the crewman.

The fourth person aboard the plane was another American, Eugene Hasenfus, a
former parachute rigger in the Marine Corps. He was captured by Sandinista
soldiers after parachuting from the stricken plane and hiding out for about 24
hours.

U.S. Connection Denied

President Reagan, asked by reporters whether the plane loaded with ammunition,
weapons and boots for delivery to the insurgents had any connection with the
United States Government, replied, ''Absolutely none.''

On his attitude toward the mission, Mr. Reagan said, ''Some years ago, many of
you spoke approvingly of something called the Abraham Lincoln Brigade in the
Spanish Civil War.''

That unit figured in the Hemingway novel ''For Whom the Bell Tolls.''

Senator Leahy, interviewed on the CBS News morning news program, said, ''I
accept their denials that this man captured or the people killed are not C.I.A.
agents, were not working for the C.I.A., were not working for the American
Government and were not working for the Department of Defense.''

''It's not a violation of our law for people to go down there on their own,'' he
said. ''But I think it is a violation of our law if the Administration is
allowing it, if it's being done with a wink and a shrug.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of plane wreckage (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CAPTIVE AMERICAN RECALLED AS SEEKER OF ADVENTURE

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 615 words

DATELINE: OSHKOSH, Wis., Oct. 8


Eugene Hasenfus, the American captured by the Nicaraguan Government while aiding
rebels there, was described today as a tall, red-haired adventurer who loved the
outdoors and had a strong sense of competition.

Friends and relatives across northern Wisconsin, the home area of the
45-year-old Mr. Hasenfus, expressed shock today that the laid-off construction
worker was apparently involved in a clandestine supply operation in Central
America.

His wife, Sally, who is a real estate agent in Marinette, Wis., near here, flew
to Managua, Nicaragua, today in the hope of being allowed to see her husband.
The Hasenfuses have three children.

Her husband was the sole survivor in the crash of a C-123 twin-engine cargo
plane carrying supplies to Nicaraguan rebels after the plane was hit by a
missile fired by Government forces.

Mr. Hasenfus's father, William, a 69-year-old local businessman, said his son
never seemed much interested in Nicaragua or politics, though he had, the father
said, become ''real patriotic'' since a military tour of duty in Vietnam in the
early 60's.

''He was in the Marines,'' said the elder Mr. Hasenfus, ''so he saw a lot of
adventure.'' According to military records, however, a Cpl. Eugene Hasenfus was
in the Marine Corps from 1960 to 1965 but did not serve overseas.

At a high school reunion several years ago, Eugene Hasenfus had told friends,
however, that after high school graduation in 1959 he had joined the Marines for
service in Vietnam. He told the classmates that he had served for 13 years in
Southeast Asia.

I. W. Stephenson, a former pilot and long-time family friend who often took
Eugene and his brother William skydiving, said Eugene had told him he worked in
Southeast Asia for Air America, a company owned by the Central Intelligence
Agency. There, the Wisconsin native said, he had been a loadmaster on supply
planes, loading the aircraft, balancing the freight properly and sometimes
seeing it to its airdrop. Mr. Stephenson recalled Mr. Hasenfus as saying he was
making ''more money than the law allows.''

Keith Comeux, a retired teacher who taught Mr. Hasenfus history in high school,
recalled his former student. ''He was a big, red-haired, quite daring boy -
almost to the point of being reckless,'' the teacher said. Mr. Hasenfus played
football with determination, teachers said. ''He was very competitive,'' added
Mr. Comeux.

''He was a good plain boy, all-American in the sense of being a rugged outdoorsy
type,'' added Mr. Stephenson. ''He's a good jolly person,'' said June Hasenfus,
the captured American's aunt, ''and helpful in any way he could be. He loved
fishing, hunting and boating.''

Mr. Hasenfus's family and friends last saw him in this area several weeks ago.
He said he was working in Florida for Southern Air Transport, an airline
reportedly once owned by the C.I.A.

Mr. Hasenfus had gone to Florida last January. According to the records of a
Wisconsin building contractor, the Oscar J. Boldt Construction Company, he had
worked for it for 10 years as a steelworker before being laid off on Jan. 15.

On his most recent visit, Eugene Hasenfus asked his oldest brother and skydiving
companion William to lend him his parachute. ''That's my parachute he used down
there in Nicaragua,'' said William Hasenfus, who lives here. ''So scratch one
parachute.''

There are three Hasenfus brothers -William, Eugene and Dennis - and one sister,
Sandy.

William Hasenfus said he was not surprised at his brother's plight. ''He's the
type who goes out looking for adventure,'' said the brother. Dennis Hasenfus
said the family had been asked not to talk with reporters until Eugene's
situation was clarified.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
THE EX-SPOKESMAN: BERNARD KALB

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 908 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 8


From the moment last Thursday morning when he read about the Reagan
Administration's reported effort to deceive news organizations, Bernard Kalb's
days and nights have been marked by personal anguish.

''It has pursued me unshakably,'' said Mr. Kalb, who joined the State Department
as its spokesman nearly two years ago after a long career as a newspaper and
television reporter.

''I have been agonizing about this thing. I knew nothing about it. I was
concerned. I was concerned with the impact of any such program on the
credibility of the United States and the word of America and what the word of
America means.''

''And I was concerned about my own integrity,'' said the 64-year-old former
foreign correspondent, his voice cracking. ''My own integritry means something
to me personally but in the grand scheme of things I'm a simple asterisk. What I
know is I didn't want my own integrity to get scooped up in this controversy.''

A Conversation With Shultz

On Tuesday night Mr. Kalb left his State Department office and walked into the
office of Secretary of State George P. Shultz. For 40 minutes the two talked. By
the end of the conversation Mr. Kalb had decided to resign from his State
Department job today - a resignation that startled and embarrassed the White
House on the eve of President Reagan's departure for Iceland and his weekend
meeting with Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

Mr. Kalb, who announced his resignation at the State Department briefing, said
later: ''Look, there may never be a perfect time to take such an action. You
cannot be driven into silence by an event. Events of the calendar cannot inhibit
you from acting on things that are exceedingly important.''

It was perfectly in character for Mr. Kalb - who is fond of garish shirts and
orange ties and who speaks with self-deprecating humor about his passion for
collecting porcelain antiques - that his resignation was tinged with deep
emotion. When he took the State Department job after years of covering
diplomatic news for CBS and NBC, Mr. Kalb said that as the son of immigrants he
somehow wanted to repay the United States.

''His father, Max, was a tailor,'' a close friend of Mr. Kalb said. ''He had Max
in mind when he took the job. He had a deep desire to return something to this
country. He's resigning because his stomach just wouldn't allow him to stay
anymore.''

Mr. Kalb said he was uncertain about his plans although he will remain at the
State Department for several days to write efficiency reports about several
aides. His office, which is filled with newspapers that date back 18 months,
serves as testimony to his links to journalism. ''I sometimes thought of myself
as a journalist masquerading as a spokesman,'' Mr. Kalb said.

Two Years in the Army

The son of Max and Bella Kalb, immigrants from Poland and Russia, Bernard Kalb
was born in New York on Feb. 4, 1922. He went to New York City public schools
and graduated from the City College of New York in 1942.

He then spent two years in the Army, mostly on a newspaper published out of a
Quonset hut on Adak in the Aleutian Islands, where his editor was Sgt. Dashiell
Hammett, the mystery writer.

From 1946 to 1961 Mr. Kalb worked for The New York Times. In his early years he
worked as a writer for WQXR and as a reporter in New York City and at the United
Nations bureau. Later he served as a correspondent in Southeast Asia, where he
developed an abiding fondness for Oriental antiques, porcelain and spicy food.

Referring to his antiques, Mr. Kalb said: ''My shelves are filled with
enthusiasm. No museum has ever expressed envy.''

In Indonesia, where Mr. Kalb served from 1956 until 1961, his wife, Phyllis,
gave birth to their first daughter, whom they named Tanah, the Indonesian word
for earth. They have three other daughters, Marina, Claudia and Sarinah. The
last two were born in Hong Kong, where he worked from 1962 to 1970 for CBS News.


The Anecdotes Are Many

Mr. Kalb also served as Washington anchorman of the CBS Morning News and, in
1975, joined his brother, Marvin, on the diplomatic beat. The brothers are
co-authors of two books, one a biography of Henry A. Kissinger and the other a
novel, ''The Last Ambassador,'' about Vietnam before the Communist takeover in
1975. In 1980, Mr. Kalb joined NBC.

Anedotes about Mr. Kalb are rife among journalists. He laughs or shrugs at most
of them, but rarely issues a denial.

On one of his first television interviews, after years as a newspaper
correspondent, Mr. Kalb reportedly rushed up to a diplomat in Southeast Asia
with a microphone in his hand. As the diplomat began talking, Mr. Kalb
instinctively removed a notebook from his pocket and tried to take notes.

According to one tale, Mr. Kalb's mother phoned CBS News years ago when both her
sons were working there. She told the phone operator: ''This is Marvin Kalb's
mother. Is Bernie around?''

Mr. Kalb has said: ''I've heard that story, and I often tell it myself. There's
no sibling rivalry, only sibling love.''

Moments before he made the announcement that he was resigning, Mr. Kalb, in
fact, called his bother and told him. His wife, Phyllis, also knew.

''This was not an easy thing for me to do, but it's something I had to do,'' he
said today. ''You know, I came here suddenly, I was taken by surprise at the
Secretary's invitation and I'm leaving with a comparable suddenness. There seems
to be an inevitability about it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PRISONER IN NICARAGUA SAYS C.I.A. RAN CONTRA SUPPLY FLIGHTS

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1599 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Oct. 9


An American captured when a plane delivering supplies to rebels was shot down
here said today that the supply flights were directly supervised by members of
the Central Intelligence Agency in El Salvador.

''Two Cuban naturalized Americans that work for the C.I.A. did most of the
coordination for the flights and oversaw all of our housing, transportation,
also refueling and some flight plans,'' the prisoner, Eugene Hasenfus, said at a
news conference here with Nicaraguan officials seated beside him.

Mr. Hasenfus then named the two reported C.I.A. officials and gave the most
detailed account so far of rebel supply operations out of El Salvador and
Honduras. His statements are being treated as a major political victory by the
Nicaraguan Government.

Plane in 'Sting' Operation

''I was told we were working out of the El Salvador Air Force base at
Ilopango,'' Mr. Hasenfus said. ''We would be flying into Honduras to an air base
called Aguacate and there we would load up small arms and ammunition and fly
into Nicaragua. There it would be dropped to the contra.''

The American prisoner looked healthy and Nicaraguan officials said he had been
well treated. But reporters could not verify the conditions under which he has
been held and questioned, and Mr. Hasenfus's future treatment could depend on
the statements he is willing to make here.

In a statement this evening, the United States Embassy here strongly protested
the continued denial of consular access to Mr. Hasenfus and also the handling of
the remains of the two Americans killed when the rebel plane was shot down.

Protest Over Remains

The remains, reportedly already cremated, were taken to the American Embassy
this afternoon in two coffins that were left in front of the embassy gate in
what appeared to be a propaganda gesture by the Nicaraguan Government. Embassy
officials termed the action ''ghoulish'' and said it violated ''decent human
behavior.'' [The Drug Enforcement Administration said the plane was earlier
involved in a United States ''sting'' operation against the Nicaraguan
Government.

And Senator Dave Durenberger, the chairman of the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence, challenged the White House to acknowledge what he said was its
role in the plane's flight. Page A3.] The incident comes at a sensitive moment:
Congress is about to release $100 million in aid to the rebels. If the C.I.A.
was involved in the supply effort, as Mr. Hasenfus says, it would appear to
violate Congressional restrictions and contradict repeated statements by
Administration officials that the plane was part of a purely private effort by
American supporters of the Nicaraguan guerrillas. If, on the other hand, the
rebel supply effort was run by a private American organization, as the
Administration says, the group appears to have had impressive resources that
allowed it to hire former C.I.A. personnel, maintain dozens of Americans in El
Salvador, warehouse tons of equipment, buy military transports and fly
repeatedly in and out of El Salvador, Honduras and the United States.

Mr. Hasenfus, who is 45 years old, said Nicaraguan rebel supply flights from the
main military air base at Ilopango in El Salvador and rebel bases in Honduras
were not only supervised by the C.I.A., but were also supported by more than 25
employees of an American company based in El Salvador. These employees appear to
have ferried more than 130,000 pounds of military equipment to rebel forces.

Prisoner Appears Nervous

The American prisoner appeared nervous and spoke slowly, staring straight ahead.
Nicaraguan officials said he did not want to answer questions and Mr. Hasenfus
left the stage after talking for about 10 minutes. A Nicaraguan intelligence
officer said Mr. Hasenfus had spoken because he was demoralized and felt
abandoned.

Officials said they still had not decided if he would be put on trial.

Mr. Hasenfus is being detained in the Ministry of the Interior and has been
interrogated for two days, according to Nicaraguan officials. They added that it
was uncertain when American diplomats would be allowed to see him. However his
wife, Sally, who traveled here Wednesday night, was permitted to talk to him
today.

''His situation is very difficult,'' said Capt. Ricardo Wheelock, head of
Nicaraguan military intelligence. ''He is a mercenary who has been shot down.''

Several documents reportedly taken from the plane, including logbooks,
registration certificates, Salvadoran Air Force identity cards and personal
papers, were shown to a reporter for two hours and appeared to support key parts
of Mr. Hasenfus's account.

But other aspects, such as his supervision by C.I.A. agents in El Salvador,
cannot be independently confirmed and are not documented in the papers captured
by the Nicaraguans.

Reported Tie to Miami Company

Mr. Hasenfus said the Americans all worked for a company called Corporate Air
Services in El Salvador, which he said was part of the Southern Air Transport
Company in Miami.

Nicaraguan officials charge that both companies work for the C.I.A. Mr. Hasenfus
said Corporate Air Services is based at the Salvadoran Air Force base outside
San Salvador.

Captain Wheelock said Mr. Hasenfus had told interrogators that he believed he
was working for the C.I.A. when he agreed to join rebel supply flights as a
specialist in freight loading. Mr. Hasenfus did not repeat that reported
statement today.

But he did describe working for eight years for a C.I.A.-operated airline in
Southeast Asia, Air America, which he said also once employed the American chief
pilot of the downed plane. The pilot and the American co-pilot died when a
Sandinista rocket hit the plane over southern Nicaragua on Sunday.

Mr. Hasenfus added that he was approached five months ago by the former Air
America pilot, William J. Cooper, with whom he flew supplies to C.I.A. agents at
remote airstrips in Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam from 1965 to 1973. From
1960 to 1965, Mr. Hasenfus said, he was in the Marine Corps.

Pay Is $3,000 a Month

He said he was paid $3,000 a month plus all expenses for working as a loader on
rebel supply flights over Nicaragua. The money was deposited directly into his
account at the Pestigo Bank in Marinette, Wis., according to Sandinista
officials. It is not clear who paid the money.

The documents found on the rebel C-123 military supply plane include Salvadoran
Air Force identity cards that describe the three American crew members,
including Mr. Hasenfus, as United States military advisers in El Salvador.

In a statement today, the Salvadoran Army high command denied any involvement in
the rebel supply flights. A spokesman at the American Embassy in El Salvador has
also denied that any of the American crew members were working as United States
military advisers in El Salvador.

One of the crew member's wallet carried the business card of a Robert W. Owen
and listed a Washington address and telephone number. Another business card was
for a Mr. P. J. Buechler, listed as working for the State Department's
Nicaraguan Humanitarian Affairs Office. That office was in charge of sending
nonlethal aid to Nicaraguan rebels over the last year.

The card listing Mr. Owen may refer to a close associate of a National Security
Council member, Lieut. Col. Oliver North. Nicaraguan rebel officials in Costa
Rica say a man named Robert Owen was sent by Colonel North to help them when
Congress cut American aid to the rebels two years ago. A telephone operator in
Washington said the number listed on the card for Mr. Owen had been
disconnected.

Crew Members Named

Three logbooks reportedly taken from the rebel plane appear to list every
guerrilla supply flight the plane had made, the names of more than 30 non-Latin
crew members and the 100,000 pounds of equipment dropped to the rebels.

The logbooks also indicate that the plane has had three unusual changes of
registration numbers in recent years. In 1982, the plane appears to have been
registered as N3142D or O. In 1983, its number changed to N4410F. Three months
ago, its number appears to have changed again, to a Panamanian registration,
HP824.

A certificate of registration lists the plane as belonging to the Sekman
Aviation Corporation in Miami, which Sandinista officials say they believe is
owned by Southern Air Transport. At least two of the Americans on the plane
carried Southern Air Transport identity cards issued in recent months.

The logbooks, two of which appear to have belonged to the American co-pilot,
Wallace Blaine Sawyer, also appeared to list landings at Nicaraguan rebel camps
in Honduras at Rus Rus, Mocoron and Aguacate, as well as at the main Salvadoran
military base at Ilopango. Other notations appear to indicate landings in the
United States.

If the rebel supply effort was private, as the Reagan Administration says, it
appears to have gone on for over a year, since Mr. Sawyer's logbooks list
flights from June 1985 until last month.

Mr. Hasenfus said he made six flights out of El Salvador and four out of
Aguacate, a rebel air base in Honduras that American officials say was built by
United States Army engineers and then handed over to the C.I.A. three years ago.

Captain Wheelock gave reporters a telephone number in El Salvador that he said
C.I.A. agents had given the plane's American crew members in case of trouble. He
also gave the address in the Salvadoran capital of what he described as a C.I.A.
safe house where some crew members stayed. Reporters in El Salvador found the
house to be empty today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Eugene Hansenfus (NYT/Peter Morgan)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE ICELAND SUMMIT;
THE FIVE MAIN ISSUES

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words


Medium-Range Missiles American and Soviet officials have said that one of the
most promising areas for negotiation at the Iceland talks is an agreement on a
reduction of medium-range missiles in Europe. There is a lesser chance of major
progress on nuclear testing though some headway could be made. President Reagan
has said, according to advisers, that he will not let arms issues monopolize the
Iceland talks. When the two men meet for their planned six or seven hours of
discussions in Reykjavik, other topics are expected to include human rights,
regional conflicts, and issues that involve Soviet-American agreements on
subjects not directly related to arms.

The two sides have come a long way on the issue of medium-range nuclear weapons.
But so far, Moscow has made all of the main concessions. The Geneva talks on
medium-range missiles began in 1980, less than a year after NATO decided to
deploy American Pershing 2 ballistic missiles and cruise missiles in five West
European countries, beginning in 1983, as a counter to Soviet SS-20 missiles and
Backfire bombers.

Meanwhile, according to the NATO decision, negotiations would be carried out
with the Soviet Union on what limits should be placed on American and Soviet
medium-range missiles.

President Reagan initially proposed forgoing the deployment of the American
missiles if the Soviet Union would give up all of its SS-4, SS-5 and SS-20
missiles, including SS-20's deployed in Asia. He also proposed a freeze on
shorter-range missiles; the British and French nuclear arsenals were excluded
from the proposal.

The Soviet Union put forth proposals that would have prevented the United States
from deploying Pershing 2 and ground-launched cruise missiles in West Europe.
The Soviet Union also sought to include British and French missiles in the
talks. When the United States began to deploy medium-range missiles in November
1983, the Soviet Union walked out of the Geneva talks. The talks resumed in
March 1985.

The Soviet Union has dropped its demand that British and French missiles be
included under an ''interim'' agreement of several years' duration and has
suggested that the United States and Soviet Union limit their deployment in
Europe to 100 warheads each. Moscow also has indicated that it is willing to
make some cuts in its Asian force, but not the major reductions that Washington
is seeking.

The United States so far has not made any major concession. It has proposed a
global limit of 200 warheads. Both sides could have 100 warheads in Europe. The
Soviet Union would keep its remaining warheads in Asia. The United States would
keep 100 medium-range warheads in America to offset Soviet missiles in Asia.

Apart from the question of Soviet missiles in Asia, the two sides still differ
over some critical issues, such as how long an agreement should last, whether
the United States should keep Pershing 2 missiles in Europe, whether short-range
systems should be included, and verification.

NUCLEAR TESTING

The Soviet Union has called for a total ban on nuclear test explosions, and has
not conducted any tests since July 1985. It has expressed a willingness to allow
verification on its territory of a total test ban.

The United States has rejected the call for a test ban, saying testing was
needed as long as nuclear arsenals existed. The United States has called on the
Soviet Union to agree to improved verification procedures for two 1970's
treaties that limit the size of underground nuclear explosions to 150 kilotons,
or 150,000 tons of TNT. The United States has signed the treaties but they have
not been ratified. Above-ground testing has been banned by treaty since the
1960's.

Recently, President Reagan announced a shift in the American position. On Sept.
22 at the United Nations, Mr. Reagan said the United States would agree to
additional limits, but not a total ban, onesesti i if two conditions are met.

One is that the Soviet Union must agree to additional verification measures for
the 1970's treaties. The second condition is that the two sides must agree on a
program to reduce and ultimately eliminate all nuclear weapons.

Mr. Reagan was deliberately vague about what other limits the United States
would consider. They could include a quota on the number of tests each year or
an agreement on a lower limit on the size of underground explosions.

REGIONAL ISSUES

United States and Soviet officials have said they expect the summit meeting will
address Afghanistan and conflicts in other parts of the world. Here are some of
the regional issues that could be raised.
  Afghanistan

The Russians have about 115,000 troops there. Negotiations through the United
Nations on a total Soviet withdrawal are stalemated.
  Middle East

The two sides have basic differences on the Arab-Israeli conflict, with Moscow
favoring an international peace conference, Israeli withdrawal from all occupied
land and a Palestinian state. Washington favors Israeli-Jordanian negotiations
for an accord that would lead to autonomy for Palestinians.
  Southern Africa

The Soviet Union sponsors some 30,000 Cuban troops in Angola and supports armed
opposition to the South African Government. The United States, which supports
United Nations calls for South African withdrawal from South-West Africa, says
no agreement is possible until the Cubans are withdrawn.
  Central America

The Soviet Union backs the Nicaraguan and Cuban Governments militarily and
economically. The United States wants the Russians to end their involvement in
Nicaragua.
  Southeast Asia

The Soviet Union backs the Vietnamese Government and its occupation of Cambodia.
The United States says Vietnam must withdraw from Cambodia.

HUMAN RIGHTS

Mr. Reagan is considered likely to raise the issue of Jewish emigration from the
Soviet Union. From a peak of nearly 60,000 in 1979, the number of Jewish
emigrants has dropped to less than 1,000 a year. Another possibility for
inclusion in the Iceland discussions is the fate of Soviet dissidents, the most
prominent of whom are Andrei D. Sakharov and his wife, Yelena G. Bonner.
Religious freedom is also an issue; Soviet Jews and Christians have difficulty
practicing their faith, with activists from both religions imprisoned. The human
rights area in which Soviet-American negotiations have produced the most results
concerns the reunification of divided Soviet and American spouses.

SOVIET-AMERICAN ACCORDS

The Administration, saying many of the Russians in the United States are spies,
has said the size of the Soviet diplomatic corps in the United States must be
reduced. The American order that 25 Russians in the United Nations missions
leave the United States was to be discussed at the summit if it was not resolved
before then. Cultural and scientific exchanges have gone ahead under the accord
signed in 1985. The United States and the Soviet Union are to open consulates in
New York and Kiev, but this has been delayed because the United States wants to
test the Kiev region for radioactivity left by the Chernobyl disaster.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Europe highlighting missile sites; photo of a nuclear weapon
test in New Mexico (AP); photo of relatives of Soviet Jewish dissidents
protesting in Tel Aviv (NYT/Micha Bar-Am)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

War Medals Returned To Protest U.S. Policy

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 205 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 9


Three Vietnam veterans and a World War II Red Cross worker gave up their medals
today to protest United States aid to insurgents fighting the Nicaraguan
Government.

The veterans held a rally on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial and marched to
the nearby Vietnam Veterans Memorial, leaving, in addition to their own awards,
more than 70 medals, service ribbons and commendations renounced by other
veterans.

Barbara Graves, a 73-year-old psychotherapist from Berkeley, Calif., returned a
Bronze Star awarded in 1945 for her Red Cross work in setting up rest homes in
France and England for wounded airmen. She carried medals renounced by 33
veterans in two ceremonies in California.

George Mizo, 40, of Boston, gave back a Purple Heart and a Republic of Vietnam
Gallantry Cross. He and three other veterans have been protesting United States
policy in Central America by fasting on the Capitol steps.

Arthur James, 37, of Chewsville, Md., renounced a Silver Star awarded in 1970
for heroism in Vietnam.

Stephan Fournier, 41, of Portland, Me., returned two Purple Hearts he received
while serving with the Marines in Vietnam in 1967 and 1968. He also left 19
medals renounced by Vietnam and World War II veterans from Maine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Upside-Down Priorities In Fighting Addiction

SECTION: Section A; Page 38, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 311 words


To the Editor:

Joseph A. Califano Jr. is to be commended for bringing together as social
problems the drug addictions that are acceptable to the dominant culture and
those that are not (Op-Ed, Sept. 23).

When we read that state and Federal law-enforcement agencies are trying to halt
the increasing production of marijuana while, as we all know, tobacco production
is encouraged by public subsidies, we wonder about the rationality of our
society.

Sumptuary legislation, which is what Mr. Califano is writing about, should have
as its first principle ''the less the better,'' because though it may protect or
improve society, it restricts the rights of individuals. Yet if recreational
drugs are to be controlled, control should be applied first to the more
dangerous or deleterious drugs.

The hard drugs are, of course, beyond the pale. But it is difficult to argue
with consistency that, if the use of marijuana should be criminalized, the use
of alcohol and tobacco should be virtually uncontrolled.

It has been demonstrated in careful studies, such as ''Marijuana Reconsidered,''
by Dr. Lester Grinspoon of the Harvard Medical School (Harvard University Press,
1971), that tobacco and alcohol are far more dangerous to health and have far
greater social costs than marijuana. Few deaths from marijuana have been
authenticated, but each year more Americans die because of tobacco than were
killed in Vietnam in 12 years. Alcohol-related deaths, from disease and
accident, may be as numerous.

We can understand that politics and economics and the cultural and ethnic
predispositions beneath them have made the legal distinctions (tobacco and
alcohol are white drugs, marijuana nonwhite). Still, to the disinterested
nonconsumer of any recreational drug, the policy appears a kind of social
insanity.

JOHN ILLO
  Shippensburg, Pa., Sept. 24, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 11, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. OFFICIALS SAID TO HAVE AIDED PRIVATE SUPPLIERS OF CONTRA UNITS

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 10


Government officials said today that White House and Pentagon officials had
continued to assist private efforts to supply the Nicaraguan rebels.

They did not directly link Reagan Administration officials to the flight of a
cargo plane downed on Sunday in Nicaragua. But they said senior officials had
helped those who set up a supply network for the rebels more than two years ago,
when Congress cut off aid.

In Managua today, an American official was allowed to see the plane's surviving
crewman for the first time. [Page 3.] The Administration has repeatedly denied
that any Government agency was linked to the plane. Secretary of State George P.
Shultz reiterated that statement today in Iceland, where he was accompanying
President Reagan.

Hundreds of Missions

One Administration official said hundreds of missions had been flown in the last
two years at a cost of many millions of dollars raised from private donors and
foreign governments. ''Certainly this has had the knowledge of people in the
Government,'' he said. ''I'm sure they don't feel they have command and control
of it. Oversight would be a good word for it.''

This official said the Administration had tried to stay within the letter, if
not the spirit, of the Congressional ban on aiding the rebels. He said, however,
that White House and Pentagon officials had been instrumental in advising the
various private efforts to arm the contras, as the Nicaraguan rebels are known.

In the last year, an organization headed by John K. Singlaub, a retired United
States Army general, has been the focus of attention from news organizations
about the supplies to the contras. He has denied any involvement in the flight
of the downed plane. One senior official said the publicity in recent years
about General Singlaub's activities was welcomed by some Administration
officials because it diverted attention from the operations being guided by the
White House.

Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and a member of the Foreign
Relations Committee, said today that he believed the panel should question
Lieut. Col. Oliver North, a member of the National Security Council staff who
was reported more than a year ago to have been providing military advice to the
Nicaraguan rebels. The committee met in closed session for a briefing on the
downed plane from C.I.A. officials.

Senator Kerry said he had evidence there had been violations of the Neutrality
Act and export law by ''people acting with the open encouragement of the Reagan
Administration.''

''And I have some evidence there are some people within the reaches of the
Administration, or in other words the N.S.C., or people who work in connection
with them, who have violated those laws,'' he added.

Briefing From C.I.A. Chief

Yesterday, Senator Dave Durenberger, a Minnesota Republican who is chairman of
the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, received a briefing from William J.
Casey, Director of Central Intelligence. ''There's no question that some private
resupply has been taking care of the contras,'' the senator said. ''Whether Bill
Casey encouraged them, I don't know. Whether Ollie North encouraged them,
whether Ronald Reagan encouraged them, I don't know.''

Today, Mr. Durenberger said: ''The President, someone on the N.S.C. surely has
some knowledge. I know the White House knows and is not telling the world.''

Last year, The New York Times reported that Colonel North was providing direct
military advice to the rebels as well as help in raising money from private
sources. After that disclosure, three House committees announced they would
investigate the issue. Each received denials from Robert C. McFarlane, who was
then President Reagan's national security adviser. The inquiries were all
concluded without result.

''I deny it,'' Elliott Abrams, the Assistant Secretary for Inter- American
Affairs, said when asked about the assertion that the Administration had
remained involved in assisting the rebels. ''The intelligence committees have
kept looking at it and looking at it. They have never found anything. There's a
reason for that. It's because this is not factual.''

Meanwhile, one Congressional source familiar with activities of the contras, as
the Nicaraguan rebels are known, said he gave credence to an account in today's
issue of The San Francisco Examiner that said an aide to Vice President Bush had
been involved in directing the supply missions.

Eugene Hasenfus, the surviving crewman of the plane that was downed, said
Thursday at a press conference in Nicaragua that two C.I.A. employees, one of
whom was named Max Gomez, worked on logistics and flight plans. The
Congressional source said Mr. Gomez had served in Vietnam at the same time as
Donald P. Gregg, a former C.I.A. official who is the national security adviser
to Vice President Bush.

Marlin Fitzwater, a spokesman for Vice President Bush, emphatically denied the
assertion. ''Neither the Vice President nor anyone on his staff is directing or
coordinating an operation in Central America,'' Mr. Fitzwater said.

The C.I.A. said that neither Mr. Gomez nor anyone else mentioned by Mr. Hasenfus
was a C.I.A. employee, either directly or by contract.

2 Bodies Flown to Miami

MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Oct. 10 (UPI) - The bodies of two Americans who were in the
plane shot down over Nicaragua left here on a flight to Miami today on a
commercial carrier, witnesses said. The coffins carrying the bodies of William
J. Cooper and Wallace Blaine Sawyer were on a regularly scheduled flight of Taca
Airlines, which is based in El Salvador.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Central America showing site of crash (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 11, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ENVOY IN NICARAGUA SEES AMERICAN SURVIVOR FROM LOST PLANE

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Oct. 10


Nicaraguan officials today permitted a United States diplomat to see for the
first time the American who was captured five days ago when a rebel supply plane
was shot down over Nicaragua.

The diplomat, a consular officer from the United States Embassy, made the
11-minute visit after the Nicaraguan Foreign Minister, Miguel d'Escoto
Brockmann, said at the United Nations today that the American prisoner would be
put on trial.

Some of the documents taken from the downed rebel supply plane showed that it
and at least one other plane flew dozens of missions over the last year and a
half, with landings in El Salvador, Honduras and the United States, carrying
supplies to Nicaraguan rebel units. A Nicaraguan intelligence official said an
analysis of all documents indicated hundreds of flights, an estimate that could
not be confirmed.

Indications of High Cost

The documents showing that the planes appeared to have been flying supplies to
Nicaraguan rebels for more than a year, using what appeared to be at least 30
crew members whose last names were listed in three flight log books, appeared to
reinforce indications that the rebel supply operation was large and costly.

The captured American, Eugene Hasenfus, asserted at a news conference on
Thursday that his work supplying rebels had been supervised by two Central
Intelligence Agency operatives in El Salvador. Reporters were not allowed to
question Mr. Hasenfus or to observe the conditions under which he has been held
and questioned. The United States Government has rejected Mr. Hasenfus's
assertions and said they were made under duress.

The two airplanes that appear from captured documents to have been used to
supply Nicaraguan rebels were the C-123 that was shot down and a DHC-4 Caribou,
which appears to have had the serial number 45677.

Lists of Crews

Two flight log books that appear to have been carried by the downed plane's
co-pilot, Wallace Blaine Sawyer, list the name of flight crews, destinations,
elapsed flight time and cargo weight for rebel flights from June 21, 1985, until
September of this year.

Other codes designating landing zones in the flight log books appear to show
dozens of flights from rebel airstrips in Honduras and from the main military
air base in El Salvador, which is located at Ilopango outside San Salvador.

A spokesman for the United States Embassy here said seven Nicaraguan officials
were present today when the chief consular officer of the United States Embassy
here, Donald Tyson, met Mr. Hasenfus at a Nicaraguan State Security office. A
senior official of the Nicaraguan State Security Service was among those
present, the embassy spokesman said.

The consular officer asked Mr. Hasenfus routine questions concerning his legal
rights and his personal wishes, according to the embassy spokesman.

Strong U.S. Protests

The United States Embassy has strongly protested not having been given regular
consular access to Mr. Hasenfus. Diplomats here speculate that Nicaraguan and
perhaps even Cuban intelligence officials have wanted to question Mr. Hasenfus
about his work on what he has said were C.I.A.-related projects.

Mr. Hasenfus told reporters on Thursday that he worked for Air America, an
airline operated by the C.I.A. during the Vietnam War, flying supplies to C.I.A.
agents in Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam and Thailand, between 1965 and 1973. He added
that the pilot of the downed rebel plane, William J. Cooper, was also a pilot
for Air America in Southeast Asia.

Foreign Minister d'Escoto, in announcing that Mr. Hasenfus would be prosecuted,
did not say what charges he would face. But Nicaraguan officials have indicated
that he will probably face a long jail sentence if he is tried and convicted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRIVATE ROLE INCREASING IN FOREIGN WAR ACTIONS

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 11


In the last four years, with the public blessing of the Reagan Administration
and perhaps its covert support, a network of private citizens made up of former
military men and anti-Communist political groups have taken an increasing role
in foreign military operations.

Congressional sources, private analysts and interviews with some of those
involved with the private operations themselves provide evidence of an
Administration program to ''privatize'' covert military operations in Central
America in the face of growing Congressional opposition, particularly over the
last two years, to Central Intelligence Agency activities there.

The extent of private-sector involvement in Central America has surfaced
dramatically twice in the last two years, first in September 1984 when a
helicopter flown by two American veterans belonging to an Alabama-based
organization then called Civilian Military Assistance, was shot down over
Nicaragua, killing the two pilots.

The group, led by Tom Posey, a former Marine corporal and Vietnam veteran, said
it had 1,000 members, who, Mr. Posey said, had contributed $3 million in
''nonmilitary'' aid to Nicaraguan rebels based in Honduras.

'Quite in Line,' Reagan Says

In the wake of that incident, President Reagan said that such private operations
were ''quite in line with what has been a pretty well established tradition in
our country'' and that he would ''not be inclined to interfere.''

The almost identical downing in Nicaragua this week of a C-123 cargo plane with
an American crew and loaded with rifles, ammunition and other military gear
destined for the contras, again underscored the extent of private involvement,
but continued to raise questions of how removed it is from the Administration.

Mr. Reagan approved the private warfare operation by likening it to the
involvement of Americans who joined the Abraham Lincoln Brigade in Spain in the
1930's to fight Franco. ''We're in a free county where private citizens have a
great many freedoms,'' the President said.

But United States officials from the White House to the Pentagon vigorously
denied any Government involvement in the rebel resupply operation, maintaining
it was an entirely private affair. The person running it, Government sources
said privately, was a retired general, John K. Singlaub.

General Denies a Role

General Singlaub, an expert in counterinsurgency and what he himself describes
as ''low-intensity warfare,'' has since 1981 been identified with the extensive
network of private support for the Nicaraguan rebel effort.

In telephone interviews and at a news conference here, however, the general
denied any involvement, and said he had no idea why the Administration ''would
want to put out this misinformation'' on the matter.

But both General Singlaub and another high-ranking former officer involved in
the private military support network - a retired Air Force general, Harry C.
Aderholt - have on at least one occasion since their retirement acted as
advisers to the Pentagon on unconventional warfare and counterinsurgency
techniques.

General Aderholt, 66 years old, heads a group of some 1,500 former - and a few
active - airmen called the Air Commando Association, headquartered near Eglund
Air Force Base in the Florida panhandle.

The organization is chiefly made up of former members of the Air Force's Air
Commandos, the Air Force equivalent of the Special Forces in the Vietnam War
era.

He Criticized Carter

General Singlaub was removed from his post as chief of staff in South Korea in
1979 for publicly criticizing Carter Administration plans to cut the American
presence there.

The general returned to the United States and formed the United States Council
for World Freedom, the American affliate of an international organization called
the World Anti-Communist League, which he now also heads.

One of the groups working with General Singlaub is the General Aderholt Air
Commandos, who say they have distributed some $3 million in medical aid to
Central America, chiefly to Guatemalan Indians.

Reached by telephone at his headquarters in Florida, General Aderholt said that
his organization had no part in the operation that led to the crash in Nicaragua
this week and that he had no idea who did.

He said, however, that it was clearly ''a resupply operation.''

According to General Aderholt's Pentagon biography, he was instrumental in
developing strategic airfield sites ''used thoughout Southeast Asia as support
sites for special warfare operations'' in the 1960's.

Congressional and other critics of the private involvement in the Nicaraguan
conflict say that it is little more than an Administration ploy to evade the
Congressional cutoff of aid to the rebels two years ago.

According to that view, shared by among others Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat
of Massachusetts, who is a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, there have
been violations not only of Congressional intent but of the Neutrality Act,
which bars private aid in the prosecution of any foreign war against any nation
with which the nation is at peace. Inasmuch as there has never been a
declaration of war, Mr. Kerry and others maintain, the private aid operations
are illegal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S.SAYS CONTRAS GET MORE SUPPLIES

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 786 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 11


Beginning about six months ago, the rebels fighting the Sandinista Government in
Nicaragua began to receive significantly more arms and materiel, overcoming
severe logistical problems that had frustrated delivery of supplies, according
to Government officials.

They said the stepped-up pace in deliveries had been detected by American
intelligence, which closely monitors supplies available to the rebels, popularly
known as contras. Some officials familiar with the reports say they clearly
indicate the contras suddenly developed the ability to acquire greater
quantities of heavy equipment.

Administration officials, from President Reagan on down, have denied there was
any Government involvement in the operation of a plane bringing military
supplies to the rebels that was shot down this week in Nicaragua.

On the crucial questions of who was involved in the supply network, how the
plane was financed and whether any American officials were involved, the Central
Intelligence Agency told Congress this week that it had no information. The
agency has said it was not involved in any way in the flight of the cargo plane
downed over Nicaragua.

Use of Salvador Base Cited

Both members of Congress and a retired military officer contended that the use
of the Ilopango air base in El Salvador by the plane that was shot down strongly
suggested the involvement of United States Government officials. The retired
officer said the base was heavily guarded, with identity cards allowing entrance
issued to Americans only if they were approved by United States officials.

Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland, said: ''It is
inconceivable that planes operating out of Ilopango were doing so without the
knowledge and support of the United States Government. That air base in El
Salvador is totally financed by the United States Government and is the center
of military operations that we have a very direct role in.''

''It is inconceivable that this abundance of Americans was doing this on their
own,'' Mr. Barnes added. ''It may be the people were not paid by the C.I.A. The
important question, then, is who helped them get on to that base.''

Several officials also said the C.I.A. owned a building on the base within sight
of the runaway from which the supply missions were taking off.

Nearly two and a half years ago, Congress cut off American military aid to the
rebels. According to Goverment officials, the rebels began relying on small,
poorly maintained aircraft with Latin American pilots. Several were shot down by
Nicaraguan forces.

Account by Surviving Crewman

The plane downed this week was apparently part of the expanded operation. Eugene
Hasenfus, the surviving crewman, who was captured by the Sandinistas, said this
week at a news conference in Managua that he was hired about five months ago to
join an operation supplying the contras that was run out of an El Salvador
airfield.

Mr. Hasenfus said he was paid $3,000 a month plus expenses and he and 25
associates had ferried more than 130,000 pounds of equipment.

American officials have repeatedly denied any role in directing the expanded
operation. They have said the contras and their supporters had a network for
supplies independent of any United States Government involvement. But some
officials have said White House and Pentagon officials had maintained ties to
the rebels, described by one official as ''oversight.''

Elliott Abrams, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs,
said this week: ''There's no United States Government involvement direct or
indirect. What there is is a kind of old boy network. Flying into hostile fire
is not something everybody knows how to do.''

''When the contras needed to do it, they looked for people who had worked
together before, whether in Vietnam or Air America,'' he said, referring to the
airline once owned by the C.I.A.

Several of those associated with the mission had a background with the C.I.A.
Mr. Hasenfus said the pilot killed in the crash, William J. Cooper, had worked
for Air America in Southeast Asia in the 1960's and 1970's.

Mr. Hasenfus also said two American employees of the C.I.A. worked at an El
Salvador base, overseeing housing, transporation, refueling and flight plans.
The C.I.A. has emphatically denied this, but it has told Congress that one of
people named by Mr. Hasenfus was a veteran of Air America.

In briefings this week, the C.I.A. continued to insist it was not involved in
the incident. According to Congressional sources, agency officials told the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee this week in a closed session it had not
collected intelligence on American private citizens aiding the contras.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUBPOENA QUASHED IN FILM DEATH CASE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 37, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 600 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 11


The prosecutor in the manslaughter trial stemming from ''Twilight Zone: The
Movie'' has lost in an attempt to subpoena the actor Ralph Bellamy and has made
allegations of ''blackballing'' in the entertainment industry.

The subpoena of Mr. Bellamy this week resulted from comments he made to
reporters when he visited Los Angeles Superior Court Tuesday to show his support
for John Landis, director of the film. Mr. Landis and four other people are
being tried on involuntary manslaughter charges resulting from the deaths of the
actor Vic Morrow and two children in filming of the movie.

In interviews with reporters, Mr. Bellamy, 81 years old, who appeared in such
films as ''Sunrise at Campobello'' and the Landis-directed ''Trading Places,''
said he believed Mr. Landis was being ''persecuted'' by the Los Angeles District
Attorney's office.

Bellamy Sees 'Theatricalism'

''There's a theatricalism going on here,'' Mr. Bellamy said. ''The thing smacks
of personal ambition. There's a question of legal manipulation.''

Upon learning of the actor's comments, Deputy District Attorney Lea Purwin
D'Agostino, the trial's prosecutor, had a subpoena served on Mr. Bellamy when
the trial recessed for the day. Mrs. D'Agostino said she acted on the assumption
that he had information on the case of which she was not aware.

Judge Roger Boren quashed the subpoena Wednesday, and called it ''a fishing
expedition.''

Attorneys for the defendants characterized Mrs. D'Agostino's subpoena as a
veiled threat to other celebrities who might want to go to the courtroom in
support of Mr. Landis.

'A Tremendous Fear'

Mrs. D'Agostino's allegations of blackballing came in a hearing out of the
presence of the jurors Wednesday. She suggested that several potential witnesses
had been less than candid with prosecutors because of fears of employment
reprisals in the entertainment industry.

''With respect to this blackballing situation in regard to Hollywood,'' Mrs.
D'Agostino said, ''there is a tremendous fear on the part of these people to
come forward and really tell the complete truth.''

''They have this threat hanging over them, and it is a known fact,'' she added.
''It is an accepted fact and everyone in the industry is aware of it and knows
about it.''

Defense lawyers vigorously protested her comments. Harland W. Braun, who is
representing the movie's associate producer, George Folsey Jr., accused Mrs.
D'Agostino of ''libeling Hollywood.''

The prosecutor's allegations appeared to have been prompted by testimony from
Richard Sawyer, the ''Twilight Zone'' set designer. His testimony varied from
his accounts in earlier proceedings about the night that a helicopter crashed
amid special effects explosions in the filming of a mock Vietnam War scene. The
crash killed Mr. Morrow and Myca Dinh Le, 7, and Renee Shinn Chen, 6.

Permit Violated, Firefighter Says

In other testimony, a Los Angeles County firefighter said the ''Twilight Zone''
filmmakers did not comply with fire officials' permit on special effects
explosives in the helicopter scene.

Mr. Sawyer said the filmmakers did not have permission from the fire inspector
to put an explosive device within any structure on the movie set. But he said
the device whose explosion caused the helicopter crash had been placed in a hut
in the film set's mock Vietnamese village.

On trial, in addition to Mr. Landis and Mr. Folser, are Dan Allingham,
production manager; Paul Steward, special effects coordinator, and Dorcey Wingo,
the helicopter pilot.

Testimony in the trial, now in its sixth week, resumes Tuesday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN LONDON, THE NATIONAL THEATER MARKS A STORMY DECADE

BYLINE: By BENEDICT NIGHTINGALE

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2335 words

DATELINE: LONDON


When Britain's National Theater was formally opened a decade ago, it was with
plenty of razzmatazz: champagne, fireworks, trumpeters, everyone who was anyone
in the audience, and a gigantic fiasco on stage. Indeed, the Queen herself was
there, sitting unsmiling through a performance of Goldoni's ''Campiello,'' which
the theater's director, Peter Hall, later confessed went very badly indeed. The
actors were like men struggling through a nightmare. When he and his company
celebrate the building's 10th anniversary later this month, it will be a very
different occasion. Those who happen to be visiting one of the National's three
constituent theaters will be offered a glass of wine and a slice of birthday
cake in the foyer after the show - and that, more or less, will be that.

The contrast seems deliberate. After 10 years of struggle and crisis the theater
has learned to avoid displays of hubris. After 10 years of successfully
surviving struggle and overcoming crisis, it is, however, entitled to a show of
quiet satisfaction. It may not have pleased everyone; but it can claim to have
found its feet, stayed on them and gradually made itself what it is today: an
indispensable part of the theatrical life of London, Britain and, indeed, the
western world.

That achievement is especially remarkable, given the acrimony the new building
generated from the start. Two centuries after David Garrick called for a British
version of the Comedie Francaise, 70-odd years after Shaw and Galsworthy and
others began to crusade seriously for a National Theater, 30 years after
Parliament had given its imprimatur, the dream itself had finally and literally
become concrete - and many of the cognoscenti had decided it was precisely what
they didn't want. Was it really worth the $30 million it had finally cost to
build, and the daunting subsidies it would need to function?

Wasn't exciting drama more likely to thrive in attics, basements, parks,
streets, than in grand new edifices? And shouldn't a genuinely ''national''
theater consist of a series of companies that traversed the nation, not a
cultural Oz ensconced beside the Thames?

This last view was most forcefully put by someone alarmingly close to home. In
1973 Peter Hall had taken over the National Theater company created a decade
earlier by Laurence Olivier, and was preparing for its move into the new
building.

One of those he first brought into his directing team was Jonathan Miller, a
lieutenant who grew increasingly disaffected, and became -and remains - the
National Theater's most articulate critic. Its architect, Denis Lasdun, might
talk of creating ''caves in the hillside, layers of stone beside the river, with
the spiritual quality, the wholeness you find when you walk into a cathedral.''

Mr. Miller could see only a big, impersonal, financially pampered institution,
''doing to London what the Luftwaffe failed to do.'' It was an extreme
expression of an opinion pretty widely shared in the late 70's.

It hardly helped that the company's switch from its original London home, the
shabby but attractive Old Vic Theater, was accompanied by a drop of standards.
Peter Hall's own production of ''Tamburlaine,'' with Albert Finney in feisty
form as Marlowe's warrior-tyrant, was warmly enough received; but ''Il
Campiello'' got dreadful reviews, as did Thomas Bernhardt's ''The Force of
Habit'' and Edward Albee's ''Counting the Ways.'' The company's first
performance of Shakespeare in its new building, ''Julius Caesar,'' was an
unequivocal disaster. Even those well disposed to Peter Hall personally, and
politically unprejudiced against the theater, were tempted to make the obvious
connection. Perhaps there was something inherent in the building which made it
impossible to rediscover the assurance evident in many Old Vic productions. How
could members of a 100-strong company, alternating between three stages, so much
as get to know one another, let alone act together with mutual confidence and
understanding?

The years since have proceeded to prove the doubters wrong, but not altogether
wrong. Only the smallest and most informal of the three constituent theaters,
the 400-seat Cottesloe, has as hospitable a feel as the Old Vic; and it can
scarcely be coincidental that it was here that one of the National's house
directors, Bill Bryden, transformed a group of actors into something that might
almost be called an ensemble, a subdivision of the company with a direct,
unfussy style of its own. They presented the Hall regime with its first (and,
some would say, still its greatest) artistic triumph in 1977, an updated cycle
of medieval miracle plays in which colliers, railroadmen, clerks and other
contemporary workers moved among the audience, presenting scenes from Old and
New Testaments. A later ''promenade production,'' this time evoking 19th-century
life, and a freewheeling adaptation of Michael Herr's Vietnam testament,
''Dispatches,'' were scarcely less successful. That, and other work at the
Cottesloe, remains the best answer to those accusing the National of
over-orthodoxy of performance.

Certainly, nothing comparable could be achieved at the 890-seat Lyttelton, with
its proscenium stage the most conventional of the three theaters. Yet it's here
that Hall painstakingly established the reputation for good, sound, reliable
work that, despite the odd artistic glitch, continues to be the minimum now
expected of the company or offered by it. When it's time to revive Galsworthy,
Maugham, early Shaw or another naturalistic playwright, the Lyttelton is the
place. But the theater has not always been so predictable or obviously dutiful.
Harold Pinter's ''Betrayal'' was given its premiere here, as were David Hare's
''Plenty,'' Howard Brenton's Marxist ''Weapons of Happiness,'' Tom Stoppard's
''On the Razzle'' and Alan Ayckbourn's ''Bedroom Farce'' with its three parallel
sleeping-chambers, each offerng a parallel picture of marital disarray.

But it's the Olivier, the 1,200-seat replica of the amphitheater at Epidaurus,
whose merits continue to provoke the most disagreements. There are those who
call it unworkable, and not just because some of the stage machinery doesn't
work adequately, notably a revolve that makes the neighboring Cottesloe rumble
as if hit by an earthquake. Certainly, its vast acreage has caused directors
problems when they've sought to focus the audience's attention on the intimate
emotion, the less-than-epic situation. There have been awful flops here -that
''Campiello,'' a recent travesty of Brecht's ''Threepenny Opera'' -but also some
majestic achievements, notably Richard Eyre's revival of ''Guys and Dolls'' and
Peter Hall's staging of Aeschylus's ''Oresteia'' in 1981. That production,
played as it was entirely in masks, provided another answer to those who have
accused the National of playing safe - and also showed the discipline, the
assurance, the cohesion the company has acquired since those first, nervous
days.

Nevertheless, with an acting corps that has sometimes numbered 150, and constant
turnover inside it, the National as a whole has never acquired the clear
identity, the consistency of performance style that has marked its great rival,
the Royal Shakespeare Company.

One reason, of course, is that the R.S.C. has a strong, distinctive house
dramatist to give a center to its work: Shakespeare himself. Another is that it
has long relied on a small core of directors, men who have given the company
continuity and unity, as well as stamping their own personalities on its work.

In Olivier's day it was said that the National was an actor's theater, the
R.S.C. a director's company; and the distinction, while less obvious, still
seems helpful. Certainly, there have been some remarkable individual
performances during Hall's regime: Paul Scofield as Othello and as Salieri in
Peter Shaffer's ''Amadeus''; Ian McKellen as the tormented Platonov in Michael
Frayn's adaptation of Chekhov, ''Wild Honey'' which is to open in New York in
December; Michael Hordern in Sheridan's ''Rivals''; John Wood as Richard III;
Anthony Hopkins as a megalomaniacal newspaper magnate in ''Pravda'' by David
Hare and Howard Brenton; Peggy Ashcroft in Beckett's ''Happy Days,'' and Ralph
Richardson as Ibsen's ''John Gabriel Borkman''.

Actually, Hall has proved more hospitable to major talent than Olivier, who was
in some respects the dominant actor-manager of the old school, yet Hall's reward
has been recurrent accusations of an excessive dependence on stars.

But what probably makes it hardest to give the National any precisely defined
identity is its own view of its aims. These include presenting ''classic, new
and neglected plays from the whole of world drama,'' ''doing experimental work
and work for children and young people,'' and touring in Britain and overseas.
That demands a variety of offerings greater than at the R.S.C. or most other
theaters. Indeed, one might say that the National's identity is, or should be,
its diversity. In the end, the question to be asked of the last 10 years is: how
successfully has the theater demonstrated that?

The obstacles have often been considerable: internal wranglings, strikes of the
stage staff and, above all, persistent worries about money. The
Government-funded Arts Council currently gives the National $11.7 million,
roughly half its operating costs. But increases in grants haven't kept pace with
inflation in recent years, with several unsettling results. Productions are
down: about 18 a year now, compared with 38 in what was admittedly the
exceptionally prolific year of 1977. The Cottesloe was closed for several months
as an economy measure in 1984.

Seat prices, currently at $19 top, may seem low to Americans, but they're higher
than the National's management would like, wishing as it does to increase the
social spread of its mainly middle-class, well-to-do audience.

With more Arts Council help, it's new-play repertory would never have consisted,
as happened recently, only of three works by three well-established authors: Mr.
Ayckbourn's ''Chorus of Disappoval,'' Mr. Shaffer's ''Yonadab'' and Neil Simon's
''Brighton Beach Memoirs.''

Yet the past 10 years have seen plenty of fresh, adventurous work, much of it by
defiantly anti-establishment playwrights: Edward Bond, Stephen Poliakoff, Mr.
Brenton, Mr. Hare. Mr. Brenton's ''Romans in Britain'' - which compared the
Government's present Ulster policies with Caesar's colonization of the Celts,
and had the rape of a male Druid as its improbable climax - actually led to an
abortive prosecution for indecency back in 1982. And today ''Pravda'' is in the
repertory: An attack on both the British Government and the capitalist press
which re-emphasizes that the National Theater can't be dismissed as a safe,
square institution.

Of course, other criticisms continue to be heard. Isn't the theater more
inclined to revive British than foreign works? Why no Pirandello, Strindberg,
Gorki, Racine in the past 10 years? To that the theater can reasonably reply
that it has presented Tolstoy, de Musset, Buchner, Brecht, Schnitzler, Molnar,
Chekhov, Giradoux, Ibsen, Fugard, as well as much American work, notably the
world premiere of David Mamet's ''Glengarry Glen Ross.'' More particularly, why
is Peter Hall often away directing operas at Glyndebourne, and profiting from
work outside the National? t The answer to this, the latest controversy
surrounding him, seems obvious enough. If a company wants an international
talent as artistic director, it must allow him to earn an international salary,
or at least rather more than the $90,000 Hall is thought to be paid by the
National. Indeed, the more one considers, the more one sees how much the theater
owes to him.

Some 200 plays have been staged in his 10 years on the South Bank of the Thames,
several of them, including his own productions of ''Amadeus'' and ''Bedroom
Farce,'' progressing to an afterlife in the West End or on Broadway. And around
three-quarters of a million people now visit the three theaters each year,
filling an average of more than 80 percent of the seats.

The least one can claim for Hall's 10 years is that they've enriched the
imaginative lives of an astonishing number of Britons, not to mention American
visitors. And in what other theater in the English-speaking world could someone
see Anthony Hopkins in ''Pravda'' and ''King Lear,'' Maggie Smith in ''Coming In
to Land,'' a new play by Stephen Poliakoff, Brecht's ''Mother,'' Arthur Miller's
''American Clock,'' and five other plays, all within a few days of each other?
That's the in-house repertory promised for the end of the National birthday
year, a time when its productions of ''Chorus of Disapproval'' and ''Wild
Honey'' should also be in the West End and on Broadway respectively.

Barring financial catastrophe, such as a savage cutback on grants, Hall should
be able to hand his eventual successor a theater that hasn't just converted most
of the original skeptics, but has become central to the theatrical landscape,
one which has presented production after production that seemed unmissable, set
consistently high standards for itself, and indeed ensured that its identity was
its diversity. But who will be the new director and when will he take over?
Well, Hall's contract ends in 1988, and his own preferred candidate is Richard
Eyre, director of ''Guys and Dolls'' and the movie ''The Ploughman's Lunch.''

But whatever the final choice and agenda, Hall's successor can doubtless expect
to be told that the National is too establishment, too anti-establishment, too
mainstream, too elitist, too middlebrow, too highbrow, too glitzy, too
impoverished, too extravagant, and dreadfully remiss in ignoring the claims of
Aristophanes, Schiller and Lanford Wilson on its stages. But the National's
ability to continue provoking controversy after 10 years of existence is, after
all, another proof of its importance, some might say it's irreplaceability.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bob Hoskins and Barry Rutter in ''Guys and Dolls'' (Alastair
Muir)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NO WAVES MADE AT U.N.

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y.


AN IMPORTANT stop on the United Nations tour is a photo display that describes,
a bit romantically perhaps, the role of the Secretary General: ''The most
impossible, frustrating, daunting, challenging, rewarding, fascinating, clearly
unique job on earth.''

Indeed, to be the head of the 159-member organization, which is in serious
financial trouble and may be bankrupt by the end of the year, is all of the
above. But Javier Perez de Cuellar said in a recent interview that to quit after
one five-year term would have been ''desertion'' and that he felt ''a moral
responsibility'' to stay on the job.

His unanimous re-election last week assures the United Nations of another five
years of steady, if unexciting, leadership. Before his re-election, Mr. Perez de
Cuellar, a 66-year-old Peruvian career diplomat, made no promises and proposed
no new initiatives. He refused even to admit that he was still interested in the
job.

As a likable, uncontroversial chief operating officer, Mr. Perez de Cuellar
sailed through his first term without one major confrontation with any member
state.

But, in the view of Western and third world diplomats, he also failed to resolve
any major problems, such as the Iran-Iraq War and the conflict in Afghanistan.
Other Secretaries General had been instrumental in sending peacekeeping forces
to Korea, the Congo, southern Lebanon and the Golan Heights on the
Syrian-Israeli border.

The job of Secretary General is largely defined by the person who fills it. The
Charter makes him the chief administrative officer and permits him to report
annually to the General Assembly and to summon the Security Council when peace
is in danger, but the rest is left up to him.

The memory of his predecessors sometimes seems to inhibit Mr. Perez de Cuellar.
Any Secretary General has to function in the historical shadow of Dag
Hammarskjold, the Swedish civil servant who held the job until he was killed in
an air crash in Africa in 1961. He expanded the job with his energy and
extraordinary lobbying skills.

The first Secretary General, the Norwegian politician and labor organizer Trygve
Lie, resigned in 1953, two years into his second term, after the Soviet Union
refused all contact with him because he advocated the United Nations force,
mostly American troops, sent to South Korea to fight Communist troops invading
from the north. Mr. Hammarskjold, who replaced Mr. Lie, lost the confidence of
the Soviet Union over the United Nations military operation in the Congo. And U
Thant, the Burmese educator and journalist who followed, antagonized Washington
with his sustained attack on American policy in Vietnam.

A man of deep honor and integrity, Mr. Perez de Cuellar also begins his second
term at a time when the prestige of the Secretary General has been tarnished by
revelations that his predecessor, Kurt Waldheim, lied about his service as an
officer in a World War II German Army command.

Mr. Perez de Cuellar spends most of his time trying to be a mediator and
peacemaker, and has shown little interest in the administration of the United
Nations. But it seems clear that if he were more dynamic he might improve the
image of the United Nations as it faces the worst financial crisis of its
history.

But he dismisses all suggestions that he change his ways and take more risks.
''Sometimes I am tempted to be a little bolder,'' he said. ''But if I lose my
credibility, I lose my usefulness.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Javier Perez de Cuellar (Contact/Dilip Mechta)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A PLANE GOES DOWN, THE POLITICAL ANTE GOES UP

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua


A SANDINISTA missile knocked out of the sky over southern Nicaragua a cargo
plane bearing supplies for the anti-Government rebels. The only survivor, an
American, traced the sweaty life of a hired hand in foreign wars and said he was
supervised by the Central Intelligence Agency. The cremated remains of two other
American crewmen were unceremoniously placed outside the American embassy here.

For the Reagan Administration last week, these events quickly raised potentially
damaging questions about official American involvement in the war against
Nicaragua's Marxist-led Government. But in Managua, the Sandinistas celebrated
the events as a windfall political victory that vindicated their view that the
war in Nicaragua is essentially being waged from Washington and Miami.

''For us this is proof of C.I.A. involvement, of American Government
involvement, in an illegal war against us,'' Capt. Ricardo Wheelock, chief of
intelligence for the Sandinista Popular Army said in an interview. ''I am
convinced that the C.I.A. ran this operation.'' American officials repeatedly
denied that charge this week. But it appears to be widely believed in Nicaragua,
where the Government-controlled press worked to drive the message home.
Newspaper headlines declared: ''Just Like Vietnam,'' ''Rambo Defeated'' and
''Yankee On His Knees,'' depicting the incident as a confrontation between
Managua and Washington.

The Sandinistas' feelings are strongly reinforced by Nicaraguan history. An
American mercenary, William Walker, invaded and ruled Nicaragua between 1855 and
1857. American Marines followed suit throughout much of the early part of this
century.

The Marines fought a wily Nicaraguan nationalist named Augusto Sandino, who
resisted until 1934 when he was assassinated on the orders of Anastasio Somoza
Garcia, the American-picked head of the new American-trained Nicaraguan national
guard. The rise of the Somoza family's 40-year dictatorship over Nicaragua began
with Sandino's murder and American support. The Sandinistas took their name from
Sandino and the Sandinista national anthem declares: ''We fight against the
Yankee, enemy of humanity.''

Another View of the War

That official view prevails in the capital city of Managua, a center of
Government support that is far from events that might produce another view of
the war: rebel ambushes and rebel attacks on state cooperatives, or Sandinista
units forcing the relocation of peasants who support the rebels. In private,
some Nicaraguans say there is support in the country for the rebels and they
candidly express grievances. But for Sandinista militants, the war is a clear
case of foreign intervention managed by the C.I.A.

Commenting on the apparent lack of security measures taken by the American crew
of the downed plane, Capt. Rosa Rasos, a spokesman for the Sandinista army
said,''To us this shows the arrogance of imperialism. They didn't believe this
could happen to them.'' In an ideological struggle in which political battles
often are more important than military battles, the Sandinistas welcomed a
needed propaganda victory.

''This is part of a total war against us supported by the American Government,''
Captain Wheelock said. Pointing to the captured American, Eugene Hasenfus,
Sandinista officials recalled that C.I.A. agents previously mined Nicaraguan
harbors and asserted that American spy planes still overfly the country taking
photos. They did not mention the existence of disgruntled peasants in the north
who appear to support the more than 10,000 Nicaraguans who are now estimated to
make up the rebel forces.

The plane had left El Salvador and slipped over the Costa Rican border into
southern Nicaragua where a teen-age Sandinista soldier shot it down with a
shoulder-fired Soviet missile. Mr. Hasenfus survived because he had the good
fortune to be wearing a parachute.

At a press conference, he said he and the rebel plane's chief pilot, William J.
Cooper, had a long history of working for C.I.A.-run airlines, going back to the
early 1960's. He then made the politically volatile claim that his work ferrying
supplies to Nicaraguan guerrillas from bases in El Salvador and Honduras had
been directly supervised by two C.I.A. agents in El Salvador. This contradicted
denials from the Reagan Administration.

It is possible that Mr. Hasenfus lied or exaggerated in an effort to save his
neck, as was suggested by a State Department official in Washington. Reporters
were not allowed to question the prisoner at the conference. But key parts of
his account appeared to be supported by several documents taken from the downed
plane. The revelations are likely to prove most embarrassing to El Salvador and
Honduras, both directly implicated by the documents and Mr. Hasenfus's
statements. In Costa Rica and Guatemala, the downed plane is likely to
strengthen a determination to keep out of the American-backed war. In Washington
the week's events could indicate that the political cost of greater involvement
in the rebel effort may be higher than expected.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Eugen Hasenfus in the custody of Nicaraguan troops in Rio San
Juan Province near the Costa Rican border last week (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHO GETS IN, AND WHY

BYLINE: BY MICHAEL S. TEITELBAUM; Michael S. Teitelbaum is a demographer who has
written extensively on immigration and refugee issues. His latest book (written
with Jay M. Winter) is ''The Fear of Population Decline.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 895 words


CALCULATED KINDNESS Refugees and America's Half-Open Door, 1945 to the Present.
By Gil Loescher and John A. Scanlan. 346 pp. New York: The Free Press. $22.50.

FEW issues have attracted more propaganda, sanctimony and ignorance than those
surrounding refugees and, more generally, immigration. The goal of ''Calculated
Kindness'' is to explore the rationales and politics of United States refugee
policy since World War II.

Those who appreciate political irony will be fascinated by the authors'
descriptions of how 1950's cold warriors, political liberals and ethnic
activists found unaccustomed common cause in promoting the liberalization of
refugee admissions for Eastern Europeans. Again in the 1970's, anti-Communist
supporters of the Vietnam War entered into odd coalitions with left-leaning
human rights advocates in an ultimately successful political and public
relations effort to promote the resettlement in the United States of some
800,000 so-called boat people from Indochina.

Although ideological and propaganda factors have long weighed heavily on United
States refugee policy, this rather elementary fact seems to have escaped the
attention of many recent commentators. How many are aware that, as the authors
report, a study in Public Opinion Quarterly in the early 50's stated that ''Only
a handful of those [East Europeans] now arriving in the West can be considered
to be escaping from Communism as a political system or from actual
persecution''? Instead, the study described the migrants' goals as principally
those of material improvement. ''Similar conclusions,'' the authors write,
''were contained in a study prepared for the State Department'' by the Institute
for Public Opinion Research.

Despite such assessments, the State Department actively encouraged defectors
from the Soviet-dominated nations of Eastern Europe, deploying considerable
propaganda resources through such outlets as the Voice of America and Radio Free
Europe. Interestingly, this policy was viewed with great skepticism by John J.
McCloy, then United States Commissioner for Germany and a bulwark of opposition
to Communist expansionism. In his succinct words: ''The more defectors, the less
potential resistors.''

This fundamental difference of opinion -whether the departure of political
opponents represents a boon or a blow to the governments they oppose - continues
to divide and confuse the politically motivated advocates who buzz around the
formation of United States refugee policy. It was powerful opposition to Fidel
Castro that led successive Administrations of both parties to admit
ex-ceptionally large numbers of Cubans between 1959 and 1980. Yet this very same
policy was embraced by Mr. Castro himself, first as a means of disposing of his
political opposition. Later, in 1980, he expelled many criminals, homosexuals
and mental patients to the United States.

Recently, American supporters of the left-wing insurgency against the Government
of Jose Napoleon Duarte in El Salvador have advocated quasi-refugee status for
the 300,000 to 500,000 Salvadorans thought to be living illegally in the United
States. Meanwhile, the Salvadoran Government that many of them seek to topple
has welcomed such action, on the ground that the money they send home
strengthens its fight against the leftists.

The principal message of ''Calculated Kindness'' is that foreign (read
anti-Communist) policy criteria have controlled United States refugee admissions
and that those people (such as the authors) who favor increased refugee
admissions for humanitarian reasons have done best when they developed
coalitions with the anti-Communists.

A secondary message is that the formulation of United States refugee policy has
been ad hoc and haphazard. For example, the principal legal basis for admission
of well over a million people (mostly from Eastern Europe and Cuba) between 1956
and 1980 was the so-called parole authority of the President, an ad hoc
authority thought by many to have been employed by six Presidents contrary to
the intent of Congress. Yet only a few weeks after this parole authority was
formally eliminated by Congress in 1980, the Carter Administration elaborated a
new classification - ''Cuban-Haitian entrant'' -to admit Cubans and Haitians.
GIL LOESCHER, an associate professor of government and international studies at
the University of Notre Dame, and John A. Scanlan, an associate professor of law
at Indiana University Law School, catalogue the activities of all the advocacy
groups in copious (occasionally excessive) detail. Although the authors'
personal beliefs appear to be those of liberal humanitarian advocates of
increased refugee admissions from authoritarian states, they struggle mightily
to restrain their biases in the interest of careful scholarship. In this they
are quite successful, at least until their discussion appproaches the late 70's;
unhappily, the final three chapters (on the policies of the Carter and Reagan
Administrations) read a bit too much like briefs prepared by one of those
advocacy groups.

Nevertheless, ''Calculated Kindness'' deserves careful reading by policy makers
and nonspecialists alike. The authors are to be admired for illuminating
humanitarian and political issues that are of growing concern and that occupy
one of the murkiest realms of American rhetoric and politics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Haitain refugees in small, wooden boat,1981

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE GROUPING OF AMERICA

BYLINE: BY CARL N. DEGLER; Carl N. Degler, who teaches American social history
at Stanford University, is the author of ''At Odds: Women and the Family From
the Revolution to the Present.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2241 words


CITIES ON A HILL A Journey Through Contemporary American Cultures. By Frances
FitzGerald. 414 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $19.95.

''WHAT is the good of history?'' the skeptical historian Carl L. Becker once
asked a correspondent. Frances FitzGerald, although she is not an academic
historian, seems not to question its usefulness. Her first book, ''Fire in the
Lake,'' drew heavily on the history of Vietnam; her second, ''America Revised,''
was given over entirely to a critical evaluation of American history textbooks.
Thus it is not surprising that in her latest book, ''Cities on a Hill,'' she
turns again to history in seeking to identify and understand the alterations in
American society over the last decade or so. Rather than look at broad, national
movements like the New Right or feminism, she has elected to investigate four
rather discrete and limited groups of Americans.

The groups are the homosexual community congregated along and around Castro
Street in San Francisco; the Thomas Road Church of the Rev. Jerry Falwell in
Lynchburg, Va.; the retirement home Sun City, outside Tampa, Fla; and the
notorious commune Rajneeshpuram in central Oregon. These ''new cultural
enclaves,'' she contends, bring ''distillation and explicitness'' to the social
and intellectual changes in contemporary America, as broader movements cannot.
She sees them as ''exploring the American scene and themselves, asking the
essential question of who we, as Americans, are, and how we ought to live.'' Two
of them are conservative in outlook (Mr. Falwell's church and Sun City) while
two are not; two are secular and two can be termed religious. Although they are
hardly representative, what is most striking about them, she properly points
out, is that they seem eminently American. It is difficult to imagine, she says,
''Parisians creating a gay colony or a town for grandparents.''

The history Ms. FitzGerald invokes, however, appears only in the brief first
chapter and in the last. The bulk of the book explores the four communities in
lucid, often entertaining detail - sometimes in too much rambling detail for my
taste. The excess is especially noticeable in the chapter on Rajneeshpuram and
to a certain extent in Ms. FitzGerald's evocation of ''the Castro.'' In both
cases, she spent a considerable amount of time visiting the sites, questioning
the participants, witnessing their activities and then retailing the knowledge
gained to her readers (readers of The New Yorker will already have seen most of
the material here).

In none of Ms. FitzGerald's essays does she pull her punches, but in none of
them is her primary purpose to criticize or question the activities of any
group. Her mode of presentation is even-handed description, often vivid and
anecdotal. She prefers some groups to others, but only marginally. Sun Citians,
as she calls them, appealed to her because they seemed to be so pleased with
their situation. She was also attracted by the homosexuals, though she does not
fail to point out a number of the sadder and less appealing aspects of the
Castro district, such as the bathhouses and other sex clubs, as well as the
sadomasochist slogan ''Black and blue is beautiful.'' And, though she makes a
point of revealing the contradictions between Mr. Falwell's aims and his
actions, as well as the anti-Semitism of some of his followers, she concludes in
the end that the anti-Semitism was really motivated by a class resentment
against the rich, and that Mr. Falwell has been a positive force for his
followers.

By leading his fundamentalist parishioners ''away from separation and
premillenial resignation and despair,'' and toward participation in the world,
Mr. Falwell enfranchised and energized ''what was perhaps the last
unenfranchised and unempowered sector of the white population in the United
States,'' she says. His ''historic achievement'' was to show his followers that
they could successfully confront Ivy League intellectuals and resist Washington
bureaucrats. Some might think, as I do, that President Reagan may have had more
than a little to do with that achievement, but Ms. FitzGerald's point is
nonetheless well taken: over the last decade the radical right has indeed lost
much of its paranoia. The chapters on Sun City and the Falwell church are
relatively short - so brief, in fact, that one does not meet the many
individuals, encounter the many stories or gain the same sense of participation
one gets from the two longer essays.

Three formative events shape the chapter on the Castro - the original appeal of
San Francisco as a haven for homosexuals in a nation that seemed unable to admit
their existence; the catalytic political rise of Harvey Milk, the homosexual
activist, and his murder; and the emergence of AIDS as the lethal transformer of
homosexual life. In the Castro in the late 1970's, homosexual men ''could spend
days, or an entire week, going to their offices, to the cleaner, the bank, and
the health club, dining in restaurants, attending political meetings, and going
to church without coming into contact with anyone who was not gay.'' At that
time San Francisco had at least 100,000 homosexuals, or about one voter out of
three. It was this political clout, of course, that fueled the growth and
sustained the social power of the Castro. The community was male in more ways
than one, for lesbians had no such locale, and presumably no comparable
community. Ms. FitzGerald seems to have made no investigation of San Francisco's
lesbians, other than to note that their sexual expression lacked the vigorous
and incessant promiscuity that apparently characterized the men of the Castro.

That promiscuity powered the AIDS panic. Carefully and at length, Ms. FitzGerald
recounts the story of the conflicts between certain homosexuals and the city
authorities over how the spread of AIDS could best be contained. She makes
evident her admiration for San Francisco's director of public health, Dr. Mervyn
Silverman, who had to make the difficult but crucial decision on closing the
bathhouses. THE shift in sexual practices that AIDS provoked is captured in a
story told by a man Ms. FitzGerald interviewed. An ''older'' resident of the
Castro (perhaps all of 30), he spied an appealing young man, stripped to the
waist, sunning himself on a stoop. The young man responded to his glance, and
the older man invited him into his apartment. They talked, but the young man
made no moves except to ask for a date as he was leaving. ''A date!'' the man
telling the story exclaimed. ''I was shocked. He was, I gathered, looking for
commitment. He was looking for a lifelong partnership.''

Rajneeshpuram also changed drastically during Ms. FitzGerald's investigations,
though she has no real explanation for that transformation. Like the Castro, the
community of white, college-educated professionals who, in the early 80's,
clustered around Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh on his commune-ranch in central Oregon
began as a new approach to the world. Though it was an obvious outgrowth of
California's human potential movement and its rejection of bourgeois
conventions, Rajneeshpuram placed much emphasis on hard work. In fact, as Ms.
FitzGerald remarked about her first Continued on next page visit, the commune
resembled Camranh Bay in Vietnam during the mid-60's, so intense was the
activity and so extensive the construction. The ''sannyasins,'' residents of
Rajneeshpuram, worked an average of 12 hours a day to support the community.
That included supporting the Bhagwan's penchant for Rolls-Royces (he had between
60 and 70) and his diamond-studded watches and bracelets. As in her report on
Mr. Falwell's church, Ms. FitzGerald does not ignore the achievements of
Rajneeshpuram - 3,000 acres of land cleared for a vegetable farm, fruit trees
cultivated, poultry and dairy cows tended, an electrical power station built, a
huge reservoir and irrigation system developed and 85 buses operated in what was
the fourth largest public transportation system in Oregon. Building on the
property increased from one farmhouse to 250,000 square feet of construction in
the first two years.

The community attracted some opposition from its few neighbors from the start,
especially after the Bhagwan's followers took over the tiny village of Antelope.
The really serious resistance, Ms. FitzGerald shows, came from the provocative,
even hostile behavior of the community toward outsiders. She speculates that the
provocation was deliberate, a way of controlling internal dissent by creating an
external threat. She discusses at length the community's many excesses -some
violent - and especially those of the Bhagwan's powerful associate Ma Anand
Sheela, whose precipitous departure for Europe broke open to public inspection
and brought home to the credulous sannyasins what had been going on. Again and
again Ms. FitzGerald marvels at the enduring credulity of those highly educated
Americans even after the scam was exposed. As one told her, ''For three days I
was just so angry at Bhagwan. But I'm over that now.'' Indeed, she was so much
over it that later she cheerfully acknowledged the Bhagwan was still her
''Master.'' WHAT do all these activities have to do with history? Well, that is
a problem with ''Cities on a Hill.'' For, despite Ms. FitzGerald's aim of
linking these four communities to an explanation of the influence of the 60's on
American culture, no connections are made until the last chapter. There she
attempts to put the groups into some historical context, principally by
asserting a similarity between the utopian communities of the 1830's and those
she describes. There were indeed antislavery and women's rights movements, as
well as religious and secular societies like the Mormons and the Oneida
community, in the 1830's and 40's. But are Ms. FitzGerald's four communities
truly analogous to the reform efforts of the antebellum years? The Noyes colony
at Oneida, N.Y., to be sure, experimented with sex, but it otherwise bore no
relation to the Castro. Mr. Falwell's church is religious, as the Mormons are,
but the two are hardly comparable in intention, scope of activities or world
significance. Sun City seems more like the planned greenbelt communities of New
Deal days than any antebellum utopian society. Rajneeshpuram alone seems close
to fitting the lineaments of earlier communities, but only if one ignores rather
important differences between them. Surely one of the uses of history is to
discover analogies in the past, for in that way we place ourselves in the stream
of time. But analogies work as analytical devices only if the things being
compared are truly alike; these are not.

Another use of history is to see continuity from past to present, and in that
effort Ms. FitzGerald does much better. When she says at the outset that her
communities are quintessentially American, what does she mean? Simply that, like
the earlier reform movements, these modern groups deny the power of the past. As
she puts it, they believed it was possible to start over again. And it is true
that virtually from the beginning, Americans have seen themselves outside
history, as a people constituting a nation of the future. Certainly President
Reagan reflected that attitude just before his visit to the Bitburg cemetery in
West Germany last year, when he called on Americans to put the past behind them.
It is in that sense, and not in the sense of repeating the past, that Ms.
FitzGerald's closing sentence is persuasive: ''The very appearance of the
Castro, Sun City, Jerry Falwell's church, and Rajneeshpuram showed that the
United States had not changed too drastically in a century and a half.'' And
that, I think, is what bothered Carl Becker - his fellow Americans have had so
little use for history.

HOW DID IT HAPPEN?

Frances FitzGerald is a literary wanderer, roaming from subject to subject
writing articles and hoping her peripatetic ways will lead her to a book. In the
case of ''Cities on a Hill'' they did. In 1978, Ms. FitzGerald was teaching a
class in journalism at the University of California, Berkeley. The homosexual
community of nearby San Francisco attracted her attention, so she wrote a
magazine article. A year later, while she was lecturing at Lynchburg College in
Virginia, she visited the church of the Rev. Jerry Falwell. Magazine article
number two.

She began to find similarities in what appeared to be opposing camps. ''It
started to occur to me that some of the deepest divisions in this country are
not the ones we imagined, that there are real cultural differences in the white
middle class,'' Ms. FitzGerald said in a telephone interview.

This notion bloomed into a theme, and in time she discovered two other cultural
enclaves of the middle class. But Ms. FitzGerald is not content simply to
chronicle the present. She likes to mine the past as well and spends as much
time in Loeb Library at New York University as in the field. In reading recent
studies of religious movements of the early 1800's, she discovered connections
between them and the subcultures of today.

Her method seems well suited to her work habits and curiosity. She confesses to
being a slow writer who likes to ruminate. She also believes any responsible
journalist would ask the question: How did that happen? ''And if you ask that,''
she said, ''you are almost inevitably involved in history.''   - Michael Norman

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Frances Fitzgerald and disciples of Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh in
Rajneeshpuram, Oregon 1984 (Linn Sage; Sygma/J.P. Laffont)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY GUIDE

BYLINE: By Frank Emblen

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 25, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 927 words


BRIDGETON'S 300TH Bridgeton, the seat of Cumberland County, will celebrate its
tricentennial Saturday and next Sunday with a Civil War enactment in which
battalions in authentic Union Army uniforms will march, sing and shoot.

Their camp will represent a Union Army muster camp of 1861, the same as would
have been found around many cities in the North at the time.

Chasseurs and Zouaves in their colorful uniforms will perform infantry drills
and demonstrate weapons in accordance with authentic Army manuals of the period.
An artillery battery also will drill and fire its cannon.

Not only will the troops - shouldering muzzle-loading rifles and muskets - try
to faithfully recreate the authentic drills of the day, but the spoken commands
and exchanges also will be true to the military parlance of the period.

The enactment will take place on the Old Fairgrounds each day from 10 A.M. to 5
P.M. On Saturday afternoon, there will be tours of Civil War-period homes
Bridgeton's Historic District. Founded in 1686, Bridgeton was incorporated in
1865. Information: (609) 451-4802.  UP, UP AND AWAY A challenge for runners with
a touch of the mountain climber in them is being offered next Sunday in
Paterson.

The eight-mile ''Great Falls Road Race'' will begin at the falls at 10 A.M. and
feature a climb to the top of Garrett Mountain, as well as a fast tour of the
historic Great Falls area.

Stuart Lipper, coordinator of the event, promises an undisclosed ''unique finish
more spectacular than any of the famous races in the U.S.''

Trophies will be awarded to the leading men and women; the first 500 entrants
will get T-shirts. The pre-entry fee is $5, post-entry, $6. There will also be a
three-mile run.

The race is the final event in a weeklong celebration by Passaic County
Community College marking the dedication of a Paterson history mural.
Information: (201) 523-9201.  THROUGH BRAZILIAN EYES Paulo Francis is an
American correspondent for a Brazilian newspaper. In 1970, he was one of the
staff members of the Rio de Janeiro satirical weekly tabloid O Pasquim to be
jailed by the Brazilian military Government; he had translated articles from The
New Yorker on alleged atrocities by American troops in Vietnam.

The New York Times reported then:

''When a reader once wrote to the paper asking Mr. Francis why he didn't turn
his dry, sometimes venomous criticism from Vietnam and the United States to
Brazil, the writer replied: 'Haven't you ever heard of allegory?' ''

Mr. Francis, who is the author of six books and now lives in the United States,
will speak at Jersey City State College Wednesday on ''The American Political
Process, as Seen by a Brazilian.''

The talk is part of the Fall Morning Lecture Series and will take place at 11
A.M. in Room 202, Hepburn Hall. The college is at 2039 Kennedy Boulevard, Jersey
City, and admission to the lecture is free. Information: (201) 547-3239.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION A daylong seminar on historic preservation and restoration
- it promises to be free of obscure jargon - will be presented Saturday in
Orange.

''Preservation in the Oranges: A Primer'' is the title of the conference, but
its sponsor also says that the content will be helpful in any locale, especially
in Essex County.

The sponsor is Housing and Neighborhood Development Services, an organization
formed less than a year ago by five clerics of different faiths in the Scotland
Road and Lincoln Avenue areas of Orange with the idea of improving those
neighborhoods.

Among the speakers will be Charles DeMarco, archivist for Essex County, and
Wayne T. McCabe, a professional planner and preservation specialist.

The Newark Public Library will bring a display of vintage photographs to the
seminar, which begins with registration at 8:30 A.M. and continues to 4:30 P.M.
The $12 fee includes lunch.

The conference will take place at Hillside and Valley Presbyterian Church, 494
Hillside Avenue, Orange.

Information: (201) 675-0275 or (201) 678-1342.

CHINESE ACROBATS

Balancing, juggling, magic, gymnastic and acrobatic skills honed by more than
2,000 years of tradition will be on display Tuesday night at the Strand Theater,
Clifton Avenue, Lakewood.

The entertainers are the Chinese Golden Dragon Acrobats and Magicians of Taipei,
whose performance will begin at 7:30 P.M.

This troupe, formed by the Chang family, comprises 23 members and represents one
of the most distinguished of Chinese families that have handed these skills down
from generation to generation. The performance includes demonstrations of
kung-fu.

Tickets are $8, $12 and $16, with discounts available to the elderly, students
and groups. Information: (201) 367-9595.  CRAFTS AND ANTIQUES Nyack, N.Y., will
be the host to 300 antiques dealers next Sunday for the fall edition of its
semiannual Antique and Craft Street Fair, which is expected to draw 25,000
visitors.

Nyack merchants will join the antiques dealers from out of town, and their
combined merchandise will include oak furniture, baseball cards, ivory carvings,
tin toys, antique jewelry, porcelain figurines, deco graphics, oil paintings,
miniatures, dried-flower arrangements, wicker furniture and paperweights.

The fair will be held - rain or shine - from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. The dealers will
set up stands on Main Street, from Franklin Street to Broadway, as well as in
parking lots of the Chemical Bank and the Cinema. There also will be dealers on
Broadway, from Cedar Hill Avenue to Lydecker Street, and in the Post Office
parking lot.

Information: (914) 928-9494.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
PLAYWRIGHT'S ALLIANCE GROWS

BYLINE: By Alvin Klein

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 20, Column 4; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


SOMETIMES a regional theater forms a longterm alliance with a playwright, and
the two become indelibly linked in a theatergoer's consciousness. Mention the
Yale Repertory, for example, and Athol Fugard comes instantly to mind.

The University of Hartford's Lincoln Theater may be developing just that sort of
ongoing relationship with - and allegiance to - Michel Tremblay, a writer from
French-speaking Canada.

Last Thursday, Mr. Tremblay's ''Albertine, in Five Times,'' which won awards in
Toronto and in Montreal, had its United States premiere in an English adaptation
at the Lincoln, where Mr. Tremblay's ''Impromptu of Outremont'' was produced
last January.

''Albertine'' was first seen two years ago in Ottawa, where Mr. Tremblay's
newest play, ''The Real People,'' will open in April. Richard Stein, the Lincoln
Theater's director, is hoping ''The Real People'' will be the third Tremblay
play to be imported to Hartford.

Ostensibly, Mr. Tremblay's plays can be considered outrageous or obscure.
''Bonjour la Bonjour'' is about incest; ''Hosanna'' concerns transvestism. In
''Forever Yours, Marie-Lou,'' a play for voices, a family is violently uprooted,
while the actors remain, symbolically, rooted in their chairs.

''Albertine,'' which runs through next Sunday, depicts a woman at five stages,
and ages, of her life, from 30 years old to 70. Each age is played by a
different actress. All five actresses - Stacie Chaiken (Albertine at 30), Jill
O'Hara (at 40), Diane Kagan (at 50), Tammy Grimes (at 60) and Sylvia Short (at
70) - appear on stage at once. The only other character is Albertine's sister,
Madeleine, who is played by a sixth actress, June Ballinger.

Though Mr. Tremblay's works are unorthodox in form as well as in content, the
play's director, Andre Brassard, commented on their accessability. Mr. Brassard,
who has collaborated with the playwright since 1968, as director, co-writer of
screenplays and co-adapter of classical works, is, as well, the director of the
National Arts Center of Canada's French Theater in Ottawa.

His directorial stint in Hartford represents ''the first time I have come across
the border to work,'' Mr. Brassard said. About ''Albertine,'' he said: ''The
women are not ghosts; they're made real through the power of memory and theater.
The play is about a woman meeting with herself in order to understand her life -
and what life in general is about. It's a thrill for the actresses to play the
same person in an ensemble piece. And audiences respond to the challenge of
using their brains. Everything here is not masticated for them.''

For Miss Grimes, Mr. Tremblay's style is elusive and distinctive, yet simple,
once it is perceived. To play it involves more reaction than action, Miss Grimes
said.

''Less is more,'' said the actress, who included ''rage, depression, happiness,
loneliness'' among the ''mood swings'' the character goes through.

Miss Grimes, who frequently appears in the state's regional theaters - her last
role was as Lady Bracknell in the Yale Repertory's production of ''The
Importance of Being Ernest'' in April - added: ''No one else writes that way. We
have to work on the art of listening to others; we're all one. The whole thing
is an exquisite piece of music - a soliloquy: one person said by many people.''

Commenting on her role, Miss Grimes said: ''At 60, Albertine is a drug addict.
She shuts out memories - terrifying things - that hurt too much. She comes into
focus and recalls Albertine at 30 and 40 and 50 -but only 70 knows what happens.
It deals with humanity and survival. The role is quite perfect for me at this
moment. I understand so much of what she feels.''

This is the beginning of the Lincoln Theater's fourth season of producing
professional theater. The remaining plays of the season are: the Negro Ensemble
Company's production of ''Ceremonies in Dark Old Men,'' the Tony Award-winning
play by Lonne Elder 3d, Nov. 6 through Nov. 9; the Guthrie Theater's ''Candida''
by George Bernard Shaw, from Feb. 26 through March 1; the Vietnam Veterans
Ensemble Theater Company's ''Tracers,'' from April 2 through April 5, and Edward
Albee's Pulitzer Prize-winning ''Seascape,'' in a Lincoln Theater production to
be directed by Mr. Stein from April 30 through May 10.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CLOSE AIDE TO BUSH LINKED TO FIGURE HELPING CONTRAS

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 803 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 12


Vice President Bush acknowledged today that his national security adviser had
ties to a Central Intelligence Agency veteran identified as a leader of a secret
effort to supply Nicaraguan rebels.

But the Vice President continued to deny any involvement in overseeing the
supply operations to the rebels, known as contras, who are fighting the
Sandinista Government of Nicaragua.

Through a spokesman, the Vice President said he had met twice in his office with
the former C.I.A. agent, known as Max or Felix Gomez and as Felix Rodriguez, but
only to discuss El Salvador.

Worked for El Salvador

According to Mr. Bush's staff, Mr. Gomez had worked for the Salvadoran Air Force
as a counterinsurgency specialist.

Mr. Bush's spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said in an interview that Mr. Gomez had
been recommended for the job by Donald P. Gregg, a former intelligence agency
official who is Mr. Bush's national security adviser.

Eugene Hasenfus, an American captured after his cargo plane was downed in
Nicaragua last week, said Mr. Gomez was a C.I.A. employee and was running the
supply operations to the rebels from a Salvadoran air base.

Denial by Agency

The Central Intelligence Agency has denied that Mr. Gomez works directly or
indirectly for the agency.

Mr. Fitzwater said Mr. Bush had met twice with Mr. Gomez, most recently in May.
On Saturday the Vice President called Mr. Gomez ''a patriot.''

Mr. Fitzwater said that the conversations in the Vice President's office in the
Old Executive Office Building here were brief, 10 to 15 minutes, and did not
involve the Nicaraguan rebels.

The conversations, the spokesman said, ''had been entirely related to El
Salvador.'' He said Mr. Bush ''has never had any conversation of any kind about
the contras or contra aid or Nicaragua with Mr. Gomez.''

No Talks on Contras

The Vice President, Mr. Fitzwater said, did not know then or now that Mr. Gomez
might be involved in aiding the rebels. Congress has barred direct American
Government support of the guerrillas.

President Reagan and the C.I.A. have denied any Government link to the cargo
plane, which Nicaragua said was carrying military supplies to the rebels. The
plane had flown from the Ilopango Air Base in El Salvador. The base, situated
just outside the capital, has become the operations center for American military
activities in the country, including missions carried out by the Central
Intelligence Agency.

The plane's crew included Mr. Hasenfus and two other Americans, identified as
Wallace Blaine Sawyer and William J. Cooper. Mr. Sawyer and Mr. Cooper were
killed in the crash, as was a fourth person, reportedly a Latin American.

Mr. Gregg and Mr. Gomez have known each other for years ''and worked together at
the C.I.A., particularly in Vietnam,'' Mr. Fitzwater said.

Have Kept in Touch

A Congressional source said that during the Vietnam War, Mr. Gomez served in Air
America, an airline once owned by the C.I.A.

According to the Vice President's office, Mr. Gregg and Mr. Gomez have stayed in
touch but not to discuss the Nicaraguan rebels.

''Gregg has said he had no knowledge of anything involving contras,'' Mr.
Fitzwater said. ''Neither the Vice President nor anyone on his staff is directly
or indirectly coordinating an operation in Central America.''

Mr. Fitzwater said Mr. Gregg was out of town today and could not be reached.
There was no answer at Mr. Gregg's home telephone.

A specialist in Far Eastern matters while in the C.I.A., Mr. Gregg once served
as the agency's station chief in Seoul, South Korea.

Bush a Former Director

Mr. Fitzwater said he did not know if Mr. Gomez was in the agency in 1976 and
1977, when Mr. Bush was the Director of Central Intelligence under President
Ford.

At a news conference Saturday in Charleston, S.C., Mr. Bush denied he had
anything to do with directing secret flights to drop military equipment to the
contras.

''It's absolutely, totally untrue,'' he said of the reports. ''I can deny it
unequivocally.'' Mr. Bush was campaigning in South Carolina for Republican
candidates.

He said he met with Mr. Gomez ''in connection with El Salvador'' in January 1985
and last May.

''I know Felix Gomez,'' he said. ''I met with him twice. Saw him at a political
event. Shook hands with him a third time. He's a patriot.''

Anti-Insurgency Expert

The Vice President said Mr. Gomez's current role ''was to help the Government of
El Salvador put down an insurrection; put down a Marxist-led revolution. And it
is the policy of the United States to support that. This man, having served in
Vietnam, is an expert in that.''

''The only discussions I have ever had with Felix related to El Salvador,'' he
said. ''To the best of my knowledge, this man is not working for the United
States Government.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
The Reasons for Lying

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 741 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


There is a wonderful absurdity in the Reagan Administration's effort to distance
itself from the C-123 cargo plane shot down in Nicaragua while carrying weapons
to the contras. The performance brings back happy memories of Richard Nixon's
flights of Watergate deniability.

The plane flew from a Salvadoran air base, Ilopango. The base is entirely
financed by the United States Government. Americans can get into the place only
if they have identity cards approved by U.S. officials.

But of course the three American crew members had nothing to do with any
official United States enterprise. So President Reagan and Secretary Shultz and
their aides assure us. And they are all honorable men.

The C-123 was connected to Southern Air Transport, a charter airline once owned
by the C.I.A. In 1984 the same aircraft was used in a United States effort to
catch Nicaraguan officials at drug smuggling. The C.I.A. installed hidden
cameras on board.

But of course neither the C.I.A. nor any other U.S. agency had anything to do
with the plane on its last flight. So the highest officials assure us, and they
are all honorable men.

The one American survivor of the flight, Eugene Hasenfus, said he worked for a
contra air supply operation run from El Salvador by two Cuban-Americans, Max
Gomez and Ramon Medina. Max Gomez flew for a C.I.A. airline during the Vietnam
War. The Los Angeles Times reported that Vice President Bush's national security
adviser got Mr. Gomez a job with the Salvadoran Air Force, and he has told
friends he reports to Mr. Bush on his operations for the contras. The Vice
President said Max Gomez was ''a patriot.'' He did not comment on his staff's
role in placing Mr. Gomez in El Salvador, or on Mr. Gomez's reporting to him
about the contra supply flights. Mr. Bush did deny what no one had alleged: that
he himself was in charge of the operations. ''It's absolutely untrue,'' the Vice
President said.

The exact chain of command that put Eugene Hasenfus and the others in that
airplane with a load of guns and ammunition may remain a secret for some time.
''I know the White House knows and is not telling,'' the chairman of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, Republican Dave Durenberger of Minnesota, said.

But there are only two broad possibilities. One is that the operation was in
fact being run by agents of the United States Government, in violation of
statutes that have banned such activity since 1984. The other is that the
operation is a ''private'' venture, active without formal official control but
with the enthusiastic approval of the Reagan Administration.

Over the last several years there has been a mushroom growth of ''private''
military activities in areas targeted by the Reagan Administration. Retired Gen.
John K. Singlaub, head of the World Anti-Communist League, has raised upward of
$10 million for what he says is nonlethal aid to the contras.

Reagan officials have also persuaded foreign governments to help. Saudi Arabia,
for example, reportedly agreed to pay for contra arms in return for Reagan
Administration support of its bid for Awacs aircraft.

The nature of the Reagan crusade against Nicaragua is what inevitably produces
lame explanations when something like the C-123 crash happens. It is a lawless
crusade, resorting to the extremely dangerous device of private war because it
does not have public support, designed to slip the American people into a
commitment they do not want to make.

Everything about the Reagan war on Nicaragua has been a lie from the beginning:
the talk of aiding the contras only to stop arms flowing to the Salvadoran
guerrillas, the later statement that the objective was to force the Sandinistas
to negotiate. Ronald Reagan is trying to overthrow another government. From that
improper, un-American objective flows all the embarrassment. A bad end produces
bad means.

''This is an outrageous violation of international law,'' Elliott Abrams,
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, said the other day. He
was talking about the Nicaraguan Government's temporary delay in allowing U.S.
consular access to Eugene Hasenfus.

That from an Administration that has violated international law wholesale in
Nicaragua - and that ran away from the World Court's adjudication of the issue.
In its foolish shrillness the remark is a telling indication of how American
values and common sense have been corrupted by the war on Nicaragua.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL AIDING CONTRAS HINTS AT A BROADER ROLE

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1702 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Oct. 13


Over the last couple of years, an organization operating out of a cramped
three-room suite in Phoenix with only three regular employees says it has
supplied 8,000 ''freedom fighter kits'' to the contra rebels in Nicaragua. The
camouflage-covered kits contain such items as shaving cream, non-melting candy
and Spanish-language Bibles.

''The Bibles have been a major hit,'' Joyce Downey, the executive director, said
in an interview last week. The organization, the United States Council for World
Freedom, also supplied a refurbished Vietnam-era UH-1B helicopter to rebels
fighting the Sandinista Government, for what the group said was unarmed
evacuation of the wounded.

But the name of the council's chairman, John K. Singlaub, has frequently cropped
up as a possible conduit for covert American aid to anti-Communist forces in
Central America that is more deadly than candy and Bibles.

Last week, at least one unnamed Administration source said groups controlled by
General Singlaub, a retired Army officer who was once an operative of the
Central Intelligence Agency, were behind the weapon-laden American cargo plane
that was shot down over Nicaragua.

Close Ties to Administration

But some associates of the 65-year-old general suggest that the Administration
was using General Singlaub, who does indeed maintain close ties with both the
Reagan Administration and with the Nicaragua rebels, to divert the glare of
publicity from the C.I.A. and other clandestine operations with more resources
than the general's tiny council. Others have suggested that he willingly played
a decoy role.

The general was not in Phoenix last week, but in a telephone interview from
Washington today, he vigorously denied he was involved with the plane and said
it was ''just outrageous'' that an Administration official had insisted he was
linked to it even after his denials.

''I wish I had been in charge,'' he said. ''I could have done a better job. I
certainly would not have flown the C-123 in such an amateurish way.''

Later in the day, the general said, ''I'm trying to find out who the cowards are
who are associating my name with the plane.''

But regardless of any connection to that plane, the nature and extent of General
Singlaub's role in Central America is unclear.

He said that the Council for World Freedom, which has been designated by the
Internal Revenue Service as a tax-exempt educational organization and raises
funds from private sources, provides only ''humanitarian'' assistance to
''Democratic resistance'' in several countries.

But he hinted broadly that he plays a somewhat larger role in Nicaragua through
his anti-Communist activities abroad, where he is not subject to American laws.

Keeps U.S. Officials Informed

''I have knowledge of where people can go to get what they want in terms of
weapons,'' he said of his aid to the contras. ''I have given military advice and
provided them with information about how to go about contacting the
international arms markets.'' He said he did this entirely outside of the United
States and without American money or Government instructions, although he added
that he kept high Administration officials informed of his activities ''so they
are not surprised.''

General Singlaub had been in the Far East for five weeks before returning to
Washington last week. Until recently, he was chairman of the World
Anti-Communist League, an international body with roots in Taiwan and South
Korea that has about 90 member groups worldwide. He has gained a measure of
praise from the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai Brith for purging the
Anti-Communist League of racists, anti-Semites and other right-wing extremists.

The Phoenix-based freedom council is the league's American affiliate. According
to Ms. Downey it has raised about $500,000 so far this year, mostly in small
contributions. Over the last two years, she said, the council has provided $10
million to $25 million in cash and ''in-kind'' aid: four to eight small aircraft
(''non gun-mounted'') to the contras, boots to rebels fighting Soviet troops in
Afghanistan, $20,000 in medicines to Cambodian resistance forces, and help for
groups in Mozambique, Ethiopia and other countries.

Meanwhile the council's chairman has emerged as a mysterious and controversial
figure of the American right. A Congressional aide said that General Singlaub,
along with a retired Air Force officer, Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, and a former
Republican Congressional aide, Robert W. Owen, are the chief links between the
Administration and the contras.

'Guy You Want on Your Side'

A 5-foot, 7-inch bulldog of a man with a military brush haircut and a combative
spirit, General Singlaub is ''the kind of guy you'd like to have by your side in
a barroom brawl,'' said one Phoenix acquaintance, Pat Murphy, the publisher of
The Arizona Republic.

General Singlaub was a C.I.A. officer in China after World War II, then deputy
chief of the C.I.A. mission in Korea in 1951. Later he became a
counter-insurgency officer during the Vietnam War. But his military career came
to an abrupt end in 1979 after he publicly criticized President Carter's plans
to cut troops in Korea.

He retired to his home in Tabernash, Colo., from which he began to overhaul the
Anti-Communist League and the freedom council. Both stridently anti-Communist
groups had fallen into disrepute and lost members because they had become havens
for violent extremists and ex-Nazis.

According to a 1981 report by the Anti-Defamation League, the World
Anti-Communist League, orginally formed in 1966, had ''increasingly become a
gathering place, a forum, a point of contact, for extremists, racists and
anti-Semites.'' There were reports its affiliates were involved in death squads
and torture. The American affiliate, formed in 1970 as the American Council for
World Freedom, also came under racist control.

But things began to change when General Singlaub took over in 1981. He expelled
the virulently anti-Semitic Mexican affliate, Tecos, and the South American
affiliate, the Latin American Anti-Communist League.

According to Irwin Suall, the fact-finding director for the Anti-Defamation
League, General Singlaub approached his group with a list of applicants to the
anti-communist league and asked for guidance. He was told many were European
neo-Nazi groups, and they were refused admission.

Last year, General Singlaub asked the B'nai Brith group for a letter on its
findings. The letter said that since he had taken over the league, the general
had ''brought about a considerable cleansing of the composition of the
organization.'' It went on: ''We are satisfied at the very least that
substantial progress has been made since 1981 in ridding the organization of the
racists and anti-Semites whose presence previously led us to publicly express
our concern.''

While Mr. Suall said the ADL did not have enough information to give a ''totally
clean bill of health,'' he said it was ''perfectly evident'' that the general
was, if a bit of a ''cowboy,'' not an anti-Semite.

Others remain dubious. In a recent book, ''Inside the League,'' Scott Anderson
and John Lee Anderson, two journalists, contend that the Anti-Communist League
continues to harbor facists under a new patina of respectability. But the
general calls the book ''absolute nonsense.''

General Singlaub is also one of 30 defendants in a Federal civil suit brought by
two journalists injured in the bombing of a 1984 press conference in Costa Rica
held by Eden Pastora, the former contra leader. The suit, brought under
racketeering legislation, charges that General Singlaub was involved in drugs
and arms smuggling and conspired to assassinate Mr. Pastora. The general has
called the charges ''fabrications'' of the radical left.

A 'Nightmare Organizationally'

His tenure at the council in Phoenix has been marked by some turmoil. Larry H.
Tifverberg, a retired Army foreign affairs officer with wide experience in
Southeast Asia, resigned as executive director earlier this year after less than
a year on the job. In an interview, Mr. Tifverberg said that while he admired
the general as a ''patriot,'' he was a ''nightmare organizationally.''

Mr. Tifverberg said he was unable to run the group effectively because when he
said no, people would ''go around'' him directly to the general.

He said the council was often approached my people who had more than just
''humanitarian'' activities in mind. ''I had people calling every day asking for
guns, ammunition, everything,'' he said. ''It was very clear our charter was for
humanitarian aid. In fact, Singlaub is involved with other activities. People
thought if they called the council, they would be involved in other
activities.''

Was the council linked to the plane that was shot down? ''Categorically, the
council was not involved - I don't think the general is mixed up with our
friends in the company,'' Mr. Tifverberg said, using intelligence argot for the
C.I.A. ''But I'm not going to say it was not a company operation.''

Meanwhile, the Internal Revenue Service has been scrutinizing the council. In
recent months, according to council officials, the I.R.S. has conducted a
detailed audit of the council's books amid suggestions that its funds have been
used for purposes forbidden charitable organizations. The council says it has
been given a clean bill of health, although the agency has not concluded the
investigation.

Aid from the council to the Nicaraguan rebels (the Nicaraguan Democratic Force,
or F.D.N.) is chanelled through New Orleans, where Mario Calero, brother of the
contra leader Adolfo Colero, operates a warehouse.

''We deal directly with the F.D.N. people in the United States,'' said Ms.
Downey. ''They know the safe routes. General Singlaub has been down there a
number of times. We are assured everything we have designated is getting to
them. He's got many accolades form the soldiers.''

Back in Phoenix, according to Ms. Downey, the council, for all its rich
conservative friends, is an impecunious operation in ''a never-ending search for
money.'' The work goes on in the office on East Camelback Road, amid all the
signs of Phoenix's wealth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John K. Singlaub (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HIGHLY SENSITIVE TEST CAN DETECT DIOXIN YEARS AFTER EXPOSURE

BYLINE: By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1744 words


USING tools of breathtaking sensitivity, scientists have learned that they can
discern traces of dioxin that have persisted in a person for years, even decades
after exposure. The advance should help resolve the painfully inconclusive
debate over the dangers of the notorious chemical.

The proof that exposure leaves lasting remnants is a breakthrough, scientists
say, because efforts to study the long-term health effects of dioxin and related
chemicals have been subverted by uncertainty about who was really contaminated
and who was not.

The steadily improving technology indicates only the presence of the chemicals,
and says nothing about their impact on health. But with a method finally
available for knowing who to compare with whom, ''it will be possible to study
health effects far more precisely than in the past,'' said Dr. Peter C. Kahn of
Rutgers University. Dr. Kahn, a biochemist, was co-leader of a study of dioxin
levels in Vietnam veterans conducted for the New Jersey Agent Orange Commission.

With techniques that can identify mere parts per quadrillion of chemicals in
human fat - a quadrillion is a 1 followed by 15 zeros - scientists have
discovered that dioxin persists in the body far longer than previously assumed.
Recent studies of victims of industrial accidents, Vietnam veterans who handled
dioxin-tainted herbicides and residents of a contaminated area of Missouri have
all found telltale traces of high past exposure.

In test animals, dioxin is one of the most poisonous substances known; minute
amounts are deadly, and extended exposure to lower levels causes cancer and
birth defects. In humans, high doses of the chemical are known to cause skin
eruptions and liver and neurological ailments. Lower, repeated exposures have
caused damage to the immune system, but efforts to show an ironclad link to
subsequent cancers or other illness are mired in controversy.

The main object of study so far has been the form of dioxin believed to be most
dangerous, 2,3,7,8-TCDD. This chemical as well as dozens of other dioxins and
more than 300 related chlorine-containing chemicals known as furans and PCB's
resist breakdown and accumulate in the food chain.

In the coming years, as the detection method is standardized and its meaning is
better understood, it could help identify those who actually have dangerous
amounts of dioxin and need special medical attention. Equally crucial, it may
also bring peace of mind to many veterans and others who find that, contrary to
their fears, they were not seriously contaminated. Test results will probably
also be introduced as evidence in lawsuits involving charges of dioxin damage.
But scientists caution that not enough is known about the meaning of the
technology to justify widespread screening.

For now, among other benefits, the technique appears likely to break the
seven-year logjam that has blocked a Federal epidemiological study of whether
some Vietnam veterans were harmed by dioxin. The chemical was a contaminant of
Agent Orange, an herbicide sprayed during the Vietnam War. Despite veterans'
pleas for answers, Federal scientists have so far been reluctant to undertake
the study, which was mandated by Congress in 1979. Officials have argued that
the military records of herbicide spraying and troop movements are insufficient
to identify those exposed with the precision necessary for a scientifically
valid comparison of health. Until recently, senior Federal officials resisted
the assertion of outside scientists that analysis of fat tissue could clarify
the matter.

But just last month, at a conference in Japan on dioxins and related compounds,
scientists from the Federal Centers for Disease Control announced that residents
from an area of Missouri exposed to contaminated soils did indeed have markedly
higher dioxin levels in fats from blood and body tissue than a control group.
And last month, the C.D.C., which is managing several major health studies of
Vietnam veterans, drew up plans to study fats in the blood of 450 veterans to
validate the accuracy of estimates of Agent Orange exposure drawn from military
records. This could eliminate the chief scientific objection to the proposed
large-scale epidemiological comparison of veterans exposed to Agent Orange and
those who were not.

The planned study of blood fats, which must first be approved by the
Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, will take about six months,
according to Dr. Vernon Houk, director of the Center for Environmental Health at
the C.D.C. If results show that exposures can be reliably estimated from
records, then the larger health survey will finally get under way, he said.

Exposure estimates used in the Air Force's continuing ''Ranch Hand'' study of
men involved in spraying herbicides will also be tested against the detection
method, Dr. Houk said. He said that it would not be feasible to apply the
detection procedure itself, which costs $1,000 a sample, on the large scale
required for the broader health surveys.

The Federal agency also plans to study people suffering five uncommon types of
cancer that dioxin is suspected of causing, to see if victims have had unusual
dioxin exposures.

At last month's conference in Japan, Dr. Kahn presented the results of the New
Jersey study, which found that ten veterans who handled Agent Orange in the late
1960's had an average of 48 parts per trillion of dioxin in their fats, ten
times the level in a control group of veterans. According to Wayne Wilson,
executive director of the New Jersey Agent Orange Commission, the study was
undertaken because of frustration with what he called the ''footdragging of the
Federal Government'' on the matter. In the coming months the health status of
the exposed and control groups will be compared, although in this study the
number of subjects is too small to yield conclusive evidence of dioxin's
dangers.

In the detection method, chemical residues in fat are analyzed with gas
chromatography and mass spectrometry. Elements of fat likely to contain the
target chemicals are separated from the rest, vaporized and their molecules
given an electric charge. As they pass through magnetic fields, the charged
molecules land at different points on a detector according to their weights,
producing a pattern on a graph for analysis. The technology is advancing to ever
more exquisite levels of sensitivity, but it is reliable only with extraordinary
quality-control measures that have been mastered by a handful of laboratories so
far, scientists said.

Swedish Detective Work

Use of this method for detecting exposure to dioxin and related compounds was
pioneered by Dr. Christoffer Rappe of the University of Umea in Sweden, who in
the late 1970's began studying tissue from factory workers and later worked with
Japanese scientists studying victims of a 1968 incident in which cooking oil was
contaminated with PCB's and furans.

Over the last few years several American scientists began using the technique on
veterans, industrial accident victims and others. Dr. Arnold Schecter of the
State University of New York at Binghamton, for example, showed that the general
population of industrialized countries was contaminated with a ''background
level'' of dioxins and furans, apparently because the chemicals appear in many
pollutants including industrial and incinerator emissions and exhausts from cars
burning leaded gasoline, and have also been present in widely used herbicides.

Dr. Schecter and colleagues have also studied dioxin in the tissues of people in
Vietnam and most recently showed that workers doused with dioxin in a West
German factory in 1953 still carried an average of 25 times more of the chemical
than their countrymen.

While outside scientists have welcomed the change of heart by the Federal
Government regarding the utility of the detection method, the C.D.C.'s plans
have not escaped controversy. Everyone agrees that obtaining blood samples is
less intrusive and simpler than obtaining fat tissue. But Dr. Schecter said that
many scientists think it is premature to rely on blood samples alone, as the
C.D.C. plans to do. He has argued that fat tissue samples, with which scientists
have far more experience, were still necessary for confidence in results. But
Dr. Houk asserted that blood specimens could produce equally reliable results.

Dispute Over Technology

Like nearly everything about dioxin, the relevance of the new technology to the
controversial court settlement between Vietnam veterans and the makers of Agent
Orange is also disputed. The judge who devised the settlement, which is now
under appeal, concluded that it was impossible to prove who was damaged by Agent
Orange, and that a fund should be shared among any veterans and their families
suffering ills possibly related to the chemical.

Some who already opposed the settlement, such as Mr. Wilson of the New Jersey
commission, himself a veteran, and Dr. Schecter, said that rather than ignoring
the question of who actually suffered health damages, as they say the settlement
does, they want to pursue answers. And studies using the detection method should
make this possible. But others observe that the the settlement involves legal as
much as medical issues, that it will be impossible to prove that an ill person
was not damaged by Agent Orange and that it will be years more before any
medical answers are likely.

Even with the new technology, scientists say, major questions about dioxin's
dangers will remain unanswered. Current trace levels of the chemical do not, for
example, necessarily tell how great the initial exposure was, because scientists
do not know how much the gradual process of chemical breakdown varies among
individuals.

One European scientist recently astonished his colleagues by swallowing some
dioxin to follow its passage through his body. But no one expects to see many
more volunteers for this.

Many scientists said that for the time being there was no point in individuals,
outside of formal studies, having their fat analyzed for dioxin contamination.
Dr. Houk said he feared that ''fly-by-night labs'' would produce ''meaningless
results.''

Even at the best laboratories, ''we can get a number, but how do you interpret
it clinically?'' asked Dr. Kahn. ''Why should a physician get a number if he
doesn't know what treatment to give?'' But maybe, he said, things will be
different four or five years from now.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph shows dioxins and furans detected in blood (Source: Centers for
Disease Control); Photo of man using machine (C.D.C.)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GEN. FRED MAHAFFEY, 52, DIES; HELD TOP COMMANDS IN ARMY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 35, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 404 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 13


Gen. Fred K. Mahaffey, considered by many of his fellow officers to be one of
the fastest-rising stars in the Army, died of cancer today at the Walter Reed
Army Medical Center here. He was 52 years old.

Until the final days of his illness, General Mahaffey was commander in chief of
the Readiness Command, with headquarters in Tampa, Fla. Under his command were
most of the Army and Air Force combat units stationed within the continental
United States.

Before that assignment, General Mahaffey had been the Army's deputy chief of
staff for operations and plans, a position that often marked an officer as a
potential Chief of Staff. He was promoted to full general when he was 51 years
old, becoming one of the youngest full generals in the modern history of the
Army.

In 31 years in the service, General Mahaffey earned a reputation as a forceful
commander and as a skilled, meticulous operations officer. A soft-spoken,
good-humored man with a twinkle in his eye, he was popular with superiors and
subordinates alike.

'An Inspirational Leader'

Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., the Army's Chief of Staff, called General Mahaffey ''a
great soldier and an inspirational leader.'' The Army, he said, ''grieves over
this untimely loss.''

In the Vietnam War General Mahaffey commanded a battalion in the Ninth Infantry
Division. He commanded a brigade in the 101st Airborne Division at Fort
Campbell, Ky., in 1975 and the Third Infantry Division in West Germany from 1981
to 1983.

General Mahaffey won three Silver Stars, two Distinguished Flying Crosses and
four Bronze Stars for valor in combat. He also held the Distinguished Service
Medal, the Army's highest noncombat award, and four Legions of Merit for
exemplary achievement.

Fred Keith Mahaffey was born Jan. 4, 1934, in Clovis, N.M. He was a graduate of
the University of Denver and earned a master's degree in international affairs
at George Washington University. He was commissioned from the Reserve Officer
Training Corps in 1955.

In other assignments, General Mahaffey was an operations officer in Vietnam, a
division operations officer in the 101st Airborne, assistant commandant of the
Infantry School at Fort Benning, Ga., and deputy commanding general of the
Combined Arms Combat Development Activity at Fort Leavenworth, Kan.

Survivors include his wife, the former Jane Garnett, and four daughters, Lorrie
Ann, Selene, Julie Anne and Melissa Jane.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Fred Mahaffey

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PUTTING PIECES TOGETHER FOR SOVIET FAMINE BOOK

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1090 words


Robert Conquest is perhaps the West's pre-eminent chronicler of the sufferings
Communist rule has brought upon the Soviet people, especially during the reign
of Stalin. The titles of some of his books give a fair summary of his message:
''The Great Terror,'' ''The Nation Killers,'' ''Inside Stalin's Secret Police:
NKVD Politics 1936-39,'' ''Where Marx Went Wrong.''

The British historian's latest work, his 14th book of nonfiction, adds an
especially grisly chapter to the record. ''The Harvest of Sorrow: Soviet
Collectivization and the Terror-Famine'' tells of the Kremlin's campaign against
the Soviet peasantry, particularly in the Ukraine, from 1929 to 1933, which, by
Mr. Conquest's estimate, resulted in the deaths of more than 14 million people.

His hope in writing ''The Harvest of Sorrow,'' Mr. Conquest said in an interview
during a brief visit to New York last week, was to ''register previously not
recognized facts on Western consciousness in a form weighty enough to be
irrefutable.'' Reports of the famine that ravaged the Soviet Union during the
period have long been available in the West, but not until now has it been
rendered as fully or in such grim detail.

Reputation Based on History

Mr. Conquest, whose family has lived in Britain for centuries, traces his name
to French ancestry but not as far back as the Norman Conquest of 1066. He has a
Doctor of Letters from Oxford University and has written poetry and fiction, but
his reputation is based mainly on his studies of Soviet history. Now 69 years
old, he has not been in the Soviet Union since 1937 and has no plans to visit
again soon. His books are based on documentary evidence, which he can read in
the original.

In ''Harvest of Sorrow,'' he has brought together economic data, first-person
recollections, official documents that have found their way to the West, the
publications of Soviet scholars during the Khrushchev period and works of
fiction based on actual events. A particularly revealing piece of evidence, for
example, is the Soviet census of 1937, which, Mr. Conquest observes, disclosed
the drastic reduction in the population over the preceding decade and was
suppressed by Moscow. ''They arrested the census board and shot them,'' he said.

Mr. Conquest divides his book into two parts. In 1929, the economically
hard-pressed Soviet regime undertook a drive to collectivize agriculture to gain
greater control over the peasantry, then more than 80 percent of the population,
and to transfer resources from the land to industry. ''They couldn't make life
for the factory workers more attractive,'' Mr. Conquest said, ''but they could
make peasant life less attractive.''

'The Waste Was Extraordinary'

The result was a plummeting of grain production and widespread starvation in the
western Soviet Union. ''The waste was extraordinary,'' he says. ''Enough grain
rotted in the fields to have saved the lives of all the millions who died in the
famine.''

Mr. Conquest attributes the disastrous farm policy in part to the weakness of
Marxist-Leninist theory regarding agriculture. As he explains it, the Communist
Party simply applied Marx's ''class struggle'' analysis to the countryside,
where it had no basis in fact. He says that Communist ''gut ideology'' consigned
the peasantry to the role of ''clods.'' The bureaucrats who were sent into the
villages to take charge of the grain were all city-bred, with little
understanding of farm life. Under Stalin, he continues, the ''kulaks'' were
painted as capitalist oppressors. He adds dryly, ''You had to keep up this class
struggle stuff.''

While the famine of 1929 can be attributed to faulty ideology and ineptitude,
the Ukrainian famine of 1932-1933, in Mr. Conquest's view, was imposed on
purpose: ''There was a clear intention to starve the villages of the Ukraine. No
relief was permitted in.'' He compares Stalin's policy of the time, which was
designed to stamp out Ukrainian nationalism, to ''Genghis Khan laying to waste a
country that had given him trouble.'' The campaign, which decimated the
Ukrainian intelligentsia and the independent church as well as the peasantry,
was thorough. Mr. Conquest cites a letter by the composer Dmitri Shostakovich
relating how the blind bards who had traditionally roamed the Ukraine,
sustaining their people's traditions, were summoned to a meeting and slain. Mr.
Conquest comments, ''It is difficult to imagine anybody but Stalin carrying
through such a massacre.''

Mr. Conquest offers evidence that Soviet agriculture has yet to recover entirely
from the depredations of the time and maintains that despite periodic moves to
reduce bureaucratic controls, Soviet farming will never be fully productive
until farmers are permitted to own their own plots and sell their produce in a
free market. Although that point of view is generally associated with
conservative economics, Mr. Conquest declines to pin a political label on
himself. But he does spend most of his time these days as Senior Research Fellow
at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, which has a distinctly
conservative reputation.

New Projects

He is now updating ''The Great Terror,'' his account of Stalin's purges of
1936-38, and is planning a book on Stalin's last year, 1952-53. He is also doing
a new study of the 1934 killing (generally attributed to Stalin) of Sergei M.
Kirov, an important Communist Party official. Mr. Conquest explains his choice
of subjects as simply ''things I want to know about.''

Speaking of Western visitors to the Soviet Union in the early 1930's who echoed
Stalin's denial that any famine existed, Mr. Conquest observes that people have
an ''ability to dupe themselves,'' especially if ''you start using the word
'socialist.' '' He said, ''If Idi Amin had called himself a socialist, perhaps
he'd have gotten away with it.'' Mr. Conquest reflects: ''There are people who
need a Shangri-La - the Soviet Union in the 30's, then China, then North
Vietnam, then Cuba, now Nicaragua, though less so.'' Today, he says, even
sympathizers of ''socialist'' regimes acknowledge facts about their oppressive
side that would have been denied some years ago.

At the least, his latest book will make it more difficult for people to dupe
themselves over what happened in the Soviet Union between 1929 and 1932, an
episode, he points out, that the Kremlin still refers to as the ''so-called
famine.'' To critics who sometimes ask, ''Why bring all that up now?'' he
responds, ''People don't live down their histories.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert Conquest

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 929 words


MOHAWK. By Richard Russo. 418 pages. Vintage Contemporaries. Paper, $6.95. ''IT
occurs to him that he had allowed himself to get more keyed up over the
operation than he should've,'' writes Richard Russo of his hero, Dan Wood. ''The
resulting disappointment was as slow and subtle in coming as the realization
that, yes, once again he'd somehow gotten his hopes up. His grip on reality had
always been a point of pride with him, and he felt a little like a backsliding
AA member for losing that grip. Hope was a luxury he could not afford - a
cruelty, really.''

Though Dan's dilemma is especially cruel - he's been paralyzed in an automobile
accident - the same might well be said of most of the characters in ''Mohawk.''
Theirs are not terribly eventful lives - few have ever left the small upstate
New York town of Mohawk; and their dreams are hardly extravagant - just the
ordinary ones of love and work and family. And yet all of these people have
begun to realize that their most deeply cherished hopes have already slipped out
of reach, that resignation or acceptance are their two remaining choices.

Indeed Richard Russo's first novel has the lonely, melancholy feel of an Edward
Hopper painting come to life. It's mainly his characters' sense of isolation and
estrangement that accounts for this feeling. But it's also the backdrops he's
chosen for his story (semi-deserted diners; genteel verging on shabby houses;
dark, backlit streets) and the suspended, almost timeless quality of his
characters' lives. Though the novel begins in 1967 and ends some six years
later, there are no references to television shows or pop culture, no dropping
of brand-names; except for a few allusions to Vietnam and industrial pollution,
the novel could as easily take place in the 30's or 40's.

A blue-collar community built around the local tannery, Mohawk's the sort of
hick town people dream of leaving for the outside world. It's a small, almost
incestuous town, Mohawk: Harry, the proprietor of the local cafe, knows just
about everybody who stops by his place for coffee, and practically everyone else
seems to be related by accidents of marriage or of fate. There aren't a whole
lot of surprises around here -Harry uses a year-old calendar, figuring ''the
months are the same'' and he ''doesn't mind being a few days off'' - but this
apparent quiescence doesn't make Mr. Russo's characters feel safe, and it
doesn't assure them that they have any control over their lives. As far as
they're concerned, money will always be scarce, and emotional security even more
elusive.

Nearly every one of these people, in fact, has suffered some sort of terrible
loss. Forced to use a wheelchair and house-bound with his ailing mother-in-law,
Dan Wood mourns his lost health - and also his failure to marry Anne Grouse, the
woman he's loved since high school. Anne, on her part, has spent the better part
of her adult life pining away after Dan - who married her cousin, around the
same time she went off with a charming but utterly hapless fellow by the name of
Dallas.

Dallas, who's so spaced-out that he's always losing his laundry at the
laundromat, vaguely misses Anne and their son, Randall, but mainly he misses his
brother David, who recently died of cancer. David, who discovered he was dying
when his daughter was a year old, ''went a little crazy, taking out a
substantial loan so he could buy the little girl twenty years' worth of
presents. They filled up the walk-in closet of the spare bedroom, each package
wrapped and dated: Merry Christmas 1985; Happy Birthday 1987.''

There are other tragedies in Mohawk as well. Mather Grouse, Anne's proud,
uncompromising father, has spent half his life as a social and emotional recluse
- unable to overcome the fear and guilt he feels over a mysterious incident that
happened many years ago. Anne's son, Randall, a self-conscious, observant youth,
will experience heroism and notoriety before he's 20. Billy Gaffney, a shy young
boy who was once in love with Anne, will become a brain-damaged hobo, thanks to
a violent beating administered by his father, Rory. And in time, Rory's unsavory
doings will lead to further violence - and death.

As such a summary indicates, ''Mohawk'' has a tendency to swerve toward
contrived melodrama - the multiple-death denouement is particularly shrill - and
one could easily find other faults with the novel as well. Several members of
the supporting cast verge on caricature -the mothers of Anne and her cousin are
little but manipulative, whiny biddies; and Rory Gaffney comes perilously close
to being a comic-strip villain. Withheld secrets are shamelessly used to propel
the plot, and unlikely coincidences abound.

That said, however, ''Mohawk'' remains an immensely readable and sympathetic
novel, a novel that attests to its author's considerable ambition and talent.
Mr. Russo has an instinctive gift for capturing the rhythms of small-town life -
the way its heavy atmospheric pressure can slowly drain people of their hopes
and dreams; the way its monotonous routines can lull them into passive
acquiescence. And he uses his eager gift of sympathy and his fluency with
old-fashioned, omniscient narration to burnish his people's lives with resonance
and meaning. With the exception of young Randall, none of his major characters
are particularly introspective or articulate, and yet Mr. Russo manages to
convey to us their essential decency and resilience in the face of loss - giving
us an appreciation of their fortitude and wit, as well as their weaknesses and
pain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Russo (Jerry Bauer)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Says Chinese Assaulted a Village

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 147 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 15


The Vietnamese press agency said today that Chinese forces, backed by the
heaviest shelling in months, had repeatedly attacked a Vietnamese village.

The agency said that the Chinese were repulsed and that 90 intruders were
''wiped out.''

The agency, monitored in Bangkok, said about 35,000 artillery and mortar rounds
pounded a village in Vi Xuyen district of Ha Tuyen Province Tuesday and that
Chinese soldiers attacked the village three times in the early afternoon.

The claim could not be independently confirmed. Most Western diplomats believe
that while Vietnam and China occasionally clash along their common border, both
sides exaggerate the scale of the fighting.

The frontier has been tense since early 1979, when China mounted a 17-day,
limited invasion of Vietnam because of Hanoi's invasion of Cambodia and the
ouster of the pro-Peking Khmer Rouge Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 928 words


THE TEARS OF THE WHITE MAN:

Compassion as Contempt. By Pascal Bruckner. Translated by William R. Beer. 244
pages. Free Press. $17.95. PASCAL BRUCKNER is a prodigy of polemic. In ''The
Tears of the White Man,'' his first book to be published in the United States,
the French writer exercises his gifts on members of the intelligentsia who go
gaga over the third world while denigrating the West. Although his examples are
drawn from his own country, beginning with Jean-Paul Sartre, his case has
applicability to the United States as well, as William R. Beer, who did the
translation, points out in an introduction. Mr. Beer notes that lacking a
colonial past to feel guilty about, a portion of the American left has used
American Indians, blacks, young people and women in much the way that some
French leftists have used the inhabitants of their former colonies as weapons in
an assault on Western values and culture.

Mr. Bruckner, who confesses he was for a time one of the ''third worldists''
whom he batters here, draws on his own experience to support his argument. He
identifies three overlapping types of third worldist: those who profess
solidarity with the entire Southern Hemisphere and take a ''we're all in it
together'' position; those who ooze compassion, which he calls the ''put
ourselves in their place'' line, and those who adopt a ''we are just like them''
pose.

Mr. Bruckner has a fine time demolishing exponents of each. He is particularly
hard on people who make no distinctions among the less developed societies, as
though they are all the same and exist mainly to allow Western intellectuals to
display their largeness of heart and disdain for their own cultures. He asks for
a spirit of friendliness and respect for specific nations grounded in affection
for one's own nation and understanding of others.

Mr. Bruckner observes: ''Calling attention to the problems of famine in the
world can be a good or a bad thing. It can be good if it is practical, precise,
and calls for effective action in particular situations.'' He does not believe,
for example, that the way to address starvation in Africa is for residents of
wealthy countries to hold hands or to eat less meat, refreshing though such
activities may be to plump bodies and consciences.

The solidarity stance, he notes, was used especially during the Vietnam war -
which Mr. Bruckner does not defend - as a means of attacking the United States,
long a favored target of the French left. He writes: ''We could take shelter
beneath her nuclear umbrella at the same time that we scolded her for
threatening peace. We could profit from the cultural, economic, and financial
benefits of an alliance with her at the same time we denounced her hold on
Europe.''

He observes that while every blunder or misdemeanor of the Western democracies
is criticized in French intellectual circles as a demonstration of greed or
decadence, the deficiencies of the former colonies are typically ''explained.''
In Mr. Bruckner's tart words: ''The remorseless and self-righteous critic who
endlessly denounces the deceptions of parliamentary democracy is suddenly rapt
with admiration before the atrocities committed in the name of the Koran, the
Vedas, the Great Helmsman, or negritude.'' An understanding attitude is adopted
even toward such manifestations of third-world culture as ''cannibalism in one
tribe, stoning of adulterous women or the amputation of thieves' hands in Moslem
countries, the sexual mutilation of young girls in Africa and the Middle East,
and the segregation and massacre of 'untouchables' in India.''

Lest anyone charge him with pulling his punchlines, he goes on: ''The people we
expected to be resurrected have turned into jailers, torturers, mass murderers,
and perpetrators of butchery, as if independence for people meant mostly the
right of people to kill their own, with their own weapons, and under their own
flag!'' And he asks, ''When will the United Nations admit that anti-Western
hatred and anti-white racism are crimes against humanity?''

As you may have gathered, Mr. Bruckner is not averse to overkill. He generalizes
liberally, laying on all his opponents the extravagant statements of a few and
lumping leftists together much as some of them lump together the third-world
countries. And he is often carried away by his own language. He can't resist a
metaphor, even though he has made the point already, more than once.

The images, however, are what give his essays their glitter. He writes of
''hemophiliacs in love with human suffering, ready to bleed for any cause.'' He
says some liberals ''would like to see us bathe in remorse like so many
French-fried potatoes.'' He has most fun at the expense of the Westerners,
apparently like himself in a former incarnation, who used to make pilgrimages to
the East in quest of wisdom. He derides the search for gurus and ashrams, for
''a Rube Goldberg mix'' of Reich, Jesus, Buddha, Freud, Krishna and Gandhi, as
''the Club Med of the mind.''

Mr. Bruckner observes sharply that some forms of anticolonialism are akin to
old-style colonialism: ''The conclusion is that the developing countries, with
no capacity to govern themselves, are innocent of their own sufferings. They are
denied national sovereignty, denied local power, and even denied moral
responsibility.''

''The Tears of the White Man,'' though no model of moderation or fount of
fairness, bubbles with truths that some Western intellectuals are still
reluctant to utter. Rarely have they been uttered as pungently and passionately.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Pascal Bruckner (Denis Roche)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE SCREEN: 'COMBAT SHOCK'

BYLINE: By Vincent CAnby

SECTION: Section C; Page 35, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 246 words


''COMBAT SHOCK,'' which opens today at the U.A.

Twin, is a movie of such breathtaking primitivism that it's not easy to tell how
much is the result of lack of experience and how much is intentional.

Shot mostly, it seems, on Staten Island (including some of its Vietnam War
footage), ''Combat Shock'' is a stark tale of a shellshocked Vietnam vet at the
end of his rope. Frankie (Ricky Giovinazzo) has a nagging wife, a monster child
that looks like a puppet out of ''Star Wars,'' no job, no money and no
prospects. When he walks around his old neighborhood, he finds nothing but drug
pushers, addicts and preteen-age prostitutes. He has trouble attending to the
terrible present because his mind keeps flashing back to Vietnam, where he may
or may not have initiated a massacre like the one at My Lai.

''Combat Shock'' means to be shocking but it more often prompts giggles. You
don't often see movies as passionately, sincerely misguided as this. It was
produced, written, edited and directed by Buddy Giovinazzo. It seems to have
been a family venture.

FLASHBACKS - COMBAT SHOCK, directed, written, edited and produced by Buddy
Giovinazzo; director of photography, Stella Varveris; music by Ricky Giovinazzo;
released by Troma Inc. At U.A. Twin, Broadway at 49th Street.

Running time: 88 minutes. This film is rated R. Frankie Dunlan...Ricky
Giovinazzo; Cathy Dunlan...Veronica Stork; Paco...Mitch Maglio; Labo...Aspah
Livni; Morbe...Nick Nasta;Mike...Mike Tierno.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 18, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTIONS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 44 words


A United Nations dispatch on Oct. 1 about a speech by Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
who heads the exiled coalition fighting to oust the Vietnamese from Cambodia,
misstated the figure he used for Vietnamese settlers in Cambodia. He said there
were more than 700,000.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 18, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Allan Gerdau Is Dead; Took Ads for Opinions

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 272 words


Allan Gerdau, the president of an international trading company who placed a
number of newspaper advertisments expressing his opinions on public issues over
two decades, died Monday, of complications resulting from a stroke two months
ago, at the Glen Hill Convalescent Home in Danbury, Conn. He was 87 years old
and lived in West Redding, Conn.

Mr. Gerdau, who was born in Stamford, Conn., headed the Otto Gerdau Company, a
New York importer and exporter named for his father. He joined the company in
1915.

His first half-page advertisment, on Sept. 28, 1967, in The New York Times,
replied to an advertisement by a California clothing manufacturer who had asked
President Lyndon B. Johnson not to seek renomination in hopes that a successor
could end the Vietnam War. Mr. Gerdau's response urged friendly discussion. It
said, in part:

''Our opponents do not expect to beat us on the battlefield. They hope to beat
us with your unwitting aid and the aid of those who try to win others to your
belief.''

Mr. Gerdau said in an interview about his $3,400 ad, ''I'm not a flag-waving
person, but sometimes one just has to stand up.''

An advertisement in 1981 urged striking air controllers to apologize to the
President and return to work. Last year he suggested to South Africans, black
and white, that they overcome their differences through love and set an example
for the world.

His wife, the former Florence Ruperti, died in 1981.

Surviving are four daughters, Alane Saavedra of Manhattan, Nancy Graves of
Fairfield, Conn., Pamela Griffin of Bethesda, Md., and Joan Rogers of Newtown,
Conn., and six grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 18, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

The Top Democrat

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 504 words


Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., master politician, is headed home. As the clock finally
runs out on the 99th Congress, the Speaker of the House closes out a career that
began with the 83d. Tip O'Neill has been more than Speaker; in the Reagan years,
he has been the Democrats' national spokesman, doggedly pressing his fractured
party's concerns for the underdog. Equally important, he has been in the
forefront of the effort to (small-d) democratize the House. Both efforts crown a
half-century of public service with distinction.

Mr. O'Neill was born to partisan politics. His father, a bricklayer, sat on the
Cambridge, Mass., City Council and picketed Harvard for hiring non-union
construction workers. The son mowed the lawns of Harvard Yard for pocket money,
savoring the contrast last month when he spoke as an honored guest at the
university's 350th anniversary.

Elected to the Massachusetts legislature in 1936 at age 23, he became its
youngest Speaker at 37. He succeeded to John F. Kennedy's seat in the U.S. House
of Representatives in 1952, and was quickly steered to the leadership ladder by
Representative John McCormack of Boston, later Speaker himself.

In the 1960's, Mr. O'Neill was one of the first in Congress to break with his
President and longtime colleague, Lyndon Johnson, on Vietnam. In the 1970's he
bravely broke with the House establishment on the sensitive issue of personal
power, taking a lead in reforms that stripped committee chairmen of their
autarchic grip on legislation. Having thus given individual members more say,
and the leadership more headaches, he was elected Speaker in 1977 and proceeded
to introduce more reforms -an ethics code, outside income limits and television
coverage of House proceedings.

When Republicans took the White House and the Senate in 1980, Mr. O'Neill was
suddenly the nation's ranking Democrat, chief defender against the new crowd's
assault on ''big government.'' Partisan Reaganites were delighted to have him as
a stereotypical foil - the bulky old Boston Irish pol who rumbled on cue against
their polished and popular President. He still rumbles, but the Republicans are
no longer delighted. Mixing sincerity with some good P.R., he has become a
formidable foe on stage as well as in the House.

Mr. O'Neill's defenses were devastated at first, when Southern ''boll weevil''
Democrats joined Republicans to form majorities for President Reagan's defense
buildup, tax reduction and cuts in social programs. When the Democrats gained
seats in 1982, Mr. O'Neill was able to resist better; but still, as he has
observed, ''In any other country, the Democrats would be five parties.''

Though the Speaker's office carries imposing institutional authority, Mr.
O'Neill added personal strength. Up against a strong President, he has adapted
to reality and forged unity in moderate opposition. Above all, he has fought
honorably to preserve the caring role of Government, to help people who can't
help themselves, casting shame on any who would abandon them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ORTEGA, FAULTING REAGAN, WARNS OF COMING WAR

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Oct. 18


President Daniel Ortega Saavedra condemned President Reagan as an
''international outlaw'' today for signing a law allowing $100 million of
American military assistance to go to Nicaraguan guerrillas.

Mr. Ortega also called on all Latin American countries to support Nicaragua
against what he called the coming rebel war and said the months ahead would be
filled with preparations to defend Nicaragua.

''The battle we will wage will be with rifles and millions of Nicaraguans with
rifles,'' Mr. Ortega said.

Mr. Ortega, speaking at a news conference, pledged a mass military mobilization
in Nicaragua and said the Government would immediately call for the United
Nations Security Council to be called into session. At the United Nations, he
said, he would seek condemnation of the $100 million of aid and would also
appeal to the Latin American countries that call themselves the Contadora group
and are seeking a negotiated settlement in Central America.

'A Law of Death'

''He has signed a law of death, a law of terrorism, a law to assassinate women
and children, to murder young people in Nicaragua,'' Mr. Ortega said of Mr.
Reagan. The $100 million was contained in an omnibus appropriation passed by
Congress Friday night and signed into law by Mr. Reagan today.

Responding to a question, Mr. Ortega appeared to indicate that Nicaragua would
not attack rebel camps in Honduras but would continue to seek a judgement
against Honduras before the International Court of Justice. Mr. Ortega added
that Nicaragua continued to ''reserve the right'' to buy offensive military
aircraft, which he said it does not now possess.

But he said that offensive military aircraft were not the most important weapon
that the Government would use, adding that the war ahead would be fought by
millions of Nicaraguans armed with rifles.

When Congress voted to approve new military assistance to the Nicaraguan rebels
three months ago, the Nicaraguan Government responded with a crackdown on
perceived internal critics. It closed La Prensa, the opposition newspaper, and
expelled two leading Roman Catholic church officials who had been critical of
the Sandinista revolution.

Crackdown Not Ruled Out

Mr. Ortega did not signal today that a wider crackdown on perceived internal
critics might be in the offing, but neither did he rule it out.

Speaking about what he referred to as growing American intervention in
Nicaragua, Mr. Ortega attacked Mr. Reagan for approving military aid that he
said could lead to a ''regional war.'' He added that Nicaragua did not ''want to
be killing North Americans'' but pledged that if American troops are sent to
Nicaragua they would be fought with all means available.

''If there is an intervention by U.S. military troops they will have the same
destiny they had in Vietnam,'' Mr. Ortega said.

Mr. Ortega pledged that Nicaragua would pursue all diplomatic and legal means,
as well as military measures, to defend itself in the months ahead.

Referring to an American captured from a rebel supply plane downed in Nicaragua,
Eugene Hasenfus, Mr. Ortega said that a trial would begin on Monday. He said Mr.
Reagan was to blame for Mr. Hasenfus's plight.

'The Godfather Is Ronald Reagan'

''We are not at all interested in getting even with Mr. Hasenfus, but simply in
seeing justice done,'' Mr. Ortega said. ''There must be justice in this case,
but we are all very clear that the godfather is Ronald Reagan and Mr. Hasenfus
and two North Americans who died here were no more than salaried employees.''

Two American pilots and an unidentified Latin American died in the rebel supply
plane, in which Mr. Hasenfus served as a crew member.

Mr. Ortega said that Mr. Hasenfus's trial, to be held in a special ''people's
tribunal'' that is used here for political crimes, would not be affected by the
signing by Mr. Reagan of the $100 million program to aid rebels fighting in
Nicaragua.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHILE ARMS CACHES ARE LAID TO CUBA

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 21, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Oct. 18


United States weapons experts have accused Cuba of providing the arms found
hidden in several caches in Chile recently. The experts say the amount of
weapons was too large for Chilean guerrillas to have acquired on their own.

In a summary of a study made available to reporters by Reagan Administration
officials recently, the experts said the weapons appeared to be part of
''sophisticated plans for a protracted conflict, rather than for a series of
quick, hit-and-run operations designed to harass'' Chilean Government forces.

The unidentified experts who prepared the study said about 70 tons of munitions,
including more than 3,300 American-made M-16 rifles and more than two million
rounds of ammunition, was the largest clandestine leftist arsenal ever found in
this hemisphere.

The arms, much of which are now stacked in a vast storeroom at the century-old
War Arsenals complex in Santiago, were found buried at 10 sites from early
August through early September. Most of the places were around the southern edge
of the Atacama Desert, about 400 miles north of Santiago.

Soviet Role Assumed

Robert S. Gelbard, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for South America, said
in a telephone interview that the United States considered the discovery of the
arms a sign of a ''major threat to the hemisphere.'' He said American officials
intended to raise the issue with the Soviet Government.

''We feel very strongly about this,'' he said. ''We know it is Cuba who did it,
and we assume the Soviet Union is behind it.''

Mr. Gelbard said the United States intended to prevent Chile from becoming ''the
site of an East-West confrontation.'' He said the Soviet Union and Cuba were
being ''very provocative'' and appeared to be seeking such a confrontation here.

Mr. Gelbard also said copies of the arms report were sent this week to 30 to 40
governments in Latin America, Europe and Asia.

Mostly U.S.-Made Arms

According to an inventory provided by the Chilean intelligence service, the
Center for National Information, the arms cache included 3,383 used M-16 rifles,
more than two million rounds of 5.56-millimeter ammunition for the rifles, 117
Soviet-made rocket launchers, 179 American-made light antitank weapons, about
2,000 rocket-propelled grenades, tons of explosives and miscellaneous other
weapons and ammunition.

The serial numbers of all but 18 of the M-16's had been filed off, the report
said. But United States officials said checks made on 10 of those rifles traced
them to guns sent to South Vietnam from 1967 to 1969. After the fall of the
Saigon Government in 1975, large numbers of the rifles fell into the hands of
the Hanoi Government.

Most of the antitank weapons and much of the rifle ammunition was made in the
early 1970's and was also among arms sent to American and South Vietnamese
forces, the experts said. Most of the Soviet-bloc equipment was made more
recently, they said, including the 2,000 grenades, which were made in Bulgaria
in 1984.

''The cost of the weapons found and the logistical problems associated with
moving them probably put an effort of this scale beyond the resources of any
Chilean terrorist group acting independently,'' the study said.

Cuba Called Supplier

It added, ''Hanoi has not sold its captured U.S. ordnance to private dealers,
and information regarding the other Latin American countries where these arms
have turned up points to Cuba as the regional supplier.''

The experts said the discovery of Vietnam-era weapons fit a pattern of arms
found since 1980 in the hands of leftist fighters in Central America, Colombia
and Jamaica.

Chilean military intelligence officers said in recent interviews that they
believed the arms were linked to a plan, backed by the Soviet Union, Cuba and
Nicaragua, to place in Chile large numbers of leftist exiles trained to lead an
insurrection. They said the weapons were intended for the Manuel Rodriguez
Patriotic Front, the larger of the two Marxist-Leninist guerrilla groups in
Chile, the other being the Leftist Revolutionary Movement.

Although conceding that he, like American officials, was surprised to find so
many weapons, one of the Chilean officers said the quantity was ''relative to
the interest of the Soviet Union in Chile historically.''

President Also Heads Army

The President of Chile, Gen. Augusto Pinochet, who also commands the army, has
long contended that Chile is a special target of Marxism-Leninism globally
because it is ''the only nation that threw off the Communist yoke.'' His
allusion is to the 1973 coup against President Salvador Allende Gossens.

The Chilean intelligence officers said a major use of the hidden weapons was to
have been for 200 to 230 exiles who had returned to Chile in recent years. They
said the exiles had undergone military training in Nicaragua or Cuba and that
more were being trained.

The American experts said guerrilla training schools were also found at some of
the locations. Their report said this was another indication that the insurgents
planned a ''long-term effort to build up the ability to seriously confront the
Chilean security forces.''

Until now, leftist guerrillas in Chile had been considered capable of mounting
only isolated acts of violence, such as blowing up electric towers, not of
organizing an armed insurrection.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VETERAN FLEW NEAR PRESIDENT

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 35, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 188 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


The fighter pilot who intruded in Air Force One's airspace is a combat veteran
who said he took evasive action after a bad radio transmission caused him to
miss a first warning, a New York National Guard official said today.

The incident occurred as President Reagan was flying from Washington to North
Dakota for a campaign appearance. On the trip back to Washington, the
Presidential jet climbed 900 feet, to 29,900 feet, when there was a problem with
the plane's altitude hold function.

In the first incident, the pilot of the F-4C fighter plane, Col. James Cook, and
his co-pilot, Lieut. Col. James Burdick, were flying from their Air National
Guard base in Niagara Falls, N.Y., to an air show at Tyndall Air Force Base,
Fla., at 9:45 A.M. Friday when they approached Air Force One 31,000 feet over
Ellwood City, Pa., said Maj. P. C. Kutschera, an Air Force spokesman.

Colonel Cook heads the 107th fighter-interceptor group at Niagara Falls, and
Colonel Burdick is head of operations.

Major Kutschera described Colonel Cook as ''an experienced senior air
commander'' who flew combat missions in Korea and Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM DEATHS WITNESS SAYS HE WARNED OF DANGER

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 38, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 18


A fire safety officer who was on the set of ''Twilight Zone: The Movie'' has
testified that he told his supervisor before a helicopter crashed and killed
three people that he ''felt certain'' that disaster was imminent.

The firefighter Richard Ebentheuer, who is retired, testified on Wednesday that
he based his concern on the aircraft's proximity to special effects explosions
in the filming of a scene three hours before the July 23, 1982, crash in which
the actor Vic Morrow and two children were killed.

Mr. Ebentheuer said he expressed his anxiety to a supervisor on the movie set,
George Hull, and that Mr. Hull suggested he speak to the filmmakers.

''I chose not to,'' Mr. Ebentheuer testified, adding that he told Mr. Hull,
''it's your responsibility.''

Mr. Hull is expected to testify later in the trial, which has ended its sixth
week of testimony.

Four-Year-Old Report

Meanwhile, a report by the Los Angeles County Fire Department on the crash was
released to the District Attorney's office Thursday, more than four years after
the report was completed.

The Fire Department report attributed the cause of the crash to the ''careless
attitude'' and ''poor judgment'' on the part of ''virtually all of those
involved in planning the film.'' The report has not yet been introduced as
evidence.

Facing involuntary manslaughter charges in the trial are John Landis, who
directed the movie, George Folsey Jr., an associate producer, Dan Allingham, the
unit production manager, Paul Stewart, the special effects coordinator, and
Dorcey Wingo, the helicopter pilot.

Mr. Morrow, who was 53 years old, and the two children, Myca Dinh Le, 7, and
Renee Shinn Chen, 6, were killed when the helicopter crashed on top of them amid
special effects explosions in the filming of a Vietnam war scene at Indian Dunes
Motorcycle Park, 40 miles north of Los Angeles.

Mr. Ebentheuer's testimony Wednesday occurred in a hearing out of the presence
of the jury. The hearing was requested by defense lawyers, who said they had not
been given an opportunity to interview Mr. Ebentheuer.

None 'Voiced Any Concern'

Also in the hearing, Mr. Ebentheuer testified that when he told a fire inspector
preparing a report on the crash about his conversation with Mr. Hull, the
inspector told him that details of the discussion ''should not be let out.''

The inspector, DeWitt Morgan, had testified on Tuesday before the jury that none
of the six fire safety officers at the filming ever ''voiced any concern'' to
him about possible danger.

Mr. Ebentheuer's concern was not included in the report Mr. Morgan prepared on
the crash that was entered as evidence on Tuesday. In that report, dated Aug. 3,
1982, Mr. Morgan stated that the fire safety officers told him ''nothing
unexpected happened'' on the set of ''Twilight Zone: The Movie'' in relation to
special effects explosions.

Lawyers for the defense reacted angrily to the apparent discrepancy between the
testimony of Mr. Morgan and Mr. Ebentheuer.

Accusation of Misconduct

They accused Lea Purwin D'Agostino, the deputy district attorney, of misconduct
for not telling them prior to Mr. Morgan's testimony about the information that
was later elicited from Mr. Ebentheuer.

Mrs. D'Agostino said Wednesday that she did not intentionally withhold the
evidence from the lawyers.

But Judge Roger W. Boren of Los Angeles Superior Court, agreed with defense
lawyers that Mrs. D'Agostino had been ''less than candid'' in turning evidence
over to the lawyers.

The judge ordered Mr. Morgan back to the witness stand on Thursday in another
hearing away from the jury.

Mr. Morgan then testified that he did not recall Mr. Ebentheuer telling him
about the conversation with Mr. Hull on the set of the movie.

Mr. Morgan also said he did not recall telling Mr. Ebentheuer that his
conversation with Mr. Hull ''should not be let out.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
'Peggy Sue' Visits A Changeless Past

BYLINE: BY VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2015 words


One of the funnier of the random jokes -which surface like debris from a sunken
lifeboat during ''Peggy Sue Got Married'' - recalls the Ford Motor Company's
disastrous attempt to create a market for what turned out to be the automobile
industry's most colossal dud.

Peggy Sue (Kathleen Turner), unhappily married and approaching middle age, finds
herself magically returned to 1959-1960, her high school senior year, with the
ability to look at the past from the point of view of a commonsensical 1985
woman. Toward the middle of the film, Peggy's Sue's father turns up at the house
with a surprise for the family - a big, gleaming, brand-new car. While her
mother and younger sister are sliding their fingers along the shiny finish of
their latest status symbol, cooing their approvals, Peggy Sue says sadly, as if
speaking from the beyond, ''Oh, Dad, you were always doing things like this. You
bought an Edsel!''

It's a nice moment. It's also somewhat more revealing than it probably means to
be.

What is most interesting about ''Peggy Sue Got Married,'' and about other movies
that look fondly back to the supposedly more innocent 1950's and 1960's, is that
the world they recall isn't appreciably different from the one presently
inhabited by the movie makers who are looking back so fondly.

The Edsel, with its chrome ''horse-collar'' on its radiator, bracketed by two
other smaller, equally pointless grilles, struck most of us at the time as ugly
and ungainly, a perfect example of the dead end of Detroit's commitment to
design for its own sake. Yet today, the Edsel doesn't look so bad or, at least,
so eccentric. Only the name remains a clear-cut joke.

Today's automobiles, clothes, manners, movies and television are variations on
fashions and technology set in the post-World War II era. Thus the past, as it's
perceived by these film makers with some accuracy, is not ''the foreign
country'' recalled by L. P. Hartley in ''The Go-Between.'' It is familiar,
unthreatening and soothing, in contrast to the world that could be seen by movie
makers looking back through the decades before World War II.

What's missing is not necessarily a sense of history -today's film makers are
probably better educated than any have been since movies were invented - but an
appreciation of the past as it differs from the present, which is, I suppose, an
awareness of mortality. One tends to forget such things after 40 years of living
in even the precarious equilibrium we've experienced since World War II.

The manner in which we perceive the past determines how we perceive the present
and the future. This possibly explains the utterly bland, incurably optimistic
timelessness of so many of our commercial movies today - of everything from the
foul-mouthed, sometimes rudely funny ''Porky's'' comedies to the gung-ho heroics
of something like ''Top Gun.'' It's a conspiracy between film makers, who may or
may not be post-World War II babies, and the young audiences they're attempting
to please.

Life in the 1959-1960 America recalled by ''Peggy Sue Got Married'' differs only
in superficial style from the 1955 America of ''Back to the Future,'' the 1962
America of ''American Graffiti'' or even the 1986 America of ''Ferris Bueller's
Day Off.''

Compared to the four decades that ended in 1950, which witnessed unprecedented
social, political, economic and technological upheavals, the nearly four decades
since have been a time of virtual stasis. Refinement of existing technology and
the development of the micro-chip have allowed us to explore space, put men on
the moon, create a collective, computerized memory, build supersonic planes and
devise ever more compact television sets, which, via satellites, can now receive
signals from anywhere in the world. These innovations have radically changed our
daily habits. However, they've not required that we change our view of the
world, or our view of our place in it, in any of the ways comparable to the
changes effected by two World Wars, the triumph of Communism in Russia, the
airplane, women's suffrage, the Depression, radio, television, the telephone and
automobile as ways of life, the splitting of the atom and the possibility of
global annihilation.

All of these things were firmly in place by 1950. They had become a part of our
culture. They are the substance of the living memories of everyone who was born
between the two great wars, and who thus sees the past quite differently from
the way his children do.

The ''past,'' to anyone born after World War II, is rather like an Edsel - sort
of quaint but, in its essentials, not very different from the present. The world
appears fixed in time, in a continuing, idealized, largely trouble-free present
- that is, as the present is reflected not in the daily news reports, but in the
fiction of our movies and television series.

Compare the Depression as it's seen in Steven Spielberg's ''Color Purple,'' set
on a Georgia farm where the corn remains harvest-ripe year-round (and seems to
pick itself), with the Depression that Robert Benton remembers in ''Places in
the Heart,'' set on a small Texas farm where, in contrast to ''The Color
Purple,'' the crops have to be sown and reaped by hand. Each film is, in its
way, romantic, though the Spielberg film is sentimental and the other isn't.

The differences between the two movies have less to do with the ages of the
directors (Mr. Spielberg was born in 1947 and Mr. Benton in 1932), than in the
kind of film each man elected to make. Mr. Spielberg sees the past in the glowy,
soft-focus images of the great Hollywood studio films of the 1930's, 1940's and
1950's. Mr. Benton's images are gritty. They're firsthand recollections of a
particular time and place.

There were several years in the late 1960's and early early 1970's when it
seemed as if the Vietnam War would toss overboard the soothing notion that our
times were unchanging. However, the history of the war, and of the violent
public reaction against it, now appears to have been so effectively rewritten -
at least, by hugely popular movies like ''Rambo'' and ''Missing in Action'' -
that a worrisome defeat has been turned into victory. The major event of the
post-World War II era has not been forgotten. It's been accommodated as an
unpleasantness with a happy ending.

One of the sure-fire gags in ''Back to the Future'' (which has more or less the
same plot as ''Peggy Sue Got Married'' and is far more coherent) occurs when
Michael J. Fox, as a time traveler visiting 1955, sees a theater marquee
announcing ''Cattle Queen of Montana'' starring Ronald Reagan. When the Fox
character reports that the star will be President one day, his friend replies,
''Yeah, and Jerry Lewis will be vice president.''

The gag works in several ways. It's funny because (1) the friend obviously
thinks Mr. Fox is nuts, (2) most of us are still somewhat amazed that an actor
could become not only President, but also a President of such popularity, and
(3) the President we see on television today seems not to have changed at all
from the man who made ''Cattle Queen of Montana'' 31 years ago. In the President
we have the personification of the post-World War II perception of past. It's
something immutable that has extended to the present and, for all we know, will
continue on into a never-ending future.

The Korean War began in 1950, but it didn't really change the course of the
lives of those Americans who weren't directly involved. The Korean War was
played in the wings while, onstage, the country got on with its business, which
was the business of realizing the potential of the extraordinary industrial
machine that had come into being in World War II.

The United States Supreme Court's rulings against racial segregation during the
Eisenhower Administration, backed by members of the newly militant civil rights
movements, modified, if slowly, the discrimination against non-whites in the
late 1950's and 1960's. This is probably one of the most far-reaching post-World
War II social phenomena. In show business, Harry Belafonte and Sidney Poitier
paved the way. Today Eddie Murphy and Bill Cosby are two of the biggest names in
movies and television. Whether Mr. Murphy and Mr. Cosby have achieved their
success by significantly altering the system or by fitting into it is something
that's still being debated.

Between 1910 and 1950, fashions in manners, clothes, speech and the popular arts
reflected momentous social, political, economic and technological changes. After
the First World War, women, who had become a part of the labor force and then
had won the vote in 1924, bobbed their hair and showed knees (preferably dimpled
and sometimes rouged) that, before the war, had been discreetly covered, even on
the beach.

Novelists wrote explicitly about sex. In ''Strange Interlude'' Eugene O'Neill
portrayed a woman who achieved happiness by taking four men as one. Men swore in
front of women, who freely swore back. Movies, under the paternal guidance of
the old Production Code, set some minor fashions but, most of the time, followed
them.

Hemlines dropped in the 1930's, went up a bit during World War II (to save
material, it was said), then crashed again, almost to the ankles, in 1947, when
Dior devised the ''new look,'' supposedly to use the cloth that was suddenly
available to civilians. After World War II, a large portion of the American
population - buying cars first, houses second - became nomads. If they didn't
move from one city to the next, they moved to the suburbs, setting up the
conditions that were later to result in the boom in suburban shopping malls and
the devastation of center-city areas.

Conditions haven't much changed since 1950 -they've simply become more clearly
defined. With the demise of the Production Code in 1968, the characters in
movies now talk more like real people or, at least, the way movie makers think
real people talk, while real people, watching movies, think that that's the way
they should talk. Do movies set fashions or follow them? It's probably a bit of
both, but it would be difficult to prove conclusively.

In this period (three decades-plus) of stasis, fashions in manners, dress and
the popular arts seem to have become increasingly arbitrary and whimsical, like
the designs that originate in Detroit. It's change for the sake of change.
Television hasn't raised the living standards of the entire population, but it
seems to have homogenized aspirations, even the aspirations of citizens who
exist on marginal incomes. Everybody, at one time or another, would like to fly
the Friendly Skies to Hawaii.

Looking at ''Peggy Sue Got Married,'' you suddenly realize not how innocent the
old days were but how little our society has changed. However, someone traveling
back 25 years from 1939 would have a discovered an alien world. The recorded
music would sound tinny to the 1939 ear. The 1914 movies were silent and acted
with gestures left over from the 19th-century theater. Long-distance auto travel
was an adventure in courage on unmapped roads still to be paved.

In the 1960's, when Peggy Sue got married, Johnny Carson was on the air doing
what he does now. People have been conceived, born, raised, grown up, married
and divorced watching Johnny Carson. The only difference is that today the young
comedians and stand-up comics, who in 1960 might have been modeling themselves
on Mort Sahl, are now hoping to become Johnni Carson, more or less the way David
Brenner and Joan Rivers have.

Watching today's new television comedians, one may well suspect that one team of
writers is turning out all of the material. The subjects: living alone, making
out, fast-food, mother, dad, ugly boyfriends, ugly girlfriends. The given in
each case is that - because the members of the audience accept as unchanging the
nature of the world -the only thing to talk about is oneself.

When there's no sense of a past that's different from the present, this short
view of life - totally self-absorbed, referential only to other comedians - must
serve as the long.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Michael J. Fox and Kathleen Turner (Ralph Nelson)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
Real World Impinges on 'Miami Vice'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words


Occasionally, as in the case of a recent episode of ''Miami Vice,'' life seems
to end up imitating entertainment. It has been argued that television is the
Great Reflector, showing society at large where it is and where it might be
going. If the country begins taking closer looks at the problems of, say, drug
abuse or battered wives, those subjects are bound to begin popping up in TV
movies, the normal instance of art, or at least entertainment, imitating life.

At the same time, though, politicians consider TV newscasts crucial to the
molding of public opinion. It's hardly a secret, or a recent development, that
politicians attempt to influence the media to their advantage. The extent of the
Reagan Administration's success here is arguable, especially when viewed in the
accompanying but no less important context of popular entertainments, which,
anything but radical, are almost painstakingly middle-of-the-road in their
attitudes. They still aim to get the biggest possible audiences, and that means
not upsetting any significant portions of the population, left or right. ''Miami
Vice'' appeals to upwardly-mobile young adults and is therefore a favorite with
advertisers. Produced in the slick style of a music-video, the series is partial
to stories spun from news headlines, wrapping them in a hard-bitten tone
reminiscent of early Raymond Chandler.

On Friday evening, Oct. 3, the fiction of ''Miami Vice'' broached the very real
and controversial subject of Nicaragua. As any watcher of TV news knows well,
the Reagan Administration is openly hostile to Nicaragua's Sandinista
Government. It sees the anti-Sandinista rebels, the so-called Contras, as
''freedom fighters.'' What, then, were tens of millions of prime-time viewers to
make of the ''Miami Vice'' scenario that was portraying assorted fictional
Contra-supporting corporate and government leaders as, at best, scheming liars?
The story opened in what was supposed to be a rural village in Nicaragua. A
somewhat seedy freelance reporter named Ira Stone was able to film, on a small
home-movie camera, shots of Americans helping the anti-Sandinista rebels
slaughter the unarmed peasants and an American priest running to their aid.
Smuggling the film back into the States, Ira enlisted the help of his old friend
Crockett (Don Johnson), the Miami vice policeman, to protect him while he tried
to work out a deal with a local TV station. The ''smoking gun'' scoop would, Ira
believed, revive his sagging professional reputation.

At first skeptical about his flaky friend's latest adventure, Crockett was
converted when he found himself being followed and roughed up by formidable
looking men in business suits. ''Let's just say I'm a nephew of Uncle Sam,''
smirked one. Crockett was not eager to get involved, but Ira remained adamant:
''We're talking about reruns of Vietnam in Central America.'' Especially eager
to keep the film footage from becoming public were members of a select group,
''patriots all,'' called The Committee. The head of this organization, formed to
help the rebel Contras, was called William Maynard.Smudging the reality quotient
even further, Maynard was played by G. Gordon Liddy, once of Watergate fame. At
his arrogantly wild-eyed best, Mr. Liddy spat out lines like: ''You can't stop
the inevitable flow of history, Crockett.''

By hour's end, Crockett was discovering that the entire Miami police force was
unable to protect Ira from his determined enemies, who even had members of the
judiciary in their power. But after being captured and sadistically tortured by
Maynard and his henchmen, the dying Ira could be told - even as Maynard and a
new shipment of Contra mercenaries took off on a plane for the vicinity of
Nicaragua - that his story would indeed be told. Independent sources in the
United States had verified the death of the priest. It looked, after all, like
one of television's reasonably happy endings. But hold on. In a brief final
scene, listening to the radio by himself, Crockett heard that the priest was
indeed killed, but by the Sandinistas. The announcer blandly explained that the
''Contras vainly tried to stop the murder,'' adding: ''A United States protest
is expected.'' Crockett looked sadly off into the distance in a moment of
introspection rare for this action series.

A week later, of course, news headlines would tell of an American plane being
shot down in Nicaragua as it carried supplies to the Contras. The only survivor
is a 45-year-old former American Marine who said, with his captors standing by,
that he once worked as a civilian delivering supplies to a Central Intelligence
Agency operative in Southeast Asia. He reportedly said that he was being
supervised by a C.I.A. agent in El Salvador. Knowledge of the mission was
quickly denied by, among others, the C.I.A., the White House and Vice President
Bush. ''Miami Vice'' viewers, on the other hand, could be forgiven the
impression that G. Gordon Liddy had something to do with it. A week ago, the
returning ''Saturday Night Live'' series included a tongue-in-cheek report that
the entire thing was masterminded by Richard Nixon.

Humor helps, perhaps, but for those advocating the Reagan Administration's
Nicaraguan policies, something like the ''Miami Vice'' episode must be indeed
frustrating, even infuriating. There were no ''freedom fighters'' in this
scenario, only what Crockett referred to sneeringly as a ''mangy looking bunch''
of hired hands breaking the law. There was no high moral cause, only blatant
lying. The Administration's supporters might understandably look for the heavy
hand of ''left-wing propaganda'' in the fictional exercise. But, just as major
polls continue to find significantly muted public enthusiasm for Administration
policy on Nicaragua, ''Miami Vice'' may have gone accurately to the nation's
middle-of-the-road mood. Television as the Great Reflector could be wrong, or
perhaps more likely could be just about on target - at least in its
entertainments - in gauging the current extent of national skepticism.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of G. Gordon Liddy with Philip Michael Thomas in ''Miami Vice''
episode

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT THE PRESS DOES WHEN THE GOVERNMENT LIES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 562 words


To the Editor:

The mixture of state sovereignty and the foibles of individual actors has a
history in the perspective of which the flap about Libya disinformation (front
page stories, Oct. 3) makes the press appear either unbelievably naive or - and
I consider this much more probable - bollixed, like the rest of us, among
conflicting principles, loyalties and perceptions.

For instance, while the press presumably doesn't approve of any means to an end,
the press seems uncertain about which ends justify which means. Thus, your news
analysis [in some editions] quotes without comment Austin Ranney, a political
scientist, on disinformation: ''F.D.R. did it in World War II and L.B.J. during
Vietnam. But that was war.'' No connection is made to Secretary of State George
P. Shultz's statement (in the report of his calling the deception about Muammar
el-Quadaffi justified) that the United States was ''pretty darn close'' to a
state of war with Libya. And later in that article, Mr. Shultz quotes Winston
Churchill, ''In time of war the truth is so precious, it must be attended by a
bodyguard of lies.''

In general, there is a clear implication, which you appear to accept, that a
state of war justifies the use of disinformation. And yet, whether or not this
is true, no war was declared in the case of Libya, and there is widespread
agreement that acts of war will increasingly occur without a constitutional
declaration - Vietnam, Grenada, Lebanon, Nicaragua and the Bay of Pigs being
examples.

The press to all intents and purposes accepts the ''state of war'' justification
and often enough generalizes this to the notion that extreme situations justify
extreme measures. This is perhaps forgivable. When situations are defined as
dangers to national security or a peril to American lives, the dilemma can be
very real. Less forgivably, the press ignores the very basic principle that
political, economic and military power is also the power to define situations
and impose those definitions (e.g., there was no deal in connection with
Nicholas S. Daniloff, the Soviet shooting down of Korean Air Lines Flight 7 was
an act of pure barbarism and so on).

But this is only one of the conflicts with which the press, like the rest of us,
is confronted. Others are those between freedom and responsibility, between
obligations to humanity and patriotism, between protection and assiduous
cultivation of sources, between entertainment and analysis, between praise for
democratic freedom and recognition that this is the result of historical,
economic and geopolitical fortuities that have nothing to do with superior
virtue or sagacity.

The press rightfully abhors the rigid control of information symbolized by
totalitarianism, but it underplays the extent of control that can be achieved in
''the free world'' by power-based manipulation in general and by the
manipulation of freedom's appeal in particular.

Indeed, the press seldom comes to grips with the problems inherent in democratic
freedom itself. Was it not also Churchill who said something to the effect that
democracy is best described as the least bad form of government? This comes
close to an honorable acknowledgment of the inescapable conflicts that must be
faced up to by any serious observer of and participant in the human
condition.JOHN K. DICKINSON Bowdoinham, Me., Oct. 4, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A COMPASSIONATE CAMERA

BYLINE: BY CORNELL CAPA; Cornell Capa is the founding director of the
International Center of Photography in New York City.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 51, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 666 words


PHOTOGRAPHY'S ROLE in effecting social change has a distinguished record in the
United States. In the late 19th century, the muckraking journalist Jacob A. Riis
railed against slums and poverty. To prove the truth of what he wrote in The New
York Tribune, he took photographs. Lewis W. Hine's photographs exposed the
exploitation of children in the nation's textile mills; his images became
weapons in the hands of the National Child Labor Committee, and the result was a
Federal law enacted in 1938. In the 30's, Dorothea Lange's photographs of
dispossessed migrant farm workers pricked the nation's conscience. In 1944,
Ansel Adams exhibited his powerful photographs of interned Japanese-Americans in
New York's Museum of Modern Art; his book on the subject was titled ''Born Free
and Equal.''

In the 50's and 60's, many photographers followed the civil rights struggle. A
number gave their lives recording the war in Vietnam. Today we have the work of
Martin Schneider decrying air pollution, Ansel Adams and Eliot Porter for the
preservation of our national resources, and the many photographers who portray
the political and military struggles in Latin America and the Middle East, the
famine in Ethiopia and the Sudan, the unforgettable scenes of South Africa.

This week, Neugebauer Press is publishing ''Village Life: The Camphill
Communities.'' The book presents a collection of photographs depicting the
communal life of the mentally handicapped residents and volunteer staff at the
five Camphill Villages in the United States. The villages (there are three for
mentally handicapped adults, one for young adults and one for school-age
children) are autonomous, each an effort to create a therapeutic environment,
where residents live and work together and provide their own services according
to their needs and capabilities. They are home to about 700 people, among them
the staff members who took the pictures. Their subjects are caught engrossed in
their activities. The simple, emotive portraits reflect calm and fulfillment.

My own involvement with the mentally handicapped began in 1953, when, as a
photojournalist for Life magazine, I was asked, along with the writer Maya
Pines, to cover the lives of the retarded in their homes and in hospitals. What
we found then was a world of social and medical ignorance. With the exception of
one bright light - Southbury Training School, a state-run facility still extant
in Connecticut -we found institutions that were little more than warehouses for
those considered unteachable. Our project resulted in a two-part Life essay and
a modest book with the prosaic title ''Retarded Children Can Be Helped.''

At the time, I was unaware that a pertinent social movement already existed. The
Camphill movement had been initiated on the eve of World War II, when a group of
European refugees, followers of the Austrian philosopher/scientist/educator
Rudolf Steiner, settled on an estate in northeastern Scotland. There they
created a new kind of environment for the care and treatment of retarded
children. The movement was introduced in this country in 1961, with the
establishment of a village in Copake, N.Y. Now with 250 residents, it is the
largest of the villages here. Overall, there are 70 Camphill communities on four
continents.

In the 50's, I intended my work to raise public awareness of the plight of the
mentally handicapped. The new book, ''Village Life,'' takes me back 30 years,
the photographs proving again the prosaic slogan, ''The retarded can be
helped.'' It is gratifying to see a new generation of handicapped living
fruitful lives.

The movement continues to expand. In the last five years two new villages have
begun in North America, in rural Minnesota and just outside Toronto. Still,
compared to the number in need, those that can yet be accommodated are few. Thus
it is my hope that as the Camphill tradition is perpetuated, so may these
photographs help perpetuate the reformist tradition of the art.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Camphill residents and volunteers (Cornelius Pietzner;
Charles Carolson; Steven Rasch)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BATTLE OVER DRUG TESTING

BYLINE: By IRVING R. KAUFMAN; Irving R. Kaufman is a judge on the United States
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, which he has served as chief judge. In
July 1983, President Reagan appointed him chairman of the President's Commission
on Organized Crime.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 52, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4572 words


ALL OVER AMERICA, THE scenario is being acted out with increasing frequency.

The players are remarkably diverse - an office manager in San Francisco, a
police officer in Boston, even a Cabinet officer in the White House. Each of
these individuals, and thousands more, has been asked to take a drug test at
work. Some have acquiesced; others have refused. Those who have not yet
confronted the issue personally would be well advised to consider it, for drug
testing is shaping up as the premier issue in labor relations for the next
decade.

''Scarcely any political question arises in the United States which is not
resolved sooner or later into a judicial question,'' said Alexis de Tocqueville.
Drug testing, for better or worse, is once again proving the veracity of the
axiom. Opponents of drug testing in the workplace have pleaded their case not
only on editorial pages but in the courtroom, where, typically, they denounce
the practice as an invasion of privacy. The legal verdict remains uncertain, but
it should be evident that drug testing is not a clear-cut issue; it may assume a
multiplicity of forms in a variety of contexts, and nothing is served by
reducing the debate to a series of slogans.

On Sept. 15, President Reagan signed an executive order calling for drug testing
of a broad range of the Federal Government's 2.8 million civilian employees,
earmarking about $56 million for the undertak-ing in the first year. The
increased use of drug testing by governmental agencies and private employers -
more than a quarter of the Fortune 500 companies test job applicants - is part
of a larger trend in society's war on drug abuse, with a pronounced shift of
emphasis to the drug user. But to inquire whether someone is for or against drug
testing in the workplace is really to pose a question without content, the
variables are so great. Is the drug test to be administered to Government
workers - in which case the Fourth Amendment's protection from unreasonable
searches and seizures must be satisfied - or to employees in private industry?
Does a given company intend to test its employees at random or will a worker be
asked to submit to urinalysis only when he exhibits some sign of drug abuse? Are
employees to be included in the screening or only job applicants?

These important distinctions, however, have not prevented some employers and
civil liberties groups from adopting blanket positions on drug testing. Those in
favor insist that an employer has the right to demand a drug-free work force,
and point to diminished productivity, increased accidents and absenteeism as the
effects of drug abuse. Opponents of ''jar wars'' - the columnist William
Safire's appellation - challenge its constitutionality in the case of public
employees and its reliability in any context. More fundamentally, they claim
that employers are not simply concerned with performance, but with enforcing a
brand of morality; if an employee smokes a joint on the weekend, they reason, it
is no concern to management as long as he performs competently come Monday.

The President first hinted that a major policy shift was in the works on July
30, when he announced that he was considering widespread testing of Government
employees, extending the existing testing procedures of such agencies as the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the
Federal Aviation Administration, the Postal Service, the Drug Enforcement
Adminis-tration and the military services. At a press conference, the President
said he and his Cabinet had ''pretty much agreed that mandatory testing is
justified where the employees have the health of others and the safety of others
in their hands.'' He also urged that ''voluntary'' drug testing be considered
inside and outside the Government. As if to set an example, President Reagan and
Vice President Bush underwent urinalysis, and 78 members of the White House
senior staff were asked to participate in a ''voluntary testing.''

My experience as chairman of the President's Commission on Organized Crime,
which fulfilled its mandate and disbanded last March, taught me just how
sensitive a topic drug testing is with the public, and how quick the media can
be to jump to conclusions. The commission examined every activity of organized
crime, including money laundering, labor racketeering and misconduct by lawyers.
But one conclusion stood out from the rest: drug trafficking is the lifeblood of
organized crime, bringing in billions of dollars of revenues annually.
Accordingly, the commission was determined to bring before the public proposals
to combat drug abuse. The report we issued recommended that Federal agencies
implement policies aimed at reducing drug use among their employees and consider
including suitable drug-testing programs where appropriate. It was also
suggested that Government contracts not be awarded to companies that make no
effort to detect and eliminate drug abuse among their workers.

For the next few days, the press reported that the commission had come out in
favor of mandatory drug testing for all Federal employees, and that it had asked
the Government not to award contracts to private companies that do not
administer across-the-board drug screening under any circumstances. The fact is
the commission never intended to call for anything so severe. Above all, our
recommendations were intended to launch a national debate. With that debate now
full-blown, it would be inappropriate for me, as an active Federal judge, to
express my conclusions about the legality of various drug-testing practices.
Rather, my purpose here is to inform and to delineate the framework of the
current debate.

D RUG ABUSE HAS become an epidemic in America, so it should come as no surprise
that the problem has spilled over into the workplace. The National Institute on
Drug Abuse reports that 65 percent of those entering the work force have used
illegal drugs, 44 percent in the last year. In its study on drug trafficking,
the President's Commission on Organized Crime reported that 20 million Americans
use marijuana at least once a month and that 6 million use cocaine as often. A
study by the Research Triangle Institute, a North Carolina business-sponsored
research organization, found that drug use drained $60 billion from the nation's
economy in 1983.

In justifying drug testing, employers may cite the need for reliable performance
from those who hold the public safety in their hands, such as airline pilots and
nuclear power plant operators. Less dramatic rationales are offered when lives
do not hang in the balance. Employers may claim an interest in the health and
safety of employees, for instance, and the right to be free from the expense of
workers who are not doing their jobs properly.

But is this really all that is behind the increasing popularity of drug testing?
Some, like the columnist Charles Krauthammer, have suggested that this screening
is an attempt to improve behavior rather than production. Krauthammer labels
testing an ''extraordinary experiment in law enforcement,'' and regards it as a
''sinister'' form of ''disguised and benign'' social control. ''It carries the
threat of a real, material sanction, a sanction that hits you where it hurts,
but doesn't quite put you in jail,'' he writes. ''It jeopardizes your job, but
not your liberty. And is administered not by guys in blue suits with guns, but
in white coats and gloves - on orders not from a judge but from your boss.'' Ira
Glasser, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, echoes that
view.

The protests, however, have not dampened the enthusiasm of government and
business for drug testing. The precursor of all drug-detection programs was the
Department of Defense's move in the 1970's to identify and treat returning
Vietnam veterans addicted to heroin. Today, each branch of the military services
administers drug tests. Where the nation's defense is deemed at stake, the
courts have been most deferential. In the private sector, some of the most
prestigious companies in the country require job applicants to undergo
urinalysis - including Exxon, the International Business Machines Corporation,
Lockheed, Shearson Lehman Brothers, Federal Express, United Airlines, Trans
World Airlines, Hoffmann-La Roche, Du Pont, the American Telephone and Telegraph
Company and The New York Times. Peter Ueberroth, commissioner of baseball, has
made drug testing mandatory for players in the professional leagues, and the
National Football League recently announced plans to test players for drug use
three times a year.

The number of businesses that test not just applicants, but employees, is also
on the rise. Two Wall Street firms, Kidder, Peabody & Company, and Smith Barney,
Harris Upham & Company, recently became the first brokerage houses to check
employees for use of illegal drugs.

In the public sector, too, testing is catching on, not only in Federal agencies
but in a growing number of local police and fire departments. Last April,
Francis M. Roache, the Boston Police Commissioner, announced that he would
require the department's 2,400 employees to be tested for drugs at least once a
year. Police chiefs in Houston and Los Angeles are also pressing for authority
to conduct random drug tests.

Can the test results be trusted? A plethora of charges have been leveled against
the reliability of urinalysis, ranging from speculation that nasal sprays cause
positive results to allegations of built-in racial bias because of the
similarity between the chemical composition of the pigment melanin, found in
high levels in blacks and Hispanic people, and the active ingredient in
marijuana. Others claim that positive tests may result from passive inhalation
of marijuana smoke. But these assertions are spurious, according to J. Michael
Walsh and Richard L. Hawks of the National Institute on Drug Abuse. Drug
screening through urinalysis can be extremely accurate, they say, but much
depends on the quality-control procedures followed by the laboratory and on the
commitment to follow-up tests for all positive results.

The manufacturer of the most popular screening test, known as EMIT (Enzyme
Multiplied Immunoassay Technique) claims an accuracy rate of better than 95
percent under ideal circumstances. But opponents of testing maintain that even
the slimmest margin of error is unacceptable. They also fear that standards will
be lowered as laboratories compete for business and employers balk at expensive
confirmation assays.

The accuracy issue is far from settled. Apparently, there is truth to the
assertion that certain kinds of widely available medications react in the same
way as marijuana when analyzed. Syva, the manufacturer of the EMIT assay, warns
that certain anti-inflammatory drugs can cause a false positive for marijuana,
specifically the painkiller ibuprofen, found in Advil and other over-the-counter
products. In addition, a person who eats enough food containing poppy seeds,
which naturally contain morphine, could be surprised to find people asking
questions about his heroin habit. Dr. Walsh of the National Institute on Drug
Abuse, however, maintains that false positives can be virtually eliminated
through proper confirmation and quality-control procedures. Unconfirmed
positives, he emphasizes, should always be reported as negatives.

My expertise, however, is not as a scientist but as a judge. I turn, then, to
some of the emerging legal questions raised by drug testing, especially when it
is performed by the Government. The lawsuits have begun to reach the courts, but
it is still too early to say how the constitutional arguments will ultimately
fare.

Most of the legal issues surrounding drug screening in the workplace are in
flux, but participants in the current debate seem to agree on a few general
propositions. The first is that, unlike workers in private industry, Government
employees may claim (Continued on Page 64) the protection of the Fourth
Amendment's prohibition against unreasonable searches and seizures. The second
is that private employers are not subject to the Fourth Amendment's strictures
(although they may be subject to other legal constraints) because the Bill of
Rights restrains only the actions of Government officials or those acting
closely in concert with them. Any discussion of the constitutionality of testing
public employees for drugs, therefore, should begin with an examination of the
historical roots of the amendment.

The Fourth Amendment to the Constitution had its genesis in abuses suffered by
the colonists at the hands of Mother England. To protect its mercantile empire,
Parliament restricted trade between the colonies and areas outside the empire by
imposing prohibitive import duties on goods entering the colonies from outside
the empire. As a result, smuggling became widespread and was practiced by even
the most respectable colonists. John Hancock, for example, was accused of
smuggling in 1768. He defended himself on the ground that the import duty was a
form of taxation without representation.

The notorious Writ of Assistance was the principal enforcement mechanism for
collection of duty fees. The writ was essentially a general warrant for the
King's custom inspectors indiscriminately to search homes and warehouses in
order to insure that the Crown received all of the tribute to which it was
entitled. Today, the general search - its end, to ferret out evidence of a
crime; its means, virtually unrestricted - remains the paradigm of the kind of
governmental intrusion most reviled by the Fourth Amendment. The Fourth
Amendment teaches, then, that no matter how compelling the Government's need to
pursue a given policy, the individual's right to privacy must serve as a check.
As drug-testing programs begin to resemble the general search, their legitimacy
grows increasingly suspect.

The Fourth Amendment provides that the ''right of the people to be secure in
their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and
seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable
cause, supported by Oath, or affirmation, and particularly describing the place
to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.'' By its terms, the
amendment covers much more than the wholesale warehouse searches of the 18th
century. All searches pursuant to a warrant must be supported by probable cause,
and there is an independent requirement of reasonableness.

The landmark case of Boyd v. United States, decided in 1886, leaves no doubt
that a search may sometimes be reasonable even though conducted without a
validly issued warrant. For example, a police officer may search the area
immediately surrounding a lawfully arrested suspect for a weapon. Similarly, an
officer who observes suspicious conduct may stop and frisk a suspect if he has
reasonable grounds to believe the suspect is armed. But wholesale drug testing
of employees falls into a different category, for the tests are often
administered without suspicion of any particular individual, and the odds are
that any given person will be found free of drugs.

Under the emerging doctrine of the ''administrative search,'' however, courts
sometimes allow broad-scale searches to be conducted without a warrant or
individualized suspicion. Anyone who has flown on a commercial airline in the
last 15 years has been subjected to an administrative search in the form of a
cursory check of his person and belongings before boarding. These searches,
instituted by the Federal Aviation Administration pursuant to Presidential
order, fall within the ambit of the Fourth Amendment, but have been held
reasonable by the courts. The reasonableness inquiry turns on a balancing test
by the judge, who must weigh the urgency of the Government's reasons for
conducting the search against the constitutionally protected interest in ''the
sanctities of a man's home and the privacies of life.''

The United States Supreme Court first authorized an administrative search in
1967, in a case involving housing inspection. The Court found that inspectors
could assure compliance with the minimum standards of municipal codes only by
conducting periodic inspections of all structures. But, significantly, the Court
did require the inspectors to obtain inspection warrants before nonconsentual
entry of a building.

In 1972, in a case involving the inspection of gun dealers, the Court dispensed
completely with the warrant requirement because of the highly regulated nature
of the firearms industry, where pervasive Government regulation and licensing
reduced the dealers' legitimate expectation of privacy. Unannounced periodic
inspections were essential if the law was to serve as a credible deterrent, the
Court said. Clearly, though, it would contradict our constitutional history to
conclude that any search of commercial property where the Government has a
regulatory interest satisfies the Fourth Amendment. After all, the dreaded Writs
of Assistance, which supplied the stimulus to enact the Fourth Amendment,
involved searches of commercial warehouses. The Court has acknowledged this by
distinguishing between searches of highly regulated industries, such as
firearms, liquor and mining, on the one hand, and ordinary businesses, on the
other. Searches of the latter must be accompanied by a warrant unless the
proprietor gives his consent.

In some instances, the Court has extended the administrative search doctrine to
inspections of the individual. Administrative searches of persons who have
exhibited no behavior that would give rise to suspicion of illegal activity have
been approved at United States border areas, at entrances to courthouses and, as
mentioned, at airport departure gates. In addition, the highly regulated nature
of the horse-racing industry was the basis for upholding random, mandatory drug
testing of jockeys by the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit
last July. The lawsuit, filed by five famous jockeys, including William
Shoemaker and Angel Cordero, contested the New Jersey Racing Commission's policy
of drawing the names of several jockeys from an envelope each day and requiring
them to furnish urine samples after the last race that day. The court rejected
the jockeys' insistence on individualized suspicion before testing, instead
embracing the racing commission's contention that searches in the highly
regulated racing industry are reasonable.

It must be noted that a search of the person is more akin to a search of the
home than to inspection of a commercial enterprise, for the Fourth Amendment
applies with its greatest vigor to intrusions upon the human body. Still, a
Federal Court of Appeals in California upheld preboarding screening of all
airplane passengers and their carry-on luggage because of the indisputable need
to prevent the hijacking of airliners. The court acknowledged the danger of
airport searches being subverted into constitutionally prohibited general
searches for evidence of a crime, but was satisfied that the inspections were to
prevent hijacking rather than to prosecute individuals for illegally possessing
firearms.

The constitutional status of a drug-testing program, similarly, may hinge in
part on the purpose to which the program is put. If designed merely to identify
and rehabilitate drug users, as the President recently maintained, the danger of
a general search for evidence of crime is avoided. If criminal investigations or
prosecutions were the primary purpose of the tests, one could argue that the
searches would be subject to the warrant and probable-cause requirements of the
Fourth Amendment. (It is further worth pointing out that unlike possession and
distribution of illegal drugs, use alone is not generally an indictable
offense.) In the airport search case, the United States Court of Appeals for the
Ninth Circuit noted that authorities searched all passengers and had no power to
single out travelers. By analogy, a drug-testing program may appear more
reasonable when it applies to all employees within a given group, not just those
who stir the boss's whimsy.

Some critics argue that it is a cramped notion of ''consent'' that deems an
employee's decision to submit to drug testing on pain of losing his job
''consensual,'' but the question of consent will invariably enter into the legal
calculus. In the airport case, the court emphasized the voluntary nature of the
search: only passengers who choose to board a plane are searched. In another
case, in which welfare benefits were conditioned on a case worker's periodic
visits to the home, the Supreme Court held that the visitation was voluntary
because the recipient was free to reject the conditions and forfeit the
payments. Whether the same logic will apply to permit a Government employer to
require workers to either submit to drug testing or find another job remains to
be seen.

Courts will also make inquiries into the intrusiveness of the method of drug
testing. When Fourth Amendment rights are implicated, the Government is
frequently required to employ the least restrictive means available to achieve
its interest. Civil libertarians point out that to insure authenticity, workers
must be observed while giving urine samples, creating embarrassment and
humiliation. Furthermore, if grounds for individualized suspicion do exist, the
basic rationale for the administrative search becomes attenuated. The Court
approved administrative searches in housing inspections because it was
impossible to tell from the outside whether any given house was in violation.
But if a problem presents observable suspicious activity, counsel will surely
argue that a blanket search subjecting everyone to governmental intrusion runs
afoul of the Fourth Amendment's reasonableness requirement.

Few generalizations can be made from the small but growing body of legal
precedent in drug testing cases. One observation that can be made, however, is
that courts are extremely sensitive to the factual context surrounding the
testing. Last year, for example, a United States District Court in Atlanta ruled
that employees of a public utility who worked on high-voltage electric wires
could be forced to submit to urinalysis. The tests were administered after an
undercover agent planted among the workers by management reported that some of
the employees had been smoking marijuana at work. The court found the tests
reasonable in light of the extremely dangerous nature of the work and the
careful nature of the investigation.

Similar considerations were present in one of the earliest drug testing cases to
reach the courts. In 1976, a union representing 5,500 bus drivers challenged the
constitutionality of the Chicago Transit Authority's requirement that bus
operators submit to blood or urine tests following their involvement in a
serious accident, or upon suspicion of drug or alcohol impairment. Here, again,
the court found the intrusions reasonable, considering the transit authority's
''paramount'' interest in insuring that drivers are unimpaired. In the parlance
of the Fourth Amendment, the interest in safety negated any ''reasonable
expectation of privacy.'' Several cases have upheld the testing of police and
correction officers, whether conducted at random or ''for cause.'' Last August,
the New York State Supreme Court rejected a challenge to the testing of
correction officers who drive prison vans and buses for New York City, citing
the strong security and safety considerations involved in transporting
prisoners.

But there have been dissenting voices, and notably articulate ones at that. On
Sept. 18, Judge H. Lee Sarokin of Federal District Court in Newark ruled that
mandatory urine testing of government employees, such as policemen and
firefighters in Plainfield, N.J., violated the Fourth Amendment. Only a strong
suspicion that a certain individual was using illegal drugs could justify
testing a worker, the court held. And last year, Harold D. Vietor, chief judge
of the United States District Court in Des Moines, reinstated a prison guard's
pay, lost when he was temporarily discharged after refusing to take a urine
test. Although prison officials had received an anonymous tip that the guard was
using drugs, Judge Vietor determined that an individual's urine may not be
tested unless the same kind of cause that is needed to search his house is
present. Although the state pressed its need to identify drug smugglers and keep
its correctional staff drug-free, the court reasoned that the same logic could
be used to support searching the guards' homes, or tapping their telephones.
''There is no doubt about it,'' Judge Vietor wrote, ''searches and seizures can
yield a wealth of information useful to the searcher. (That is why King George
III's men so frequently searched the colonists). That potential, however, does
not make a governmental employer's search of an employee a constitutionally
reasonable one.''

In another well publicized case, the Appellate Division of the New York State
Supreme Court ruled last summer that probationary teachers in a Long Island
school district could not be compelled to submit to urinalysis. Without
reasonable suspicion of drug abuse, the court said, the tests would be an
unconstitutional invasion of privacy. ''Strikingly absent from the record is
even a scintilla of suspicion, much less a reasonable suspicion,'' the court
noted.

Employers in the private sector are not subject to the Fourth Amendment, but
drug testing in this area will hardly go unchallenged. Workers may be able to
raise privacy claims pursuant to local statutes, union agreements or even state
constitutional provisions. For example, a computer programmer sued the Southern
Pacific Railroad in San Francisco in 1985 after she was discharged for refusing
to submit to a drug test. Though her case is still unresolved, she has the
benefit of an explicit right-to-privacy provision in the California
Constitution.

Workers in private industry may also be able to challenge the accuracy of test
results in certain circumstances, aided by recently enacted ordinances, such as
one passed in San Francisco. In another suit filed against Southern Pacific, an
office manager was required to enroll in a rehabilitation program after
urinalysis indicated the presence of cocaine. The manager contends that the test
was a ''false positive.'' For 28 days, according to his lawyer, he was isolated
from his family at a drug clinic, although all follow-up tests were negative and
doctors said there was no need for rehabilitation. For weeks after, the manager
was required to attend drug-therapy meetings and to undergo regular testing. He
obtained an injunction against further testing under a local ordinance, but was
demoted the next day, prompting a second suit, which is being litigated.

U NFORTUNATELY, THE debate on drug screening has been rich in emotion and
hyperbole. Not all proposals for drug testing are the brainchild of Big Brother
or a knee-jerk reaction to saturation media coverage of drug abuse. Some
screening programs may genuinely represent an effort to keep the workplace
drug-free in order to insure safety and improve performance. But, though good
intentions are reassuring, heightened sensitivity to concerns about privacy,
accuracy and legality are indispensable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT MEN;
Time Out

BYLINE: BY JACK L. MAYER; Jack L. Mayer is a pediatrician now in part-time
practice in Middlebury, Vt.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 96, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words


PHILLIP'S MOTHER HAS had her fourth baby by a third man. The child, my patient,
is a boy. I wonder if she'll try again for the girl I know she wants. Twinkies,
potato chips and Kool-Aid are still her kids' standard fare. Questions of child
abuse haven't been raised in over two years, and the scars on Phillip's neck
from the boiling water his mother spilled are not too deforming. All through
this pregnancy she smoked a pack a day. She makes me mad.

Like so many men, I always thought my work defined me. When I thought about my
work, I felt comforted and in touch with exactly who I am. But now, after 10
years as the first pediatrician in this town on the Canadian border, I'm
leaving. Despair and human stubbornness have undermined the compassion and
dedication of which I was once so proud. Another pediatrician will replace me
here after another hard winter.

In seventh grade, I decided to become a doctor. Over years of schooling, I
constructed an idealized vision of myself bringing quality care to the rural
poor, crusading against injustice and inequality. After I entered medical school
in 1967, I learned about Vietnam, Woodstock, Chicago and Watts along with
biochemistry and pathology. ''Medicine is a social science, and politics is
nothing more than medicine on a grand scale,'' wrote Rudolf Virchow, the father
of modern pathology. That's why I decided to practice pediatrics in one of the
poorest towns in Vermont, a place where you can buy a stately old house on a
quiet street for $27,000 - hand-turned banisters, elaborate scrollwork on the
peaks.

When I first came here in 1976 from the Stanford University Medical Center, I
had the sum total of pediatric knowledge in my back pocket. All I had to do, I
thought, was lay it out for my eager families and -presto - welcome to the
golden age of preventive care, social responsibility, anticipatory guidance and
heroic life-saving.

Delayed introduction of solid foods to infants' diets was my first crusade. The
best pediatric minds in the world had concluded that babies were healthier when
solid foods were introduced after 4 months of age, but most of my newborns were
eating cereal by two weeks. It was an uphill battle. ''My mother told me. . .
.'' ''I've raised three kids and they all started cereal at two weeks. . . .''
''How many kids you got, Doc? None?'' I have a young son now, but I was
childless when the mothers said those things to me.

They wouldn't take the contents of my Holy Grail - not about feeding babies,
wearing seat belts or treating illness. It was a personal affront. ''I'm a
pediatrician,'' I would say, ''and I know the right way to feed a baby.'' ''You
rubbed Save the Baby on his chest? That won't cure pneumonia.'' ''It's just a
cold. He doesn't need penicillin.''

Poor people's kids are sick a lot, and I was swamped with patients.
Malnutrition, child abuse, chronic illness - my patients' lives were so chaotic
and desperate that they had precious little interest in anything except a quick
cure.

Things got worse - budget cuts, Medicaid cuts, worker cuts at the hockey-stick
factory. After 38 straight months of ''economic recovery,'' the stock market
broke 1,500 and rents to the south, in Burlington, Vermont's largest city,
reached $500. Those who couldn't afford it moved north and finally ended up
here, with their backs against the border, no place else to go. My waiting room
filled with economic refugees. I lost my patient with the new green Saab. She
drove 26 miles across the county to see another pediatrician, where her kids
could play on slides and tunnels by Creative Playthings without contracting head
lice.

Weeks grew long and frustrating. The child-abuse team visited my office twice a
week instead of twice a month. Children were hungry by the end of each month -
their mothers' food stamps had been cut. One cold day in February, I had two
pregnant teen-agers within an hour. People who had no phones and no cars walked
through the snow to see me.

''He won't mind me.'' Phillip's mother slapped a pack of Winstons onto my desk
as if it were my fault and settled her fifth pregnancy into my rocker. ''What
the hell,'' she said. ''I tried putting him in his room like you said, Dr. Jack,
and he just tore the place apart and came out screaming, so I spanked him
again.'' Was nobody listening? Didn't it make any difference that I was here? I
hated their wet sneakers in the snow. I hated the constant illness that stalked
their children. I hated their abusive discipline, their junk-food diets, empty
stares, crumpled Medicaid cards. Stanford University Medical Center seemed so
far away.

On the ninth anniversary of my practice, I met an old friend at the Botanical
Garden in New York, and I told her my secret: ''I'm leaving my practice. I hate
my patients.''

My friend, a pediatrician in a South Bronx slum, also a proud veteran of the
1960's, knew my pain. Her diagnosis was precise. ''There are so many things
wrong,'' she said, ''but it's not their fault.''

''I know,'' I said, shaking my head, ''I know. But I'm tired of being on the
front lines, tired of treating what should be prevented. My patients are worse
off now than they were 10 years ago. I guess it's easier to leave hating them.''

''It's O.K. to leave. You don't need a rationalization.'' She touched my arm.
''Don't give up the dream unless you really want to.''

I don't want to. But I need time to reflect, to revitalize. I think Phillip's
mother and I share an important anger. We have been doing the best we can
against terrible odds.

Her kids have been denied health and equal opportunity from conception, and I
feel like a man defeated.

I'm leaving this town to work part-time in Middlebury, Vt., a middle-class
college town where I can hear jazz and string quartets and see foreign films.
Leaving the Canadian border is a tactical retreat, R and R. I don't have the
answers anymore. My carefully nurtured image of myself as Dr. Schweitzer is
inadequate, and I humbly confront the real man who is tired and frustrated.
Although my ideals are very much alive, my feelings cannot be suppressed. I hope
the anger that has built up for 10 years can be channeled as a force to redefine
myself as a healer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VILLAGE ACTIVISTS

BYLINE: BY PHYLLIS LA FARGE; Phyllis La Farge's forthcoming book is ''The
Strangelove Legacy: Children, Parents and Teachers in the Nuclear Age''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 946 words


HOPE IN HARD TIMES America's Peace Movement and the Reagan Era. By Paul Rogat
Loeb. 322 pp. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books/D. C. Heath & Company. Cloth,
$24.95. Paper, $10.95.

THE American people elected Ronald Reagan in part because they wanted to ''walk
tall.'' But in an era of unimaginably powerful nuclear arms and computerized
weapons systems - and with the memory of defeat in Vietnam still fresh -
''tall'' soon seemed too tall to substantial numbers of people who were alarmed
enough to want to learn as much as they could about the arms race, or Central
America, or both -and, once informed, to become active, at least for a while.

In ''Hope in Hard Times'' Paul Rogat Loeb, the author of ''Nuclear Culture:
Living and Working in the World's Largest Atomic Complex,'' portrays the
antinuclear arm of this recently reborn peace movement. Focusing on a number of
individual activists, he illuminates an often obscured fact: a popular movement,
at least initially, is the sum of the choices made by individuals. But choices
that lead to activism against the arms race are not easily made. They often
involve a gradual process of acknowledging longstanding uneasiness about it,
deciding to become informed and only then -sometimes very tentatively - deciding
to take some form of public action. At every point the process may be inhibited
by the fear of appearing unpatriotic, the fear of losing one's job or
jeopardizing one's career, or a daunting sense of powerlessness in the face of
the economic and political institutions that control the arms race.

What enables some individuals to persevere, in the face of such deterrents, in a
process that can lead to public dissent or even civil disobedience? The
activists discussed by Mr. Loeb have no real answers to this question - at any
rate, he has elicited none. The phenomenon of how and why people are moved
morally and spiritually may be as mysterious to those undergoing the experience
as it is to the observer. ''It feels better to participate,'' says one of Mr.
Loeb's subjects of his involvement as an activist, but this merely begs the
question, because to the great majority of people just the opposite is true.
However, it is clear throughout Mr. Loeb's book that the availability to an
individual of information about the arms race, and his opportunities for contact
with people he trusts who are themselves concerned with the issue, support the
inner process of commitment.

Mr. Loeb is at his best describing the combination of strategies that convinced
a majority of Californians to vote for the nuclear freeze in a 1982 referendum -
the low road of arduous grass-roots organizing and the high road of a slick
media campaign that saturated the state with television spots. He is
particularly good in his account of the way in which the media campaign took
public wariness of the Soviet Union into account, while at the same time neatly
sidestepping any substantive grappling with the issue of whether the Russians
could be relied on to strike a bargain and stick to it - an issue about which
the American public has deeply conflicting feelings.

Although the author acknowledges that the advertising campaign was critical to
the success of the California referendum, he stresses that he does not believe
the news media can enlist everyone in the democratic process. The strategy that
most appeals to him is what he calls ''village politics'' - engagement with
national issues at the grass-roots level. Only such ''human-scaled efforts,'' he
says, can build a context sufficiently personal and sustaining to maintain
long-term commitment, and, he implies, counter the intimidating scale of
contemporary institutions. Village politics may indeed be a strategy vital to
our salvation with respect to many more issues than the nuclear one, but anyone
who has organized anything more than a bake sale knows how hard it is. IF
village politics is to be a workable strategy, I believe it will be because
local efforts are inspired and sustained by information and support coming from
outside as well as inside the immediate community. Mr. Loeb repeatedly describes
the ways in which this was true for the people he writes about, but he does not
make it part of his analysis. Today we live in two ''villages'' - a face-to-face
community of home and workplace, and an increasingly global village of images
and information. While it is true that those who decide what will get printed
and broadcast have something of Big Brother's power to shape our political
acquiescence, including our acquiescence to the continuation of the arms race,
nonetheless the image-and-information village has great potential to extend our
sense of possibilities in our face-to-face communities. What we should not
forget, however, is that villages in the past seldom favored change or
encouraged dissent.

''Hope in Hard Times'' has its flaws. The combination of reportage and advocacy
is a difficult one to pull off, and Mr. Loeb often has a surer touch as an
essayist-advocate than as a reporter - his cast is too big, with the result that
some characters are insufficiently developed. But in giving the peace movement
the serious portrait it deserves, and in being objective enough to be critical,
most pointedly of the movement's longing for quick fixes and its tendency to
''huddle against the world'' like a besieged ''chosen few,'' Mr. Loeb offers the
kind of confirmation the peace movement needs. At the same time he gives the
rest of us a chance to learn about the people whose moral and spiritual strength
makes it possible for them to be aware of the vulnerability so many of us would
rather not think about.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EXPERTS DISCERN A BLOC: 'NEW COLLAR' VOTERS

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1491 words

DATELINE: BROWN DEER, Wis., Oct. 17


Gary and Janice Bloedorn will tell you that the high-tech revolution, like most
revolutions, does not always deliver on its extravagant promises.

Mr. Bloedorn, who is 38 years old, works as a computer technician. But he warns:
''It's not like the television commercials say it is.'' The money is not always
great - he makes $25,500 a year, more with overtime, less with layoffs - and it
has not been easy since Mrs. Bloedorn, 37, left her job as a clinical
psychologist to stay home with their two children in this Milwaukee suburb.

In the view of many politicians and analysts, voters like the Bloedorns are a
key to the future of American politics. They are in the heart of the baby boom
generation, and have little in common with higher-paid young urban
professionals, the ''yuppies'' so often discussed.

They work in the booming service economy: they run the computers, staff the
car-rental counters, nurse the sick and fill in the papers that move money and
goods from here to there. Their collars are white but they are paid less than
many in blue-collar trades.

And the candidates who can figure out just who they are and what they want and
can speak to their needs, in the view of some who follow politics, will have a
significant electoral advantage in coming years.

It is a hard group to pin down politically, if it is a group at all. The
Bloedorns are like many in their generation: They revere John F. Kennedy, but
admire and voted for Ronald Reagan. They think of themselves as fairly liberal;
they strongly condemn racism, for example, and think they are far more open than
their parents are to the ideas of racial and sexual equality.

But on most other matters, they think their values are very much like their
parents.' They go to church every Sunday, they hate weakness abroad and do not
always like the welfare state.

This year, they like Mr. Reagan no less, but they are voting for a Democrat, Ed
Garvey, for the United States Senate over Senator Robert Kasten. The Republican
incumbent, said Mr. Bloedorn, is a ''yes-man to Reagan.''

A contradiction? Not at all, said Mr. Bloedorn, who feels Mr. Kasten is too
close to big business. Besides, he said, ''The President is powerful enough -he
doesn't need a yes-man to back him up.''

Ralph Whitehead, who teaches communications and politics at the University of
Massachusetts, has made it his task to identify these voters for politicians.

He estimates that there are 25 million or more ''new collar workers,'' and they
fit few of the conceptions that dominated political discourse as recently as a
decade ago.

Not Steel Workers, He Says

''They're not people who service vast blast furnaces in a steel works,'' said
Mr. Whitehead. ''But they don't fit in with the gentility or income categories
once associated with the words 'white collar.' ''

Their parents often worked on farms or in factories, but they do not. ''They are
the workhorses of the service economy,'' Mr. Whitehead says, ''just as the
blue-collars were the workhorses of the industrial economy.''

They like rock 'n' roll, and some were influenced by the values of the 1960's.
But their lives have little to do with the counterculture. They did not much
like the Vietnam War, but many of them fought in it, and most preserve a sense
of patriotism that President Reagan speaks to.

Paul Maslin, a Democratic poll-taker, calls them ''Springsteeners.'' Bruce
Springsteen and other rock stars like John Cougar Mellencamp sing their songs,
the ballads of forgotten Americans of the baby boom.

No Ties to Democrats

Yet, unlike the forgotten Americans of a previous generation, they are not
firmly tied to the Democratic Party. ''They're not part of the Democratic
culture of political clubs or labor unions,'' said Mr. Whitehead.

That is one reason Mr. Reagan did so well among them. He appealed both to their
patriotism and their sense that something was wrong. Mr. Bloedorn, for example,
said he liked Mr. Reagan because ''he was a tougher kind of guy.''

''At one time, I never thought I would vote for Ronald Reagan,'' he said. ''But
we needed someone tougher.''

Erwin Vonderene, 36, an electrical engineer who lives in Waukesha near here,
earns $35,000 to $40,000 a year. He voted for Mr. Reagan, too.

''He's been assertive within reason,'' he said. ''The other side is running
scared.''

Seeking Some Fairness

Yet these voters' sense of patriotism is matched by a feeling that the society
has not been quite fair to them.

''They don't want to blow up the Establishment,'' said Daniel B. Payne, a media
consultant, ''but they don't mind kicking its tires.''

Mr. Payne advises the American Federation of State, County and Municipal
Employees, and did a commercial for a union organizing campaign in Ohio last
year.

The commercial was built around an overburdened secretary, ''Beatrice.'' After a
day of overwork and indignities, Beatrice got on the phone and called the union.
''We win respect,'' was the commercial's tagline. The union won the campaign.

Help for an Upset Election

Respect and fairness goes to the heart of things for the new collars, said Louis
Fortis, 39, who upset a 16-year incumbent assemblyman in the Democratic primary
here this year with the help of people like the Bloedorns.

''They have an entrepreneurial sense; they know they won't be able to hold the
same job for 30 years like their parents did,'' said Mr. Fortis, who runs a
nonprofit economic development agency. ''They respect hard work, hustle, and
they care about fairness to the people who do those things.''

Mrs. Bloedorn said she thought the system was unfair to people like her and her
husband, which is one reason why she cannot think of herself as conservative or
Republican. But she and her husband say they want little from government except
a decent elementary and secondary education for their children.

''We built our lives around the idea of the American dream, that if you got
educated and worked hard, you could get there,'' she said. ''But every five or
six years, the rules change.''

Another Will Vote for Kasten

Like the Bloedorns, Mary Koenig also loves President Kennedy and admires Mr.
Reagan. She likes Mr. Reagan enough that she will be voting for Senator Kasten
this year, as will Mr. Vonderene.

Mrs. Koenig's husband earns $40,000 a year as a customer-service supervisor for
the electric company and she was able to leave her job as a secretary to be with
their two sons,but she thinks they will not have it so good.

''My sons probably won't have the luxury of their wives staying at home,'' she
said. ''What we need is some kind of job-sharing so that parents can work, but
have time to be with their children.''

These are the sorts of demands labor unions have had to respond to in their
efforts to organize individualistic new collars.

''The issues are different from wages and working conditions,'' said Amy Mayers,
assistant director of public affairs for A.F.S.C.M.E. ''We're talking about
working conditions and pay equity, bonuses for people working on video
terminals, the danger of new chemicals in the workplace.''

Rejection of Formal Group

One problem for both unions and Democrats is that the new collars do not think
of themselves as being part of any formal group. Indeed, they often reject the
idea of groups.

''People don't have much of a sense of class consciousness,'' said Susan C.
Eaton, assistant director of field services and a former organizer for the
Service Employees International Union.

''They're in similar situations,'' she said, ''but secretaries feel differently
from nurses who feel differently from computer programmers, even when they work
for the same company.''

It is the very diffuseness that has made the new collars difficult to identify
as a distinct political category.

Mr. Whitehead said he defined them as workers in the service economy who are
part of the baby boom generation, roughly 22 to 40 years old, and who have
annual family incomes higher than $15,000 but less than $50,000.

'Yuppies' Overblown, He Says

Gary C. Lawrence, a Republican poll-taker, said he did not use the new collar
category in his own work, but he thought it an improvement over ''yuppies.''
''The yuppie thing was completely overblown,'' he said. ''There just aren't
enough of them.'' What is clear about the new collars is that they are in flux
politically and up for grabs.

Offered a list of 1988 Presidential contenders in both parties, Janice and Gary
Bloedorn could not cite a single one who excited them.

But they said they would like to be excited, and Mrs. Bloedorn spoke of the
distant hero, Kennedy, not Mr. Reagan, in describing the sort of person who
might succeed in generating such feeling.

''I don't think kids now understand the passion we felt back then,'' she said.
''There's no passion in our politics now, but I hope someday our kids will have
a chance to experience that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gary and Janice Bloedorn, with sons Matthew and Adam (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MEXICO AND THE NARCOTICS TRAFFIC: GROWING STRAIN IN U.S. RELATIONS

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2816 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY


The scene was familiar, both to John Gavin, then the United States Ambassador to
Mexico, and to the Mexican officials he was meeting, including President Miguel
de la Madrid.

United States officials had put together information implicating a Mexican
Government official in drug trafficking, and at a meeting last year Mr. Gavin
wanted to tell Mr. de la Madrid about the case, as he had done with others
before it.

But this time the case involved the son of the Defense Minister, who directs a
significant part of Mexico's drug-eradication program.

Asked hMw the Mexican officials reacted to his information, Mr. Gavin imitated
them with a shrug and a grimace of mock concern.

In that case and several others, Mr. Gavin said with frustration, ''they would
say to me: 'Show me the proof.

Show me the proof.' ''

''But as they knew,'' he said, ''to show the proof would be the death warrant
for my sources.''

Many Files Compiled

Over the last two years, American intelligence officials have compiled many
files laying out evidence of drug trafficking involving such people as the heads
of the Mexican security police and Mexico's Interpol office as well as at least
three state governors and the President's cousin. Several of the officials have
quietly left their jobs since the allegations surfaced and some have disappeared
from public view.

These public and private allegations about drug trafficking have become the
stickiest aspect of the most divisive issue between the United States and
Mexican Governments.

Officials in both countries agree that the drug problem and its attendant
corruption are growing worse almost by the day. Many members of the United
States Congress are becoming so angry over what they see as lack of cooperation
from Mexico that they have begun debating political and economic sanctions.

''I've never seen so many senators with fire in their eyes over Mexico,'' said a
State Department official who was following the debate in September.

Meanwhile, the Mexican Government says the American point of view is unfair.
Even if one-third of the heroin, cocaine and marijuana consumed in the United
States is produced in Mexico or transported through the country, as the United
States asserts, it is only because the American demand for drugs is so strong
that impoverished peasants are drawn into the business, Mexican officials say.

Nonetheless, with Mexico's anti-drug campaign involving thousands of police
officers and tens of thousands of soldiers, Chief Deputy Attorney General Luis
Octavio Porte Petit Moreno said: ''No other country in the world does so much
for the youth of North America. This is an effort that must be valued.''
Attorney General Sergio Garcia Ramirez concurred. ''It hurts me to see these
criticisms of the enormous work Mexico is doing,'' he said in an interview. ''I
know that public opinion in the United States asks about efficiency and
corruption in this country. I'm afraid corruption goes hand in hand with drug
trafficking, but the Government of Mexico does not protect drug traffickers or
bow before them either.''

The traffickers' tactics, it is clear, present those who would enforce the law
with a formidable task. At the United States Embassy in September, a narcotics
control officer, flipping through photographs of a helicopter spraying
herbicides on marijuana plants in western Mexico the week before, said, ''I hope
that pilot doesn't get a visit.'' Frequently pilots in the American-financed
crop-eradication program are visited by drug traffickers after a successful
afternoon in the air.

The traffickers threaten them by ''bringing along pictures of the pilot's
children taken as they were walking to school,'' the American official said.
''Last year one pilot told me they had also offered him five million pesos a
month,'' or about $20,000 at the exchange rate of the time, ''for cooperation -
missing his fields or spraying them with water.'' At that time, the offical
said, a top pilot's salary was about $200 a month. Pointing Fingers: A Sensitive
Undertaking The difficulties and misunderstandings that swirl around the drug
and corruption issues are small-scale illustrations of the wider diplomatic
problems that make relations between the United States and Mexico so
troublesome.

At his meeting with President de la Madrid last year, Mr. Gavin told him that
the United States had information indicating that the Defense Minister's son,
Juan Alejandro Arevalo, a federal prosecutor, was in league with drug
traffickers.

American officials say the United States also has information implicating the
Defense Minister himself, Gen. Juan Arevalo Gardoqui, who directs a significant
part of Mexico's drug-eradication program. But they say the information on the
minister is slim, a cause ''for possible suspicion, but not much more,'' an
American intelligence officer said.

In September the Mexican Government issued a formal diplomatic protest over a
news article about that allegation, and in an interview General Arevalo said,
''The only thing I can tell you is that as Minister of Defense my actions are
without doubt.''

As for the general's son, who was a federal prosecutor in Baja California at the
time Mr. Gavin met with the President, the intelligence tying him to drug
traffickers ''was not conclusive, but there was an awful lot of circumstantial
evidence,'' Mr. Gavin recalled in an interview. ''To use the old bromide, if he
walks like a duck and talks like a duck, he's probably a duck,'' said Mr. Gavin,
who left his post at the end of May. U.S. Official Cites 'The Protection Factor'

Other American officials in the Customs Service, State Department, Drug
Enforcement Administration and the United States Embassy said Mr. Arevalo
appeared to have been passing information on drug investigations and raids to
traffickers who had recruited him because of his father.

''We think he was hired basically because of the protection factor having him
offered,'' an American official said. Several American officials also said the
theory that the Defense Minister's son was involved with drug traffickers was
emblematic of the wider corruption problems the authorities face in the Mexican
drug enforcement effort.

Mr. Arevalo could not be reached for comment. But his father said his reaction
to Ambassador Gavin's discussion with the President ''was exactly the same as
the one I had'' when the allegations about his own activities surfaced in
September. ''It was one of the most terrible blows I have ever received in 48
years as a military man,'' he said.

''They have made this attack, but I have a son who has been educated with my
rectitude. He is a young professional and an honest man.''

Other Mexican officials expressed more general frustration.

''Each time we are given knowledge or evidence in relation to any person,'' Mr.
Garcia Ramirez said, ''we have followed the custom of asking, in a formal
written petition, for all the data and evidence. We can act only on evidence,
not rumor.'' Mexicans' Response: 'This Vicious Circle'

But in almost every case, said Samuel I. del Villar, who was President de la
Madrid's adviser on government corruption matters until a year ago, ''we'd fall
into this vicious circle.''

For example, he said, ''the station chief of the D.E.A. would come to me and
tell me their contacts said so-and-so is related to drug traffic.''

''We'd say, can you give us some details, and they'd say no, we cannot,''
because of confidential sources, Mr. del Villar said.

''In this environment it's very difficult to differentiate between rumor and
reality.''

The Mexican Government's failure to publicly prosecute several police officers
and other officials who the United States has said are corrupt -especially the
police officers believed involved in the torture of a Drug Enforcement
Administration agent, Victor Cortez, in August and in the torture and murder of
another agent, Enrique Camarena Salazar, last year - has infuriated members of
Congress and others in the United States.

''Their complete lack of cooperation in the Camarena case is appalling,'' said
Representative Larry Smith, the Florida Democrat who is chairman of the Foreign
Affairs Committee Task Force on International Narcotics Control. He sponsored a
successful amendment that cuts $1 million in narcotics-control aid to Mexico
this year unless the guilty parties in the Camarena and Cortez cases are
''brought to trial and effectively prosecuted.''

In the Senate in September, amendments were openly debated, though not enacted,
that would have imposed oil import tariffs and other potentially serious
sanctions against Mexico for failure to prosecute corrupt government officials.
Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d called Mr. Garcia Ramirez to warn him of the
growing Congressional concern. The Judicial Systems Are Vastly Different In
Mexico City, meanwhile, Mexican and even some American officials say Congress is
being unfair.

''The lack of understanding of our legal system is making the confusion,''
Attorney General Garcia Ramirez said. ''The procedure in Mexico is very
different than the procedure in the United States. We have no less than 40
people on trial, but in our judicial system the trials take place mostly in
written form, without the visibility of U.S. trials.''

The United States Embassy sent a long cablegram to Washington in September
explaining the differences between the Mexican and American judicial systems,
with the notation, ''The embassy believes it would be useful to share this
information with Congress.''

Mr. Porte Petit, offering the Mexican Government's first public prediction of
the result of the trials in the Camarena case, said, ''An important number of
the people are in jail, and I have every confidence they will receive the most
severe sentences they can get,'' adding that their sentences will be pronounced
''before the end of this year, and in the meantime they will remain in jail.''

Even Drug Enforcement Administration officials in Mexico, who believe that the
Camarena case has dragged on too long and that several key suspects have not
been arrested, also say, in the words of one, ''The reason we seem to be at
loggerheads is that Congress tends to look at these things from the U.S. point
of view, and the Mexicans don't think that way.''

As an example, Senator Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona, who follows
Mexican issues closely, recently prepared a list of Mexican Government officials
who had been publicly implicated in drug trafficking. He asked: ''What has
happened to them? Have any been tried or gone to jail? We don't know.'

Mexican and American officials say several senior officials who are believed
involved in drug trafficking have quietly left office, as is the Mexican custom.

For example, Mr. Arevalo, the Defense Minister's son, was not charged with
anything, and the Government made no public statements about him. He is no
longer a federal prosecutor, however, and he ''kind of disappeared,'' a D.E.A.
official said. ''We heard they found him another job in government somewhere to
get him out of the way,'' the official added. Head of Security Is Another Who
Quit The same thing happened last year with Jose Antonio Zorilla Perez, who was
head of the Mexican security police. American officials privately told the
Mexican Government that he was involved with drug traffickers after several
important traffickers were arrested carrying security police credentials,
American officials in Washington and Mexico said.

Neither Government said anything in public, but ''he just resigned,'' an
American drug enforcement official said. ''We think he now lives in Spain.''

Miguel Aldana, former head of Mexico's Interpol office, a part of the Attorney
General's office that is staffed by the federal judicial police, left office
''practically overnight,'' in one official's words, and disappeared from sight
last year after United States officials asserted that he had taken a bribe from
cocaine dealers, American officials in Mexico said.

Mr. Gavin said the Mexican Government on occasion had handled his allegations
about corrupt governors by telling him: ''Elections are coming up soon, and
they'll be out of office. That way we don't upset the system, and you don't want
to disturb the system, do you?''

Several corrupt governors have left office, officials said. Still, a State
Department official, summing up the prevalent United States Government view,
said, ''There has not really been the type of crackdown on corruption that most
people think is needed to convince the drug traffickers that the Government is
serious.'' Corruption Is Called A Threat to Security Mr. del Villar said he
agreed, and other Mexicans said a key reason he quit as chief adviser for
President de la Madrid's much publicized ''moral renovation'' campaign was that
he did not believe it was aggressive enough.

Mr. del Villar would not comment on the reasons for his resignation, but he did
say: ''What worries me is the velocity that corruption is accelerating through
the Government. It's the most serious threat to national security we face. If
the Government doesn't do something about it, it will destroy our country.''

He added: ''I have watched the most distinguished police commanders, the best
the federal police had in the 70's, inevitably become corrupted. If you move the
army into drug enforcement, inevitably they will be corrupted too. It's
impossible to resist, especially in these times of economic crisis.''

Like others, Mr. del Villar partly blames the United States for the spread of
corruption because of ''the great export of American narco-dollars into this
country.''

Behind his statements and those of virtually everyone in the Mexican Government
is the conviction that Mexico is merely a victim in the drug business. From the
Mexican point of view, the country's entire anti-drug program is a great favor
to the United States.

''We have no drug users in this country,'' a senior Mexican law enforcement
official said. ''The number of heroin users in this country can be counted on
the fingers of the hand.''

Mr. Garcia Ramirez said: ''Cocaine does not come from Mexico or go to Mexico
either. We are victims.''

Despite that, he said: ''What we are doing is putting a dike on the flow of
drugs to the United States. It may not be sufficient, but it is a great effort
with many hazards and great expense.'' The Mexican Side, In Pictures and Charts
A new United States State Department report says Mexico remains the chief
foreign supplier of heroin and marijuana to the United States. But at the
Defense Ministry in Mexico City in late September, General Arevalo and his key
aides gave a two-hour lecture, illustrated with photographs, charts and graphs,
showing that even if the State Department estimate is correct - and the Defense
Ministry disagrees - it is actually the fault of the United States.

''The general believes the real cause of the drug problem is the demand,'' a
major said, pointing to a chart as General Arevalo watched. ''The supply of
drugs is merely an effect.''

''The general believes demand is a problem of the developed nations,'' the major
added, using the euphemism Mexicans often employ when they do not want to
mention the United States outright. ''It is caused by the great wealth, the
disintegration of the family and the psychological effects of the war'' in
Vietnam.

''The cause of the supply,'' the reason Mexico produces so much drugs, General
Arevalo asserted ''is the demand, and also ignorance of the law. The peasants do
not know it is illegal.'' American officials call the ignorance theory
ludicrous, noting that Mexican marijuana and opium poppy farmers are sufficently
wary that they try to hide the plants among other crops, such as corn. Often
they shoot at helicopters that come to spray herbicide on the plants and string
wire between the tops of trees, trying to trip the helicopters so they crash.

Even though he believes Mexico is merely a victim, General Arevalo said: ''We
are committed to a permanent campaign against drugs, despite the great economic
problems we face. I have 25,000 troops permanently assigned to the campaign.''

An aide, pointing to a multicolored map showing Mexico and all of Central and
South America, said, ''We have seized or eradicated quantities of marijuana,
cocaine and heroin since 1983 sufficient to intoxicate every resident of all
these countries for a week.''

''Every year our efforts have been 100 percent superior over the previous
year,'' General Arevalo said.

When asked why, despite his figures, the United States Government has repeatedly
asserted that Mexican drug enforcement has been growing progressively worse, the
general said: ''It's because of lack of communication. It's a
misunderstanding.''

NEXT: A new type of emigrant -the affluent professional.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Neighbor in Distress: Mexico's Crisis and the U.S.; Second of six
articles.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mexican police walking away from burning marijuana plants
(Reuters); Photo of Gen. Juan Arevalo Gardoqui (Camera Press)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
Gorbachev's Global Respite

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


One of the world's most far-seeing diplomats, asked for the reason behind the
Soviet Union's current moves, responded with a question of his own: Had I read
Mikhail Gorbachev's July 28 speech at Vladivostok?

I had been absent when Conceptual Frameworking 101 covered Mr. Gorbachev's
Vladivostok speech. The State Department says it does not have a copy in
English; the Soviet Embassy's press division is permanently out to lunch; Radio
Free Europe has only a summary of what it calls ''the most important address he
has so far given dealing with the Kremlin's policy toward Asia and the Pacific
region.'' Finally I winkled an English translation out of Tass.

In it, the Russian leader reminds us that the Soviet Union ''is also an Asian
and Pacific country.'' Noting that ''it is in Asia that American imperialism
waged the two biggest wars since 1945 - in Korea and Indochina,'' Mr. Gorbachev
views with alarm ''the militarized triangle of Washington, Tokyo and Seoul,''
resulting in the placement of ''nuclear weapon delivery vehicles'' in Japan and
South Korea.

His ostensible solution to that supposed threat: a new Helsinki-type accord of
all the Pacific nations, headquartered in Hiroshima, ''the first victim of
nuclear evil'' inflicted by the U.S.

But his real message is an assurance to Peking that he seeks ''good
neighborhood'' on his eastern border. The Gorbachev speech subtly uses the
soothing term Panchsheel, (''Five Principles'') evoking Nehru's negotiations
with Zhou Enlai when those leaders liked to speak of non-interference and
coexistence in the 50's.

But what of the ''three obstacles'' to renewed warmth laid down by Deng
Xiaoping: occupation of Afghanistan, troop buildups on the Chinese border,
support of North Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia?

In Vladivostok, Mr. Gorbachev announced the planned withdrawal of six regiments
from Afghanistan (three of them antiaircraft units, hardly a concession when the
Afghan resistance has no aircraft). On obstacle two, he hinted at a pullout of
''a substantial part of the Soviet troops from Mongolia'' (only 75,000 are
stationed there, but that is close to Peking and would be a welcome token). On
the Cambodian obstacle, he had nothing to offer; let Mr. Deng come to Moscow to
talk about that.

The obvious purpose of the Russian opening to the East is to use the specter of
Chinese-Soviet rapprochement to pressure the West. Since the Shah's fall, our
main intelligence-gathering land base has been in China; Mr. Gorbachev wants to
remove that means of verification. Even more important, by reducing the rivalry
between the two largest Communist powers, the Soviet leader gains diplomatic
respite on his Eastern front while gaining political leverage to use in Europe
and in arms reduction talks.

His much less obvious purpose is to lessen the danger to the U.S.S.R., a
generation hence, of a China equipped with thousands of ballistic missiles. The
Russians cannot afford to be naked to nuclear attack by the Chinese, who could
survive them in an all-out exchange.

That is why his passionate objection to space-based defenses is a subterfuge.
Mr. Gorbachev knows that the evolution of deterrent into defense is a historical
imperative; he treats it not as a feasibility but as a certainty; he objects
only to an American S.D.I. in place before his own.

His strategy from the start has been to delay our testing and deployment of a
shield until his own, less publicized space defense gains an advantage. That
explains the attempted entrapment in Iceland: as Anatoly Dobrynin surely
predicted, this surprise gambit precipitated a debilitating debate in America
about trading a missile-reduction bird in the hand for a space-defense bird in
the bush.

Because arms reductions are now hostage to delay in American defense testing,
the Russians can allow the U.S. to negotiate with itself and delay S.D.I.
funding. A promised summit in America is now put off, perhaps until after a
summit with Mr. Deng in Moscow. The leader with his finger on the ''hold''
button is Mr. Gorbachev.

Thus his opening to the East, combined with his tantalizing offers of missile
reductions tied to space-defense delays in the West, is designed to gain him
respite on both fronts. He needs that time to strengthen the economy on which
all potential domination rests.

My classmates in Conceptual Frameworking 101 may differ, but they haven't read
the Vladivostok speech.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PENNSYLVANIA GOVERNOR'S RACE UPENDS THE WAR OF GENERATIONS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1189 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 19


At first glance, the Pennsylvania Governor's race looks like a classic conflict
between political generations.

On one hand is Robert P. Casey, whose bushy eyebrows, his political trademark,
are still black. His big frame still suggests the basketball player he was in
the early 1950's at Holy Cross College. But as he runs hard in his attempt to
return the governorship to the Democrats for the first time in eight years, the
54-year-old candidate's hair is silvery.

His Republican opponent charges that he is a political relic, the product of a
dead era of patronage politics and smokestack economics, that ''his heart is in
that era'' and that he is therefore ill-equipped to lead Pennsylvania into the
post-industrial age.

Looks Conservative Today

Mr. Casey's opponent is Lieut. Gov. William W. Scranton 3d, 39, who as a Yale
University student in the late 1960's acted like many other undergraduates of
the day: He wore long hair and jeans, opposed the Vietnam War and smoked
marijuana. Today his short hair, neatly tailored look and pin-stripe suits
symbolize the expanding movement of his generation into positions of power.

But in this case, things are not quite that simple: it is the younger Mr.
Scranton, not the older Mr. Casey, who has been part of an entrenched government
in Harrisburg for eight years. So Mr. Casey, who has been hammering at the theme
of managing economic change as insistently as his opponent, charges that Mr.
Scranton, for all his relative youth, is wedded to tired approaches.

So far, thrust and counter-thrust appear to have produced a standoff in the
campaign to succeed Gov. Dick Thornburgh, a Republican who by law must leave
office after two terms. All independent polls have indicated a close race. The
latest, conducted Oct. 10 to 12 by KRC/Research of Cambridge, Mass., for KYW-TV
of Philadelphia, showed a flat tie, with each candidate favored by 41 percent of
those polled. Sixteen percent were undecided and 2 percent refused to answer.
Four hundred voters were polled, statewide, and the poll had a margin of
sampling error of plus or minus five percentage points.

State in Transition

On one level, the campaign is being fought out over which candidate can best
manage Pennsylvania's transition from manufacturing to a service economy. Much
of the state, particularly southeastern Pennsylvania and the vote-rich
Philadelphia area, has largely completed the transition. But the traditional
steel and coal regions around Pittsburgh, in the Lehigh Valley and around
Scranton and Wilkes-Barre continue to struggle.

Both candidates have put forth their own programs for using state resources to
help stimulate the lagging areas. Mr. Scranton, citing what he says are the
Thornburgh administration's successful attempts to stimulate small
entrepreneurs, favors a decentralized approach, with the state supporting local
efforts.

Mr. Casey favors scrapping the state commerce board, through which the
Thornburgh administration has chiefly worked, and replacing it with a
public-private partnership that he says will eliminate what he describes as the
Thornburgh administration's tendency ''to pile one bureaucracy on top of
another.''

Some Personal Attacks Seen

On another level, the overriding economic issues have been upstaged of late by a
flood of personal, negative attacks that have made the candidates themselves the
issue.

Both men are from Scranton. The father of one candidate, Mr. Casey, was a coal
miner and laborer who became a lawyer. The city of Scranton was named for the
family of the other. His father, also a Republican, was at one time Governor and
in vain carried the moderate banner as a Presidential candidate in the
Goldwater-conservative year of 1964.

Mr. Scranton's use of drugs as a student has become an issue several times in
his political career. It arose again last month at a news conference in
Harrisburg. The candidate described his former use of marijuana as
''recreational'' and ''in the mainstream with the people in my generation.''

This stirred renewed furor at a time when drug use has become a powerful
political issue. Mr. Scranton tried to lay the issue to rest in a speech at a
West Chester high school in mid-September. He said that his experience had
taught him that ''any drug use is wrong,'' that he firmly opposed drugs and that
he would take strong measures against them as governor.

Fear of a Backfire

The Casey camp, fearing that any attempt to exploit the counterculture aspects
of Mr. Scranton's past might backfire and alienate members of the 1960's college
generation, has refrained from doing so.

However, there appeared on Philadelphia's streets a handbill showing a
photograph of a long-haired marijuana smoker with the caption, ''If my daddy
gave me a million bucks I'd run for office too.'' Signed by the ''Vietnam War
Era Vets Desiring Good 'Hootch' in Government,'' it urged Mr. Scranton's
election. Other leaflets appearing last week portrayed Mr. Scranton as a
draft-dodging hippie (he was deferred for medical reasons).

Mr. Scranton branded the fliers ''scurrilous,'' saying they were part of a Casey
''smear campaign'' of ''old-style politics that brings shame to our entire
state.''

He Disavows Them

Mr. Casey has disavowed the leaflets, saying ''our campaign has nothing to do
with it,'' and upbraiding Mr. Scranton for suggesting that it did.

In its television advertising, the Casey campaign has been painting Mr. Scranton
as a laid-back, less-than-diligent lieutenant governor who has missed most
meetings of groups he is supposed to preside over, such as the state Senate and
the pardon board. Pennsylvania is still known as a state that strongly values
and practices the work ethic.

''They gave him the job because of his father's name,'' says a Casey television
spot. ''The least he could do is show up for work.'' Mr. Scranton insists that
he has been a hard-working inside member of the Thornburgh administration who
has helped shape its economic policies.

The Scranton campaign has retaliated by charging that Mr., Casey, too, missed
meetings when he served as the state's Auditor General from 1969 to 1978. ''He
promised he would be a full-time Auditor General,'' says Mr. Scranton, ''and he
went out and started practicing law.'' Mr. Casey, Mr. Scranton says, has ''feet
of clay'' on the diligence question.

Mr. Casey won praise in his terms as Auditor General for putting the office on a
professional basis, for fighting corruption and for avoiding scandal at the time
while Democrats in other state offices did not. This is his fourth candidacy for
the governorship. He lost in the Democratic primary three times, finally winning
the nomination last May.

Both campaigns appear well financed. Mr. Scranton has raised nearly $4.5 million
so far. The Casey campaign raised $2.4 million for the primary last spring and
so far has raised about the same amount for the general election. Mr. Scranton
was unopposed in the primary, and therefore has a larger treasury now. But Mr.
Casey's treasury is considered unusually substantial for a Pennsylvania
Democrat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William W. Scranton 3d (UPI); Photo of Robert P. Casey (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

DESIGNER SCULPTURES MOUNTAINS TO ATTRACT SKIERS

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1444 words

DATELINE: WHISTLER, British Columbia


To an unusual degree, Paul Mathews has combined his life's passion with his
life's work.

When a student at the University of Washington in Seattle, he skipped the winter
quarters in order to roam the world and ski. He has long delighted in following
Canada's national ski team, especially the group of daredevil downhill skiers
affectionately called the ''Crazy Canucks,'' through the World Cup circuit.

His vocation, which he pursues in this beautiful alpine resort, is designing
mountains for skiing - a job of increasing importance as the pace of growth in
the sport has slowed and ski slope owners are putting ever-greater emphasis on
the quality of their operations to attract customers away from competitors.

Tough Environmental Rules

''For any mountain, I can draw you up a plan that will make money or lose
money,'' Mr. Mathews said.

He can also draw a plan that will be in accordance with the tough United States
environmental rules that emerged in the early 1970's, a key factor in the growth
of mountain design as an occupation. His company also performs other services
that range from financial and marketing plans to reforestation.

Mountain design, Mr. Mathews suggests, is a lot like designing vertical country
clubs, but with several differences: Golf course designer do not have to factor
in Arctic-like climatic conditions, avalanches, broken legs or frostbite.
Moreover, 500 people a day use the average links, while a big ski area may serve
15,000.

Part of a small elite of ski designers, Mr. Mathews, 39 years old, has designed
ski slopes, and often resorts, throughout the Western United States and Canada
as well as Japan. The biggest recent project of his consulting company, Ecosign
Mountain Recreation Planners Ltd., is designing Mount Allen, the skiing venue
for the Calgary Winter Olympics in 1988.

Sculpturing a Mountain

''The old-fashioned technique was to simply take a mountain and mark a trail,''
said Janet Nelson, executive editor of Ski Area Management magazine. ''Now,
designers actually sculpt the mountain.''

Such sophistication is appropriate to what is now a very big recreational
business. Some of the largest resorts are owned by giant enterprises, while
hundreds of small operations have closed. The Gillette Company, for instance,
owns the Vail, Colo., ski area and the Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corporation
owns the Aspen, Colo., area.

Even the size and capability of the equipment have grown. In 1950, 600 people
could go up a mountain in single chair lifts in an hour. By 1975, some 1,800
could be transported hourly in triple lifts. The latest innovation is faster,
quadruple-chair lifts, capable of carrying 2,800 riders in an hour. And as the
number of users increases at a ski area, the area itself grows to accommodate
them.

The number of skiers has increased to an estimated 21 million Americans from 7.7
million in 1973, and growth elsewhere has been parallel, or even better, as in
Japan and other Asian countries. Industry revenues exceed $1.5 billion, compared
with $405 million a decade ago.

Master Planning Started at Vail

The idea of drawing a multidisciplinary master plan for a large ski area was
really inaugurated by Vail in the mid-1960's. Millions of Americans -their
interest piqued by the 1960 Winter Olympics in Squaw Valley, Calif. - were
taking up the sport, and it was clear that greater planning was needed.

Just as important was the passage in the United States of the Environmental
Protection Act in 1973, which mandated detailed environmental assessments by
multidisciplinary teams. The fragility of alpine environments and the fact that
most ski areas are on publicly owned lands made the need particularly acute.

For Mr. Mathews, who was just graduating from college with a degree in
landscaping and forestry, it amounted to a wonderful opportunity. He began to
assemble a team, whose members now include 10 full-time experts, ranging from
agricultural to computer specialists.

At first it was slow-going, and he jokes that in those years he had to tend bar
to support his consulting habit. But the flood of people then hitting the slopes
was creating a new demand. Not only did they want more places to ski, they
wanted smoother, easier trails.

''Skiers today want learning how to ski to be as easy as learning how to roller
skate,'' Ms. Nelson said.

Two Years of Study

Mr. Mathews says a typical job involves two years' computer-aided study of
weather, wildlife, soils, trees and terrain. Then the market must be measured
against these physical realities.

More and more jobs are expansions of existing areas. At Mount Zao in Japan, for
instance, Mr. Mathews designed an expansion that in the next 10 years will bring
the daily capacity of that country's third-largest ski resort to 30,000 from
15,000.

At Mount Bachelor, Ore., a new quadruple ski lift will replace three existing
ones. A single base camp will supplant the five existing ones, facilitating
construction of a village.

The company's analysis does not always suggest expanding, however. At Schweitzer
Basin, Idaho, a 1980 analysis suggested that the resort's business was not big
enough to justify a significant renovation and that it should merely make some
operational improvements. Last year, Ecosign returned for another look. This
time, it recommended renovations, including new lifts and village.

For the upcoming Olympics, Mr. Mathews chose one mountain for all of the
downhill and slalom events, rather than the three that the province of Alberta
first thought was needed. In the process, he chopped the total development
expenditure to $25 million instead of the originally projected $180 million.

Disturbing Short-Term Trend

But while skiing has generally been a growth industry, for the resort operators
and others who profit from people sliding down mountains, there is a more
disturbing short-term trend. The rate of industry growth has slowed as baby
boomers have moved from ski lodges to parenthood. As with tennis and other
popular participation sports, there is not another new wave of skiers to
increase growth at past rates.

Jim Branch, president of Sno-engineering Inc., a New Hampshire mountain-design
company, says the result is a much more intense analysis of a ski area's
competitive posture, followed by careful plotting of how to achieve its
market-share goals.

In this competitive market, he said, even a slight shortage of good snow fall or
drop in attendance leads to ''a feeding frenzy of piranahs'' among operators.
Price-cutting and televised marketing salvos are only some of the symptoms.

Mr. Branch cites his own company's experience as evidence of the growing
competitiveness. He said Sno-engineering was begun 32 years ago by ''sort of
playboy types who liked to ski.'' They hoped that by claiming expertise in
mountain design, they would be able to sell ski lifts, mountain-grooming
equipment and the like.

The company was taken over by men who brought professional engineering
principles to mountain design, creating a company that grew to be the largest in
its esoteric business. Today, competitors range from big resorts peddling their
expertise, to single-person firms specializing in single areas such as base
areas.

Mr. Branch says that Mr. Mathews' Ecosign is one of the sharpest rivals, along
with some very sophisticated French ski consultants. ''If I lose a job to Paul,
I've lost to a damn good man,'' he said.

For all his skill, Mr. Mathews' income is limited. Ecosign's annual revenues
exceed $500,000, although Mr. Mathews will not divulge Ecosign's annual profit,
other than to say, ''I didn't do it to be a rich man.''

Charges Vary

Charges vary greatly. A complete master plan can go up to $250,000 (Canadian),
while an operational study might run just $10,000. Normally, Ecosign will be
working on four or five major projects and a number of smaller ones.

Global travel increasingly separates Mr. Mathews from his wife, Margot, and his
young son, Douglas, not to mention from daily pursuit of his wintertime passion.
He is pursuing contracts in China, New Zealand and Australia as well as
Scotland, his first European effort.

In conversation, he makes a point of stressing his values, particularly his
commitment to conservation. During the Vietnam War, he returned from Canada to
the United States to answer his draft call. He says he refuses offers of
interests in ski resorts as a form of compensation, because that might
compromise his objectivity.

''I had long hair and a conscience when I got into this business,'' he said,
smilingly patting his bald spot. ''I still have a conscience.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE:  October 31, 1986, Friday, Late City Final EditionOctober 24,
1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

An article in Business Day on Oct. 20 about a company that designs mountains for
skiing misidentified key legislation that contributed to the rise of master
plans for large ski areas. The law was the National Environmental Policy Act of
1969.

An article in Business Day on Monday about a company that designs mountains for
skiing misidentified the owner of Vail Associates Inc., the Colorado ski resort.
It is owned by Gillette Group Inc. of Nashville, which is primarily a
communications company, not the Gillette Company, which produces personal care
products.

GRAPHIC: photo of Paul Mathews (Greg Griffiths); photos of Mount Allen (Greg
Griffiths)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Gandhi Hints at Role In a Cambodia Accord

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 20


Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, ending a four-nation trip to Southeast Asia and the
Pacific, said today that India might consider a more active role in trying to
end the eight-year-old war in Cambodia.

''We will try to look at the situation and see what part we can play,'' Mr.
Gandhi said at a news conference here before returning to New Delhi after visits
to Indonesia, Australia, New Zealand and Thailand.

He said that any change in attitude would be reflected in India's stand on the
issue at the United Nations. The annual vote on Cambodia's seat in the General
Assembly is expected to take place this week.

India is the only major nation outside the Soviet bloc to recognize the Phnom
Penh Government installed by Vietnam after it invaded Cambodia in 1978 and
overthrew the Khmer Rouge in early 1979.

Thai and Indonesian leaders asked Mr. Gandhi to exert his influence with Moscow
and the group of nations that call themselves nonaligned to begin talks on
Cambodia, a country with which India has strong historical and cultural links.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW LIBERAL JEWISH MAGAZINE AIMS FIRE AT COMMENTARY AND STIRS INTERNAL PROTESTS

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 797 words


A new Jewish magazine with a liberal perspective has taken direct aim at
Commentary magazine for becoming what it calls too conservative, stirring
protests among several of the new magazine's founding editorial board members.

The new magazine, Tikkun, made its debut in the summer with a printing of 40,000
copies, announcing itself as a ''quarterly Jewish critique of politics, culture
and society.'' The first issue of the magazine contained essays by Christopher
Lasch, ''What's Wrong with the Right''; Ann Roiphe, ''Politics and Anger,'' and
Hal Jacobs, ''Vietnam Revisited.''

In its promotional advertising, Tikkun also explicitly offered itself as a
''liberal alternative to Commentary'' and suggested that Commentary was out of
step with the majority of American Jews. That attack has led to the resignation
of two board members, the writers Elie Wiesel and Robert Alter.

Michael Lerner, editor of Tikkun, which is based in Oakland, Calif., says the
magazine is strongly supportive of nuclear disarmament, feminism and a more just
distribution of wealth and power. Yet it departs from much liberal and radical
thought, he said, in strongly supporting the values of family and community. It
also breaks with many Jewish liberals, he said, in being concerned about the
experience of Jews as an oppressed people, a history that Mr. Lerner said was
''totally discounted'' by many liberals. He said they insisted that Jews focus
on other oppressed minorities.

'Specific Things to Teach'

''Judaism has things specific to teach the liberal and progressive world,'' Mr.
Lerner said, giving his view of why it was important for the magazine to be a
Jewish-oriented intellectual magazine. ''We've been in a struggle against
slavery and the forms in which the human spirit has been suppressed. So our
experience is rich in how to carry that struggle on and not be destroyed.''

What has provoked attention was the advertisements by ''the new kid on the
block'' taunting Commentary, the 46-year-old intellectual magazine published by
the American Jewish Committee, which has shifted dramatically over two decades
from a journal of liberal thinking to a journal of what the magazine's editors
call neo-conservative thought.

''Tikkun,'' the magazine's back cover explained slyly, means, in Hebrew ''to
heal, repair and transform the world,'' and then adds, ''All the rest is
commentary.'' Mr. Lerner elaborated: ''It was important to define ourselves as
an alternative to Commentary because Commentary was the spokesperson for the
view that liberal politics were out of step and disloyal to the Jewish world.

''The vast majority of Jews have liberal politics, but they're increasingly
experiencing themselves as being out of the mainstream.'' He cited surveys that
showed the percentage of Jews who voted for Ronald Reagan declined from 38
percent in 1980 to 34 percent in 1984.

''In some ways, Jews felt addressed by the right and didn't feel addressed by
liberals. The right was talking about the breakup of families, the absence of
ethical values, the appeal of religion and meaning, outside money and power.''

Editor's Earlier Years

Mr. Lerner, who is 43 years old, is an observant Jew who grew up in Newark and
studied at the Jewish Theological Seminary in the early 1960's. He was active in
protesting the Vietnam War and was an editor of Ramparts, the antiwar magazine
that closed after a decade, in 1974. Since then, he has taught and worked as a
psychologist at the Institute for Labor and Mental Health in Oakland.

To win new readers, Tikkun advertised heavily. One advertisement last May began:
''The neo-conservatives don't speak for the Jews . . . Finally, a liberal
alternative to Commentary magazine.''

Such advertisements, Mr. Lerner acknowledges, drew assorted complaints from Mr.
Wiesel; Mr. Alter; Martin Peretz, editor of The New Republic, and Prof. David
Hartman of Hebrew University in Israel, although only the first two withdrew
from the editorial board.

''I didn't like the aggressive tone they have taken against Commentary,'' Mr.
Wiesel explained in an interview before the announcement that he was the winner
of the Nobel Peace Prize. ''I don't think magazines should be created against
other magazines.''

Norman Podhoretz, who has for 27 years been editor of Commentary, said he did
not feel threatened by the newcomer.

''A magazine exists after its exists for a certain length of time,'' he said.
''A manifesto is not a magazine. If Tikkun can find a place for itself and an
audience, then it will be worth talking about. So far all it is is an idea.'' He
also feels there are already several Jewish topical magazines with a liberal
perspective. Moment and Midstream are two Jewish intellectual magazines already
on the market.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AUSTRALIAN FILMS FACE QUANDARY

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia


Equally afraid of being seduced by flashy Americans and of remaining a
wallflower on the world movie scene, the Australian film industry is facing the
future with a mixture of self-assertion and longing.

In 1986, the industry has reached a crossroads. It is wrestling with how to make
movies for export and still remain distinctively Australian. The problem has
arisen because of several recent phenomena: The worldwide success of the ''Mad
Max'' movies, the American triumph of ''Crocodile Dundee,'' and the announcement
by Dino De Laurentiis that he is building a studio in Queensland at which he
will eventually produce 8 to 10 films a year. Along with the weakness of the
Australian dollar, which makes it a bargain to produce movies here, and the
bleak future for the tax concessions on which Australian films were built, the
industry is being pushed into producing on more than a regional basis.

Last year, 42 films were made in Australia. Most of them were bankrolled by
doctors, dentists, lawyers and civil servants interested in tax breaks. Many
people think the credits introduced in 1981 have encouraged a lot of second-rate
films. However, they also worry that repeal will mean looking to Hollywood for
cash and, thus, Hollywood control and American actors.

Stars Snared by Hollywood

Of the 13 Australian movies distributed in the United States in 1985, only ''Mad
Max III: Beyond Thunderdome'' (Warner Brothers) and ''A Test of Love''
(Universal) were released by major Hollywood studios. However, Hollywood has
snared a number of bright talents from Down Under. They include the actors Mel
Gibson and Bryan Brown, half a dozen of the best directors, and the
cinematographers John Seale, Donald McAlpine and Russell Boyd.

During the 1970's, the modern Australian film industry was established with
Government support and by such talented directors as Bruce Beresford (''Breaker
Morant''), Peter Weir (''Picnic at Hanging Rock''), Fred Schepisi (''The Chant
of Jimmie Blacksmith''), Philip Noyce (''Newsfront''), Paul Cox (''Man of
Flowers'') and Gillian Armstrong (''My Brilliant Career'').

The industry was created more out of cultural nationalism than out of a desire
to make a quick buck. ''At the end of the 60's, during the peak of the anti-
Vietnam War fervor, there was a new sense of national identity,'' said Frank
Morgan, deputy director of the Australian Film and Television School. ''We had
been a colony of the British Empire through the 1940's and a colony of America
during the 1950's and 1960's. Suddenly, Australians were challenging the idea
that you had to go to Europe or North America to achieve in the arts.''

From ''Gallipoli,'' a movie dealing with the fate of thousands of Australian
soldiers who were sacrificed in World War I, to ''Silver City,'' which dealt
with the immigrants who poured into Australia after World War II, there was a
flood of historical films that probed into famous military defeats, the fine
points of the cultural psyche and such nasty social problems as relationships
with the native Australians, the aborigines.

''We got a film industry going to interpret ourselves to ourselves,'' said
Philip Adams, who is regarded as the father of that industry. Producer,
newspaper columnist and advertising man, Mr. Adams successfully lobbied for the
film school and Government investment in movies. Now he warns that the tax
concessions introduced in 1981 will probably end next year.

''That will mean less attempts at art and more attempts at making a quid,'' Mr.
Adams said.

Paul Hogan, the star of ''Crocodile Dundee,'' is not the slightest bit
ambivalent about the need for Australian movies to make money. ''We can't afford
self-indulgence,'' he said. ''Too many little art films are being made. They're
never going to make money or appeal to the public. If that continues, this
industry will die.''

''Crocodile Dundee,'' a comedy about a self-sufficient backwoodsman who uses his
skills in the New York jungle, has earned about $11 million in film rentals, far
surpassing Australia's previous box-office winner, ''E. T.'' It has been
estimated that seven million people, almost half of Australia's population of 15
million, have seen ''Crocodile Dundee.''

Terry Jackman, former managing director of Hoyts theaters, said: ''During the
last five or six years -before 'Crocodile Dundee' - no contemporary Australian
films have worked.'' The only home-grown movie with a modern subject to do
passably well at the box office was Bruce Beresford's ''Puberty Blues,'' Mr.
Jackman said. Mr. Beresford, who received an Oscar nomination for directing
''Tender Mercies,'' returned to Australia early this year to make ''The Fringe
Dwellers,'' about the woes of modern-day aborigines.

Dino De Laurentiis, for whom Mr. Beresford recently finished ''Crimes of the
Heart,'' has signed the director for ''End of the Line,'' a true story about the
rescue of a trapped miner by two divers. The movie is scheduled to be made here
early next year. Mr. De Laurentiis said that ''End of the Line,'' which will
star Bryan Brown, will cost only $8.5 million. ''It would have cost $14 million
in Canada and $20 million in the United States,'' he said.

While Mr. De Laurentiis is offering employment to the country's skilled film
technicians and more clout in marketing Australian movies abroad, fears remain
that he will melt away when the Australian dollar shifts in value. To which Mr.
Jackman, the managing director of De Laurentiis Australia Ltd., responds:
''We're going to spend $10 million or $12 million building a studio. When the
dollar goes up, we can't pack up the studio and send it to Mexico.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mel Gibson (NYT); photo of Paul Hogan

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.N., by Record Vote, Urges Vietnam to Leave Cambodia

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 112 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 21


By a record margin, the General Assembly called again today for the withdrawal
of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia and for Cambodian self-determination.

The vote was 115 to 21, with 13 abstentions. Soviet-bloc nations opposed the
resolution.

Vietnam invaded Cambodia in late 1978 and has about 100,000 soldiers there. Each
year an increasing number of General Assembly members have joined in a call for
withdrawal.

Last year, the resolution was approved 114 to 21, with 16 abstentions.

Diplomats from the six members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
which led the effort in favor of the resolution, said they were pleased about
the increase in support.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
Bush Aides Assess the Contra Speculation

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 21


Marlin Fitzwater, Vice President Bush's press secretary, still chuckles about
the reporter who recently telephoned the Vice President's office, mentioned a
man's name, then asked if the man worked for George Bush in Central America.

Mr. Bush, a former Director of Central Intelligence, has denied any involvement
in directing a secret supply network for Nicaragua insurgents, known as contras.
But speculation persists and, in Mr. Fitzwater's view, ''It's reached a
ridiculous level.''

''Every freelance soldier in the Western Hemisphere says he works for George
Bush,'' he added.

In recent days, the speculation has spread to include questions about whether
Donald P. Gregg, Mr. Bush's national security adviser, serves as an
Administration link to a rebel supply network. There have also been suggestions
that Mr. Bush's son Jeb, the chairman of the Republican Party in Dade County,
Florida, has been active in supplying military equipment to the rebels.

Aides say the Vice President has not been damaged by the speculation since it
underscores the perception that Mr. Bush, like others in the Reagan
Administration, is strongly committed to the rebels seeking to topple the
Marxist Government in Nicaragua.

''It seems to me that a lot of people on the right are applauding the fact that
he is strongly for the contra movement,'' said a key Bush associate who asked
not to be identified.

But still, some aides seem concerned about the impression that Mr. Bush might
somehow be linked to a secret operation that, if conducted, would be in
violation of American law.

Since denying that assertion at length at a news conference when it first
surfaced, Mr. Bush has declined to disucss his role further. ''We have said all
there is to say,'' Mr. Fitzwater said. Mr. Gregg did not return telephone calls
on the subject.

Mr. Fitzwater said Mr. Bush decided to meet the allegations head-on when they
arose after a rebel supply plane was downed in Nicaragua two weeks ago and an
American survivor, Eugene Hasenfus, was captured.

Mr. Hasenfus, who went on trial in Managua this week, asserted that he was
associated with a man he identified as Max Gomez, who he said was an C.I.A.
operative who ran supply shipments to the contras from an air base in El
Salvador.

Mr. Gomez, whose actual name has been reported as Felix Rodriguez, is a
Cuban-American who participated in the Bay of Pigs invasion and worked for the
C.I.A. previously in Latin America and in Vietnam. Government officials have
said that he is not currently employed by the agency.

Bush Terms Him a 'Patriot'

Mr. Bush entered the picture first when The San Francisco Examiner linked him to
Mr. Gomez. The Vice President subsequently acknowledged at a news conference in
Charleston, S.C., that he knew Mr. Gomez, having met with him several times. He
termed him a ''patriot.''

Beyond that, Mr. Fitzwater confirmed that Mr. Gomez had been recommended for a
job as a counterinsurgency specialist in the Salvadoran Air Force by Mr. Gregg,
who worked at the C.I.A. as an operations officer from 1951 to 1979.

Mr. Bush denied ''unequivocally'' at the Charleston news conference that his
office was running an operation to supply the contras and said that the only
discussions he had had with Mr. Gomez were on other matters.

Giving Freedom a Chance

''The only discussions I have ever had with Felix relate to El Salvador,'' Mr.
Bush said. ''Now, if you want to ask am I glad that people are supporting the
contras, yes. That's our policy, and we feel strongly that freedom should have a
chance and democracy should have a chance.''

Mr. Bush added: ''For somebody to write as a nameless source that I was running
an operation in Nicaragua is just flat untrue. And I'd like to encourage people
to get those nameless sources out so we could have a chance to take a test as to
who's telling the truth on this matter.''

But Mr. Bush acknowledged that he was in a ''Catch-22'' situation, because ''I
want to see support for the contras.''

In Mr. Fitzwater's opinion, the allegations are not damaging to the Vice
President, because he met them by responding ''quickly, honestly and on the
record'' and because they are groundless.

''The implication that the Vice President is directing and coordinating any kind
operation is just not true and it's clear to everyone who has looked into it,''
he said.

Mr. Fitzwater also said that the only time Mr. Bush had met with leaders of the
contras was when they visited the White House in March as part of the
Administration's successful push to secure $100 million in military and
nonlethal assistance for the rebels.

What has been particularly disturbing, aides to Mr. Bush say, are more recent
reports that suggest that Jeb Bush might have been involved in efforts to supply
arms to the contras.

That assertion came last weekend in a CBS News report, which the younger Bush
disputed, Jeb Bush, 33, acknowledged in a telephone interview that he had
participated in a number of programs conducted by Spanish-language radio
stations in Miami to raise funds for the rebels. But he said the money generated
was for nonlethal assistance.

''What I have done is a far cry from being part of a arms supply link to the
contras,'' he said.

Although Administration officials outside the Vice President's office have
generally left it up to Mr. Bush's staff to fend off the charges, some have
suggested that they are being circulated as part of an attempt to undermine
President Reagan's Central American policy.

It has also been speculated in the White House that Mr. Bush's own staff leaked
suggestions about the Vice President's ties to the contras in hopes of
bolstering his standing with the conservative right, which backs the guerrillas.
Mr. Fitzwater and other staffers deny such duplicity.

A Button: 'Who Is Max Gomez?'

''It's a paradox, we've got people saying we put the story out and people saying
that we are trying to stop the story,'' said another aide to Mr. Bush.

Mr. Fitzwater, a former Treasury and White House press spokeman who went to work
for Mr. Bush last April, believes that the allegation involving the Vice
President will in time ''play itself out.''

And he has opted to ride out any public storm that arises. In his office at the
Executive Office Building is a button that says ''Who is Max Gomez?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of George Bush and son Jeb (UPI; Susan Greenwood)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MARSHAL YE JUANYING, 90, DIES; FORMER CHINESE HEAD OF STATE

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 796 words


Marshal Ye Jianying, a veteran army officer who became one of China's top
leaders in the late 1970's and its titular head of state from 1978 to 1983, died
today, the New China News Agency reported in Peking.

He was 90 years old.

Marshal Ye, a veteran of the epic Long March of 1934-35 that saved and shaped
China's Communist leadership, was Defense Minister from 1975 to 1978 and was a
major supporter of Hua Guofeng's drive to gain the party chairmanship, which
came in October 1976.

But Mr. Hua was eclipsed in the early 1980's by Deng Xiaoping, and Marshal Ye
rapidly lost influence. With his health failing, he was forced to retire from
his last major posts, in the Communist Party's ruling Politburo and on its
Standing Committee, in 1985.

As Defense Minister, he stressed military preparedness and the importance of
advanced weaponry. Even in the 1950's, at a time when ''people's war'' was
official policy, Marshal Ye had been a strong advocate of military
modernization.

Close Ties With Zhou

One reason for his prestige was his status as an ally of Prime Minister Zhou
Enlai. As a young military instructor known for his good humor, the future
marshal formed a friendship with Mr. Zhou, a fellow officer, that endured half a
century until Mr. Zhou died in 1976. According to the journalist Edgar Snow,
Marshal Ye ''was highly regarded for his sound strategic concepts by both Mao
and Zhou.''

At the peak of his career in 1976 and 1977, when he was the party's only Deputy
Chairman, analysts said Marshal Ye's eminence and power had other sources: He
was the leading figure in the Military Affairs Commission, the party body
overseeing the army, when the army was playing an influential part in political
events.

Marshal Ye repeatedly played sensitive and important roles within China's
leadership. After Mao's death in 1976, he helped obtain the arrest of the
radicals known as the Gang of Four, including Mao's widow, Jiang Qing.

But by the mid-1970's the marshal had already grown feeble with age, and in
March 1978 he stepped down as Defense Minister and moved to the less demanding
role of chief of state, with the formal title of Chairman of the Standing
Committee of the National People's Congress.

Early in 1983 he retired from that largely ceremonial post. His retirement -
officially because of frailness and advancing age - was widely seen as
buttressing the faction led by Mr. Deng, who had emerged as China's foremost
leader. The marshal had come to be regarded as an obstacle to Mr. Deng's
campaign to root out Maoist influences.

Native of Guangdong Province

The future marshal was born in a village in the southern province of Guangdong.
He had a middle-class upbringing, graduated from the Yunnan Military Academy in
1919, and by some accounts served in a warlord army before joining Sun Yat-sen's
Kuomintang and, later in the 1920's, the Communist Party.

He formed his friendship with Mr. Zhou when the two were on the faculty of the
elite Huangpu Military Academy near Canton, which opened in 1924.

In 1929 he went - together with Mr. Zhou - to Moscow, where he received advanced
military training. By the mid-1930's, after taking part in uprisings as well as
the Long March, he had become known as an outstanding officer, adept at
strategic planning. He was chief of staff of the Eighth Route Army in the war
against Japan, and he was sent by Mao to Chongqing in World War II as a liaison
officer with United States forces.

After the Communists came to power in 1949, he became Mayor of Peking, then
Mayor of Canton as well commander of the Guangdong Military District and the
larger South China Military Region. He was also the chief political commissar
for Guangdong. He went on to a succession of important Government posts and
diplomatic assignments, including leading military delegations to Burma, India,
North Vietnam and Poland.

Promoted to Marshal in 1955

In 1955 he was one of 10 men promoted to marshal, China's highest military rank.
There were indications that, after the Cultural Revolution began in 1966, he
went into eclipse, but his star rose again, and he was made a Politburo member
in what was widely thought to be an attempt by Mao, then the party's Chairman,
to reassure the army.

After Lin Biao, who was then Defense Minister, died in a purported coup attempt
in September 1971, Marshal Ye took his place. But he was not formally named
Defense Minister until January 1975, and some analysts have ascribed the delay
in part to behind-the-scenes disagreement about the appointment.

The marshal was married at least twice. In 1975 he was known to be married to
Zeng Xiezhi, and they were reported to have two daughters. A son, Jianmin, was
appointed Governor of Guangdong Province in 1985.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Marshal Ye Jianying (Camera Press)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Beware '86 Election Post-mortems

BYLINE: By Ted Van Dyk; Ted Van Dyk, a public-policy consultant, has held senior
positions for 25 years in Democratic Presidential nominating and general
election campaigns.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 683 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Congressional, state and local elections are nearly upon us. Thus, so are
post-mortems that will attempt to detect deep national meaning in the elections
and to extrapolate accordingly for the 1988 Presidential campaign. Pay little
attention to the morning-after dopesters. These midterm elections will have less
significance than most previous ones, which themselves did not mean much.

The crucial thing is that the electorate isn't much interested in politics. The
primary turnout this year has been at its lowest level in more than 20 years.
Only about 10 percent of eligible voters voted in statewide primaries for
senators and governors. Unless some major galvanizing event happens in the next
few days, the general election turnout will be correspondingly low. Only hard
core political activists in both major parties and people intensely concerned
with specific ballot issues are likely to take the trouble to vote.

The choices in this year's Federal and state elections are mostly not between
candidates of Good or Evil or between polarizing ideologies. With few
exceptions, they are between moderate and unexciting but generally responsible
people who have spent time in politics.

Second, America, which has been through a lot in recent years, seems to be
passing through one of its 30-year turn-inward-for-a-while cycles. It does not
seem unreasonable that, as in the 20's and 50's, voters are spending their time
and energy on home, work and family - institutions beset by economic and social
changes - and not on political contests they perceive (not necessarily wrongly)
as making little real difference.

The outcomes are in sight. The Democrats have more governorships at stake than
the Republicans; the G.O.P. should pick some up. In the Senate, the opposite is
true. Democrats thus should either gain a majority or come close to it. Because
of superior funding and organization, Republicans probably will continue to gain
somewhat in their efforts to win control of more state legislatures. Democrats
will gain a few seats in the House but fewer than in the usual off-year
campaign.

The 1988 campaign will have little to do with any of the above. For the
Democrats, there will be the good news that even Franklin D. Roosevelt and
Dwight D. Eisenhower, at the height of their popularity, were unable to transfer
it to their successors or parties. Ronald Reagan won't either. But there will be
bad news. Unless an economic or international disaster happens, people may be
content to ride things out for a while.

Presidential elections tend to be referendums on the status quo. If things seem
O.K., voters are inclined to go along with the ''ins.'' If things seem shaky,
they vote for change. Thus, in 1960, with the economy weakening and Mr.
Eisenhower unwilling to stimulate it to benefit Richard M. Nixon, John F.
Kennedy won. In 1968, with the Vietnam War tearing America apart and public
opinion showing the Great Society to be increasingly unpopular, Mr. Nixon seemed
a better bet than Lyndon B. Johnson's Vice President, Hubert H. Humphrey. In
1976, fed up with Watergate and the Nixon pardon, voters chose Jimmy Carter over
Gerald R. Ford. In 1980, upset with inflation and with Mr. Carter's perceived
ineptness, they went for Mr. Reagan.

By the same token, the electorate felt comparatively satisfied with things in
1964, 1972 and 1984 and stayed with Presidents Johnson, Nixon and Reagan
respectively.

Not particularly deep or complicated, you say? That's right.

The hard part for the G.O.P. will come in the next two years as the
Administration, having created huge budget and trade deficits, tries to fend off
their potentially disastrous consequences until Election Day. This means it will
have to make budget and policy choices inconsistent with Mr. Reagan's feel-good
rhetoric.

The Democrats have to hope for Republican policy failures without gloating over
any public pain. They also have to hope that their 1988 nominee can inspire
sufficient confidence that, if things seem to be going downhill in the country,
voters will trust him to take charge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE POLITICAL CAMPAIGN;
RETURN TO WESTCHESTER: ABZUG TRIES COMEBACK

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1075 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS, Oct. 21


The political stage has not been the same since the mid-1970's when ''Bella,'' a
one-woman show, ran in Manhattan, but received nationwide attention. Today the
show - still rousing, still impassioned, but scaled back a bit -has moved to
White Plains. And the critics are asking: Will it play in Westchester?

This is a question that Bella S. Abzug answers in a distinctive gravelly voice
that seems constitutionally incapable of mincing words.

''People are generally disinclined to get involved,'' Ms. Abzug, who is 66, said
in a recent interview. ''When they see someone who takes a stand, they like it.
They like the fact that I stand up and take a position.''

Ms. Abzug, a Democrat, is running against Joseph J. DioGuardi, the Republican
incumbent, who won his first bid for public office two years ago.

Different Voter Habitats

Voters in Westchester, she said, are just like voters in Manhattan, except that
they are harder to find.

Instead of congregating on street corners, they tend to be in shopping malls and
supermarkets. But they still smile - or at least raise their eyebrows - when
they recognize Ms. Abzug under her familiar hat; they still approach her on the
sidewalk and let her know who they are and what they do, surprisingly confident
that she will care.

''I'm a communicator,'' she said. ''I communicate to people and they relate to
me.'' And if they do not, well, so much for that. ''I'm resilient, I bounce back
a lot,'' she said.

It has been 10 years since Ms. Abzug, a three-term United States Representative
who was involved in the fight against the Vietnam War and the effort to impeach
President Richard M. Nixon, left Congress to make a bid for the Senate seat now
occupied by Daniel Patrick Moynihan. In a five-way primary, she lost that race
by 1 percent of the vote, a figure that is still frequently quoted by her
supporters, as if it could somehow ameliorate everything that has happened
since.

Two More Defeats

The next year, she ran unsuccessfully in the New York City mayoral primary, and
the year after, lost again in a Congressional campaign to represent the ''Silk
Stocking'' district of Manhattan.

After losing three elections in a row, she spent the next eight years outside of
electoral politics, lecturing, writing and heading a group dedicated to
registering women to vote. But she never lost the urge to hold office.

''She loved the House, and she wanted to get back in,'' said a political
consultant, Howard Brock, who served as Ms. Abzug's press secretary during her
early years in Congress.

Until recently, though, the right district had not presented itself, Mr. Brock
said. Either the district was already represented by a liberal Democrat, or it
was in an area with which she had no connection.

Links to Westchester

Ms. Abzug's connection to Westchester - she lived in Mount Vernon for 14 years
while her two daughters were children - has been made much of during the current
campaign, which has been colored with frequent charges of ''carpetbagging.'' She
now lives and has her law office in White Plains after many years in Manhattan.

Today Ms. Abzug credits her years in Mount Vernon with having shaped her
political consciousness. ''I was involved in the P.T.A., the school board
elections, real local activist kind of things,'' she said.

Friends say that Ms. Abzug's late husband, Martin, had been looking forward to
moving back to Westchester. His death in July, they say, has made this campaign
relatively subdued.

But while Ms. Abzug's style -widely known as combative and confrontational - may
have mellowed, her substance has not altered. In an age when most politicians
are fighting for a spot in the middle of the road, Ms. Abzug is content to
remain on the left side - too far to the left, according to Mr. DioGuardi, for
the 1980's.

'I Stand on What I Am'

''I am not a centrist,'' she said. ''I stand on what I am and what I've done.''

Ms. Abzug has been the subject of so much press coverage that she has become
more a personality than a politician. But her supporters, and some of her
detractors as well, say that what has been overlooked is an unusually strong
record of legislative success.

''She was a very effective legislator,'' said Dick Sullivan, chief counsel to
the House Public Works Committee, of which Ms. Abzug was a member. ''She
understood the process.''

''I always looked up to her,'' said Representative Norman Mineta, Democrat of
California, who is still a member of the committee. ''She was the type of
legislator who really cared about her district.''

Getting the Job Done

Mr. Mineta recalled how once Ms. Abzug took committee members on a tour of the
New York City subway system, then introduced a bill in which ''a large sum of
the mass transit money would have gravitated toward New York.''

''Everybody thought, 'Ha, ha, ha,' '' he said. But the bill, in a modified form,
eventually passed. ''She really got our attention,'' he said.

The daughter of a Russian immigrant, Emmanuel Savitzky, who ran the Live and Let
Live Meat Market on Ninth Avenue, Ms. Abzug is more comfortable campaigning at
day-care centers and shelters for the homeless than at fashionable social clubs
and corporate headquarters.

Ms. Abzug's earliest involvement in national politics was as a leader of the
Women's Strike for Peace, organized in response to the resumption of nuclear
testing in 1962. Despite the advances of the last decade, women today, according
to Ms. Abzug, remain woefully underrepresented. ''We've done everything in pairs
since Noah, except govern,'' she said. ''And I think we suffer for it.'' New
Issues, Old Passion If the issues that brought Ms. Abzug to prominence - women's
rights, the war in Vietnam and Watergate - are no longer in the forefront, this
does not seem to have diminished her sense of urgency.

''The question of what our priorities are is becoming daily a more and more
serious question,'' she said. ''Are we going to launch a trillion-dollar hoax
into space when we have no decent space left on earth?''

And if most of today's voters do not share this sense of urgency about the world
situation, neither has this, Ms. Abzug insisted, made her message obsolete.

''There are moments when people reach a pitch and moments when they look
inward,'' she said. During inward-looking times, they are no less in need of
leadership, she said. ''The least one can do,'' she said, ''is try.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bella Abzug (NYT/Suzanne DeChillo)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM D'AMATO-GREEN DEBATE IN ALBANY

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1394 words


Following are excerpts from a debate last night between the two candidates in
the Nov. 4 election for United States Senator from New York - the incumbent
Alfonse M. D'Amato, and Mark Green.

Opening Statements

GREEN. Thank you. I want to thank the League especially for allowing the public
to hear tonight the clearest choice in a generation for the United States
Senate, between a fighting Democrat out of the party of Roosevelt and Truman and
Cuomo and a far right Republican out of Joe Margiotta's corrupt Nassau machine.
Ask yourself tonight as you watch which of us can best represent your needs and
your beliefs in the United States Senate in the future.

For example, I think it's wrong to send $100 million in aid to thugs called the
contras in Nicaragua. My opponent says it's fine.

I think it's essential that we have tougher handgun control laws to reduce the
killing on our streets. My opponent disagrees.

I think women have the right to choice. My opponent wants to make all abortions
criminal.

Well, based on my years of experience with Ralph Nader, I think Al D'Amato is a
consumer fraud . . . Because while he talks like Jacob Javits he votes like
Jesse Helms, and because while he ways that he brings home the bacon, in fact
New York has lost more Federal aid than any other state per capita.

As a result of my opponent's votes there is less money for Social Security, less
money for pollution control enforcement, less money for student loans. . . .

D'AMATO: . . . We've just concluded a rather historic session - the 99th
Congressional session came to an end. And with it, some historic legislation has
been passed. Tax reform, true tax reform. And I voted for that and fought for
it, and fought in that bipartisan tradition to see to it that New York's
interests and concerns were heard and observed. I led the battle, along with my
colleagues, along with Governor Cuomo and Pat Moynihan, to preserve the
deduction of state and local taxes. We won that fight by coming together.

I fought the battle to bring more dollars in mass transportation to this state.
As a result of that, $600 million more have come to New York due to my efforts
to see to it that there was a dedicated source of funding for mass transit. It's
been Al D'Amato who's been fighting for working middle-class families in New
York; fighting to preserve senior citizen housing, Urban Development Action
Grants. It's a record that I'm proud of. It's the kind of record that has
brought bipartisan support to my candidacy. . . . ...

Campaign Contribution

Q. You testified on behalf of a discotheque owner from your home town of Island
Park. Your testimony was as a character witness for a man who was accused of
being an associate of a major mobster. Now, on one hand we've seen you out
speaking very forcefully against the mob, yet here's your testimony. Do you see
this as contradictory?

D'AMATO: Not only speaking forcefully but doing something: passing the
comprehensive crime control bill. Doing more to bring about an effort in terms
of mobilizing this nation and its resources against the scourge of a drug
epidemic.

And to more particularly respond to your question, this was a person in my
community, a local community, who I had known as a hard-working family man
businessman. I was not aware of his associations that have come subsequently.

And by the way, there have been some who've said you've accepted some money. I
was not aware of that. We had more than 70,000 individual contributions to our
campaign. Our campaign checked out the records. Indeed, he and I believe his
wife have made contributions. Those contributions were returned. ...

GREEN: Let me talk about Philip Basile since you asked the question. He's a man
whose nightclub had 20 drug arrests in one year. He's a man who was indicted and
convicted of conspiring with an organized crime member, a member of the Lucchese
family to get a drug dealer out of prison. You know who his only character
witness was? Al D'Amato. He exploited the position of U.S. Senator, walked into
court and said that this man, Philip Basile, was a man of integrity. Instead,
the jury thought that he was a felon. What kind of signal does it send on the
issue of drugs, on the issue of crime, when Al D'Amato testifies for such a man
and then takes $1,000 from him ...

Dealing With Soviet

Q. Mr. Green, both your Democrat and Republican opponents have painted you as a
leftist Democrat. Following that theme, do you feel we can negotiate with
confidence with the Soviet Union?

GREEN: Of course. First, I am in the progressive mainstream of both my parties.
My first job in public life was with Jacob Javits. I worked a decade with Ralph
Nader, then with Senator Gary Hart. Governor Cuomo's appointed me to the State's
Industrial Cooperation Council. So I think I'm working for patriots and my
public career . . . as a public interest lawyer demonstrates it.

Of course we have to stand up to the Soviets in places like Afghanistan. We have
to sit down with them as well when it comes to negotiating arms control
treaties. I'm very disappointed that this administration said that Star Wars
would be a bargaining chip but they wouldn't spend it. And they went there with
high hopes and came back with alibis.

I think this is the first Administration since the nuclear genie got out of the
bottle, that hasn't produced one single arms control treaty. . . . ...

Q. Senator D'Amato, . . . you said President Reagan was correct in not giving up
the Strategic Defense Initiative, but the agreement that the Russians were
willing to sign would continue to allow S.D.I. research. This agreement would
have been the only one in history that was an actual arms reduction agreement,
which is something the President said he wanted. Isn't this simply standing up
to the Russians for the sake of standing up to the Russians?

D'AMATO: I don't believe so. I think Ronald Reagan will eventually have that
nuclear arms accord - one that is verifiable, one that really reduces weapons -
nuclear weapons. I think we are very close. But I also think there's another
reason that he's come so close, and that's because he has insisted on bringing
us to a position of strength. We were teetering on the brink of falling
perilously behind, in terms of being able to preserve peace. I think that our
S.D.I. is an important part in terms of securing for American today, and its
future, its legitimate defensive needs. Why should the Soviets be concerned
about a defensive system, and the testing of that system? We're not talking
about an offensive system - a defensive system. . . . ...

Central America

Q. . . . The President said that one of the things that caused him to go into
aid to the contras was the placement of MIG's at an airbase in Nicaragua, or the
preparation, rather, of the base for MIG's. Do you think that was not cause for
him to take action? And what action would you have told him to take were you to
be a U. S. Senator?

GREEN: The President does not yet return my phone calls. But if I called him,
and he took the call, I would say that if the Soviets went into any country in
Central America with MIG's or nuclear missiles - as they did, of course, in Cuba
in the early 1960's - that would be cause for an American response. Realize, of
course, there are no Soviet MIG's in Nicaragua, to our knowledge.

Why are we in Nicaragua? We're saying that we're protecting the Contadora
nations around Nicaragua from them exporting their revolution. Well, let me tell
you, the Sandinistas, I think, have betrayed a lot of their revolution. . . .
But the Contadora nations, who are supposedly the beneficiaries of our policy,
oppose Al D'Amato's $100 million in aid to the contras. . . . They prefer,
instead, to negotiate with Nicaragua. . . .

Q. Senator D'Amato, on that question?

D'AMATO: You know, it's interesting that the same people who today oppose aid to
Nicaragua are for the most part the same people who opposed aid to El Salvador.
El Salvador would have been lost. We would not have had President Duarte, who's
attempting to build and does have the broad-base support of the people, who are
now themselves under attack by the guerrillas. I might suggest when we begin to
liken Nicaragua to Vietnam that we just don't understand history, or where we
are in this nation. ...

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mark Green and Sen. Alfonse D'Amato (NYT/David Jennings)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

$50,000 IS AWARDED TO ACTIVISTS IN 60'S RIGHTS VIOLATIONS BY F.B.I.

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 22


A Federal district judge today ordered four former agents of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation to pay more than $50,000 in damages to four 1960's political
activists and a peace organization whose constitutional rights were violated.

The ruling by the judge, Louis F. Oberdorfer, nearly brings to an end a
10-year-old damage suit against top operatives under J. Edgar Hoover, who was
the F.B.I. Director, in a program to intimidate and disrupt groups opposed to
the Vietnam War and civil rights organizations.

The plaintiffs in this case, four individuals and the Washington Peace Center,
were shown in the agents' trial in 1981 to have been the targets of false press
releases designed to tarnish their reputations, fictitious ''housing assistance
forms'' sent to demonstrators coming to Washington, infiltration by informers
and telephone taps and intimidation by F.B.I. interviewers.

'A Common and Unlawful Plan'

Judge Oberdorfer said today in a 30-page opinion that the agents had
participated ''in a common and unlawful plan'' under Mr. Hoover to ''expose,
disrupt and otherwise neutralize'' the plaintiffs' constitutionally protected
rights to speak freely against the Vietnam War and for civil rights for blacks.
One of the plaintiffs, Arthur Waskow, now a rabbi in Philadelphia, was placed on
the bureau's ''security index,'' a list of citizens regarded as ''leaders of
basic subversive organizations who have shown the greatest propensity for
violence.''

The jury in the 1981 trial awarded the plaintiffs total damages of $711,000, an
award an appeals court later held to be too high. The appeals court also
dismissed as defendants the former District of Columbia police chief and a
number of Washington police investigators who had participated with F.B.I.
agents in the program. But the appeals bench affirmed the jury's verdict that
the F.B.I. agents were subject to ''individual and conspiratorial liability''
for their acts. A separate and much larger claim of some $300,000 in plaintiffs'
legal fees is still pending against the defendants, as well as a fifth agent. He
has demanded that a jury determine his separate liability in the case.

U.S. May Pay Award

The Justice Department may end up paying the penalties under a new program,
announced in July by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, to pay civil damage
judgments and legal fees of Government employees sued for official acts. Mark
Sheehan, a department spokesman, said late today that there has been no decision
yet on payments to the F.B.I. defendants under the program but that ''my
understanding is that this case would be covered by that policy.''

Mr. Meese's proposal has brought Congressional criticism that it would diminish
the incentive of Federal agents to avoid participating in ''wrongful acts.''

In an interview today, Anne Pilsbury, the plaintiff's principal lawyer in the
case, which was conducted with the support of the Washington chapter of the
American Civil Liberties Union, called the case an ''extraordinarily important
decision for First Amendment rights, for free speech.''

''The issue has been 'can you put a monetary value on the loss of your First
Amendment rights?' '' she said. ''We said that you must be able to value them.''

According to the ruling, the four retired agents must pay the following amounts
by Nov. 10:

Charles D. Brennan, former head of the bureau's domestic intelligence branch,
$20,001; George C. Moore, who headed the F.B.I.'s ''black nationalist'' branch,
$15,001; and two other agents, Courtland Jones, $8,000, and Gerald Grimaldi,
$8,125. The additional liability of the fifth F.B.I. defendant, Gerould
Pangburn, who is still on active duty, is to be determined later.

Under a complex formula that Judge Oberdorfer said in his order followed the
judgment of the original jury verdict, the plaintiffs and their awards were
listed as follows:

Mr. Waskow, $10,600; the Rev. David Eaton, pastor of All Souls Unitarian Church,
$15,162.50; Mrs. Tina Hobson, widow of former City Councilman Julius Hobson,
$11,100; Richard Pollock, a Washington public relations man, $7,663.50, and the
Washington Peace Center, $7,601.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: Q & A: Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.;
WATCHING THE PENDULUM OF POWERS OF CONGRESS

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1051 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 22


Until he officially retires in January, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. will keep his
office here on the 22d floor of the Federal buildingnamed for John F. Kennedy,
the man whom Mr. O'Neill succeeded in 1952 as the Representative of the Eighth
Massachusetts District. The Speaker will be succeeded by President Kennedy's
nephew, Joseph P. Kennedy.

The Speaker is known for his loyalty to friends and supporters, and on Monday he
spent the day in Chicago, raising money for Representative Marty Russo, a member
of the Ways and Means Committee. Tuesday, Mr. O'Neill was able to realize a
lifelong ambition and throw out the first ball in Fenway Park, for the third
game of the World Series.

Today, with Congress finally gone and his beloved Red Sox leading the Series,
the Speaker took an hour in his office here to discuss the institution he is
leaving, and the problems it faces in the years ahead.

Q. What are the main ways that you've seen Congress change? It's for the better.
Back when we came in, we were full of pep and vinegar and we wanted to change
it, were opposed to the seniority system, wanted to have a voice in the Congress
and all that. But that wasn't the way it was in those days. The leadership and
the chairmen of various committees were the cardinals of the operation. There
was no spreading of power.

Well, we did open it up, you know, after the '74 election. That group that came
in in '74, more of those people had never served in public life than any other
group, I believe, in the history of Congress. The party itself, the Democratic
Party, it had changed. You didn't have the leadership across the nation; you
didn't have the party organizations.

So when these people came in -they were highly educated, very, very
sophisticated, many of them were junior executives well on the road to success -
they had no loyalty to the party whatsoever. And we ran into difficulty. They
set up their own caucus and they were a factor. They had 54 and if they left
you, you were in trouble.

The old boys were running the shop and they wanted to have a part of it. And so
you came in with the system of so many subcommittees. I think we had a 160-odd
subcommittees. Too many now. The party is dispersed in the hands of too many
people. But the pendulum is swinging back.

Q. You mean that people want power less dispersed?

Yes. They say there are too many subcommittees out there, too many. And too many
staff people.  Q. While the institutional power was dispersed during your time,
did the institution as a whole gain more power - reassert its power - vis-a-vis
the President after the war powers turmoil of Vietnam and the abuses of
Watergate?

Absolutely, it reasserted itself. And it took back the power that the President
had assumed.

Q. Do you think that the way Congress runs has to be changed further?

I think we ought to do something about the PAC's, put on a limitation. It's
wrong when you can go out there and you can raise a couple of million dollars.
By raising a couple of million dollars, what does that mean? That means that I
scare anybody from running against me. Now, when you have a fellow that has
that, he becomes a kind of a little bit of an autocrat, thinks he's a power
within himself. Kind of forgets from where he came. You need somebody barking at
your heels.

Q: What do you think about next year? What is your advice to Jim Wright about
how he should handle things if he succeeds you, as is expected?

Jim's biggest problems are that he's very thin-skinned, and he's very quick to
react, and he's a red-head, he's apt to flare. And I keep telling him, ''Jim,
listen, people come in and here you - you know, you blow off a little steam in a
little hurry if you don't agree with them. A good listener is better than a good
talker. Listen to everybody's statement along the line.'' He's going to have to
learn this very fast - you have to consider the party at all times, at all
times. Where's the party going to go? You analyze the elections.

But Jim is going to do a good job. You know, he's basically a moderate, or a
progressive, where I have been a liberal through the years. The fellows will
respect him for what he is. Jim's one of the finest - probably the finest orator
in the Congress.

Q: Do you worry that the Democratic Party has forgotten where it comes from? No.
Q. What should be the agenda for the party next year?

Well, the agenda basically doesn't change. You can't pull up the ladder on the
people that are behind you. You can't let the person with the calloused heart
take away from them the rights that are there.

Q. So you think that's still the agenda of the Democrats?

Those are things you always have to watch. When the going is the toughest for
this Government is when the Democratic Party always does its best. And the
people turn to the Democratic Party because they know that it has concern.

Q. What do the Democrats have to do to win in '88?

I think the pendulum has swung anyway. My personal opinion: While the President
has tremendous popularity, there's going to be a Teflon transfer. I don't see
how they stop Bush as their nominee. And he's the guy that advocates the
programs of the President. And the people out there don't like the programs of
the President. Bush is the easiest that the Democratic Party ought to think it's
going to be able to beat.

As for the faults and the mistakes that we've made in our party, one has been
the power of the party has been in the liberals hands of the Northeast section -
or from Chicago east. We haven't broadened ourselves as far as bringing leaders
in.

I have a feeling that the party would do good if we had somebody from the
Midwest, California, somebody from the South and that we avoided the East for
once. I think that the East has controlled the Democratic Party too long. We're
a national party and it's high time that we broadened our perspective.

Q. Finally, looking back over it all, Is there anything you would have done
differently, Mr. Speaker?

As Speaker, no. I'm proud of the things that I did as Speaker. I put a strong
ethics code in there. I opened up the Congress and brought television to the
House. You got to have the image shine. We've spread the power out there. We've
opened the House, and I think all in all the Congress has been pretty good.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Tip O'Neil (NYT/George Tames)

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MARSHAL YE JIANYING DIES AT 90; HAD BEEN CHINA'S HEAD OF STATE

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section D; Page 30, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 831 words


Marshal Ye Jianying, a veteran Communist army officer who became one of China's
leaders in the late 1970's and the head of state from 1978 to 1983, died
yesterday, the New China News Agency reported in Peking. He was 90 years old.

Marshal Ye, a veteran of the epic Long March of 1934-35 that saved and shaped
China's Communist leadership, was Defense Minister from 1975 to 1978 and a
supporter of Hua Guofeng's drive to gain the party chairmanship in 1976 after
the death of Mao Zedong.

But Mr. Hua was eclipsed in the early 1980's by Deng Xiaoping, and Marshal Ye
lost influence. His health failing, he was forced to retire from the Chinese
leadership in 1985.

As Defense Minister, he stressed military preparedness and the importance of
advanced weapons. Even in the 1950's, at a time when ''people's war'' was
official policy, Marshal Ye had been a strong advocate of military
modernization.

Close Ties With Zhou Enlai

One reason for his prestige was his status as an ally of Prime Minister Zhou
Enlai. As a young military instructor known for his good humor, the future
marshal formed a friendship with Mr. Zhou, a fellow officer, that endured half a
century until Mr. Zhou died in 1976. According to the journalist Edgar Snow,
Marshal Ye ''was highly regarded for his sound strategic concepts by both Mao
and Zhou.''

At the peak of his career in 1976 and 1977, when he was the party's deputy
chairman, analysts said Marshal Ye's eminence and power had other sources: He
was the leading figure in the Military Affairs Commission, the party body
overseeing the army, when the army was playing an influential part in political
events.

Marshal Ye played important roles in China's Communist leadership. After Mao's
death in 1976, he helped obtain the arrest of the radicals known as the Gang of
Four, including Mao's widow, Jiang Qing.

But by the mid-1970's the marshal had grown feeble with age, and in March 1978
he stepped down as Defense Minister and moved to the less demanding role of
chief of state, with the formal title of Chairman of the Standing Committee of
the National People's Congress.

Early in 1983 he retired from that ceremonial post. It had become nominally the
country's highest ranking position after the post of President was abolished
during the Cultural Revolution. This position was reinstated and filled in June
1983 by another old revolutionary, Li Xiannian.

Marshal Ye's retirement - officially because of frailness and advancing age -
was widely seen as buttressing the faction led by Mr. Deng, who had emerged as
China's foremost leader. The marshal had come to be regarded as an obstacle to
Mr. Deng's campaign to root out Maoist influences, which were diminished in late
1982 and early 1983 by the removal of various officers from national and
provincial positions.

Native of Guangdong Province

The future marshal was born in Meizhou, in Guangdong Province. He had a
middle-class upbringing, was graduated from the Yunnan Military Academy in 1919,
and by some accounts served in a warlord army before joining Sun Yat-sen's
Kuomintang and, in the 1920's, the Communists.

He formed his friendship with Mr. Zhou when the two were on the faculty of the
elite Huangpu Military Academy near Canton, which opened in 1924.

In 1929 he went - together with Mr. Zhou - to Moscow, where he received advanced
military training. By the mid-1930's, after taking part in uprisings as well as
the Long March, he had become known as an outstanding officer, adept at
strategic planning. He was chief of staff of the Eighth Route Army in the war
against Japan, and he was sent by Mao to Chongqing in World War II as a liaison
officer with United States forces.

After the Communists came to power in 1949, he became Mayor of Peking, then
Mayor of Canton as well commander of the Guangdong Military District and of the
larger South China Military Region. He was also the chief political commissar
for Guangdong. He went on to a succession of important Government posts and
diplomatic assignments, including leading military delegations to Burma, India,
North Vietnam and Poland.

Promoted to Marshal in 1955

In 1955 he was one of 10 men promoted to marshal, China's highest military rank.
There were indications that, after the Cultural Revolution began in 1966, he
went into eclipse, but his star rose again, and he was made a Politburo member
in what was thought to be an attempt by Mao, then the party's chairman, to
assure the army.

After Lin Biao, the Defense Minister, died in a purported coup attempt in
September 1971, Marshal Ye took his place. But he was not formally named Defense
Minister until January 1975, and some analysts have ascribed the delay in part
to behind-the-scenes disagreement about the appointment.

The marshal was married at least twice. In 1975 he was known to be married to
Zeng Xiezhi, and they were reported to have two daughters. A son, Jianmin, was
appointed Governor of Guangdong Province in 1985.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ye Jianying (Agnece France-Presse)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Don't Turn Your Back on the Veteran, Uncle Sam

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 505 words


To the Editor:

In reply to ''Let's Address Our Taboos'' by Gov. Richard D. Lamm of Colorado
(Op-Ed, Oct. 13), the more than 100,000 men and women in our Veterans
Administration hospitals, nursing homes and domiciliaries deserve a far better
fate than he apparently has the humanity to grant them. I speak in particular of
the Governor's fourth paragraph:

''Seventy-two percent of the care in the nation's 172 veterans' hospitals is for
nonservice-connected disabilities. If a veteran took a bullet at Normandy, we
clearly should care for him. But does the same obligation apply if he falls off
a bar stool in Chicago?''

In less than 50 words, the Governor has wrought considerable violence. He has
disposed of the repeated pledges made by our country to its veterans, that, if
they chose, their health needs would be free of charge for life. Yes, burn that
contract, Governor, no matter what the cost to the veterans and their families.
Burn it and then figure out how to make future servicemen believe any promises
made by their Government.

Through the use of the phrase ''if he falls off a bar stool in Chicago,'' the
Governor has defamed countless hospitalized veterans whose only mistake is to be
poor at a time when hospital costs average $300 a day.

Whether or not a serviceman went into combat (and in World War II, for example,
only 10 percent did) was never determined by him. Decisions about which Army
units or Navy vessels saw battle were made by the generals and admirals, of
course. Yet each serviceman, on the day he was sworn in, stood the same chance
of being maimed or killed as every other one. Now Governor Lamm says we should
decide who does or does not receive a V.A. hospital bed by this roll of the
military dice.

Some units in World War II lost 80 percent to 90 percent of their personnel,
some in Vietnam even more. But those who survived those same battles, provided
they escaped without a wound, would not be eligible for treatment 30 or 40 years
later if they could not pass the Governor's service-connected test. And that
would be the case whether they were dying from cancer, being saved from kidney
failure through costly dialysis or even paralyzed after having fallen off a ski
lift in Boulder, Colo.

I am acquainted with some V.A. patients to whom I would like the Governor to
repeat his ''bar stool'' remark. I'd like him to tell it to Ruth H., a
courageous black veteran in Houston who recently lost her second leg to
diabetes. I'd like him to repeat it to the residents of the intensive-care unit
at the Bronx V.A. while the cathode-ray monitors beep out their constant vigil
over feeble and arrhythmic hearts.

Finally, I would appreciate it if he would explain the finer points of his
remark to some 500 severely depressed or schizophrenic veterans at the Montrose
V.A. in Westchester County. But do not wait for their reply, Governor. Some of
them have not spoken in years.

ARNOLD DRAKE
National Executive Director
Veterans Bedside Network
  New York, Oct. 16, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HASENFUS REFERS TO SECRET AIRSTRIP

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Oct. 23


A plane carrying supplies for Nicaraguan insurgents used a clandestine airstrip
in Costa Rica this year, according to an American captured after his own supply
plane was shot down in southern Nicaragaua.

The American prisoner, Eugene Hasenfus, also said in an interview here that a
Miami concern, Southern Air Transport, had provided mechanics and hand tools for
rebel planes at the mainly military airbase in El Salvador. Southern Air
Transport used to work for the Central Intelligence Agency. Company officials
have repeatedly stated that it no longer does so.

Mr. Hasenfus, who is being tried by a Sandinista political court, also said the
chief American military adviser in El Salvador visited a rebel safe house in San
Salvador to tell operatives working there to stop ''raising hell'' in nightly
outings around town.

Services Supplied

William J. Kress, a spokesman for the Southern Air Transport Company,
acknowledged in a telephone interview that the company had provided ''mechanics
and services'' to ''a customer'' in El Salvador flying the rebel supply planes
into Nicaragua.

He also said Southern Air had provided a ticket for Mr. Hasenfus to fly to El
Salvador, although Mr. Hasenfus was not an employee of the company.

Mr. Hasenfus said at least four of his fellow rebel plane crew members had
worked with him for Air America, a C.I.A.-run airline that was used extensively
in Vietnam. His statements suggest that whoever set up the rebel supply
operation in El Salvador had the knowledge to locate and recruit men such as
himself who had worked for C.I.A.-air operations in the past.

But Mr. Hasenfus also painted a picture of a covert operation that had trappings
of professionalism, but in fact was poorly run.

One-Hour Interview

Mr. Hasenfus spoke in a one-hour interview at a military prison in the presence
of two Nicaraguan officials, one of whom spoke English.

Mr. Hasenfus looked relaxed and said he had been well-treated, but he added that
he was ''not sure'' at times how he really felt. He is now on trial and his
statements could affect his treatment.

In two separate instances Mr. Hasenfus denied important statements Sandinista
officials have attributed to him. He denied that a rebel operative named Ramon
Medina had said he knew Vice President Bush and he denied that he had seen any
evidence showing that guns for the rebels were shipped from the United States.

In speaking of a secret airstrip used by rebel flights in Costa Rica, Mr.
Hasenfus gave a description that appears to resemble closely a landing field
closed by the Costa Rican Government two months ago on the Nicoya Peninsula near
the Nicaraguan border.

Under Supervision of Americans

Several residents there said the airfield was built under the supervision of two
Americans earlier this year.

Mr. Hasenfus said rebel planes made supply drops to Nicaraguan rebel units near
the Costa Rican border in southern Nicaragua.

Mr. Hasenfus emphasized again that he was not a C.I.A. agent. But he said that
he thought he had joined an operation backed by the C.I.A. or some other branch
of the American Government and that he now felt abandoned. American officials
deny he was working for any branch of the Government.

Mr. Hasenfus said he was hired by the chief rebel pilot, William J. Cooper, who
died in the lost plane. ''Cooper said this stuff is coming directly from the top
shelf,'' Mr. Hasenfus said. ''He meant from Washington.''

Mr. Hasenfus has been allowed to see the American press more often than he has
been allowed to see his lawyer, his wife or the American Consul here at a time
when he is on trial for crimes that carry a 30-year prison sentence.

Mr. Hasenfus's lawyer, Enrique Sotelo Borgen, formally answered the state's case
against his client this afternoon by challenging the legitimacy of the
Sandinista tribunal to judge the case. He also denied the charges against Mr.
Hasenfus and said they were too inexact to be prosecuted. [Griffin B. Bell, a
former United States Attorney General who is seeking to join the defense team,
arrived in Nicaragua tonight, The Associated Press reported from Managua. He was
quoted as saying of Mr. Hasenfus, ''I have great reason to doubt he is a
terrorist.''] Explaining why the deceased American pilot and co-pilot of the
downed rebel airplane were carrying highly revealing secret documents in
violation of most basic security procedures, Mr. Hasenfus said they ''got too
relaxed,'' and even refused to wear parachutes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
Around the World With Weinberger

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 23


On Oct. 11, as senior Administration officials gathered in the chill of
Reykjavik, Iceland, for a superpower conference, Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger sat in semitropical Kunming, China, 200 miles from the tense border
with Vietnam, being briefed on a running artillery duel that most of the world
has long ignored.

Mr. Weinberger's unswerving hard line on arms negotiations had made him seem a
bit out of step with the Administration going into the Reykjavik rendezvous,
casting doubt on how much influence he would retain as he toured Asia.

Two days later, in India, the Defense Secretary wore a look of satisfaction.

A Unity of Views

President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev had moved toward the kind of dramatic
reductions in nuclear missiles that Mr. Weinberger has long favored over more
modest limits. Then, at the last moment, Mr. Reagan had - ''to his eternal
credit,'' said this loyal Cabinet member -walked away from the package because
it would have sharply constrained research on research for a space-oriented
defense against missiles under the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization.

Even half a globe away, Mr. Weinberger's influence was being felt. He was, of
course, represented in Iceland by an able deputy, Richard N. Perle. And it may
be that the often-cited Cabinet infighting between Mr. Weinberger and Secretary
of State George P. Shultz is, as the Defense Secretary insists, overblown.

But most evident of all to those who went along with Mr. Weinberger on his
19-day circumnavigation of the world was the continuing unity of views between
him and the President.

Mood Rises Further

As Mr. Weinberger's tour wore on, taking him from China and India to Pakistan,
Egypt, Italy, West Germany and Scotland, his mood seemed to rise further.

He scored minor successes in China, where a port visit was arranged, and India
and Pakistan, where he promised additional military technology to the first and
arms to the second. At each stop, as if to underscore his role as Presidential
envoy, he carried a letter from Mr. Reagan to the head of state.

As he left Asia for Europe, the strategic debate seized his attention and he
seemed to sense his position of strength. He was elated by polls showing that
the American public blamed the Russians, not the President, for the collapse of
the Reykjavik talks. Even more pleasant for Mr. Weinberger was the public
support for the Strategic Defense Initiative. Suddenly, in the wake of
Reykjavik, the polls found people willing to support Mr. Weinberger's view,
firmly shared by the President, that the plan was not to be bargained away.

Arriving in Europe, where military leaders were reportedly alarmed by events in
Iceland, he found Italian Defense Minister Giovanni Spadolini in a receptive
mood. Dining at the ornate Palazzo Barberini in Rome and again at Mr.
Spadolini's Florence residence, he heard that the Euro-pean concerns revolved
mainly around the mechanics of the swift events in Iceland.

To the extent that the Europeans were worried about the long-term strategic
repercussions of the deals that had been discussed in Iceland, Mr. Weinberger
found, he could assuage them by stressing that the United States would not
casually let down its deterrent guard over Europe.

The Spadolini meetings, and Monday's visit in Germany with Lieut. Gen. Colin
Powell, Mr. Weinberger's former military assistant who now commands a central
European corps, offered him time to prepare for the meeting this week of the
Atlantic alliance's defense ministers at Gleneagles, Scotland. Here, too, his
close tie to the President would stand him in good stead.

Despite rumblings of discontent among the Europeans, who are reluctant to give
up their cherished American nuclear umbrella, Mr. Weinberger was after all among
defense ministers, men who share his, and Mr. Reagan's, view of the world.

And it quickly became clear that the alliance would endorse Mr. Reagan's actions
in Iceland. On the first morning of the meeting, British Defense Minister George
Younger said he could foresee no other outcome.

Indeed, the ministers' attention focused quickly on an apparent misstep by the
Russian side, which departed Iceland declaring that deals on strategic weapons,
intermediate-range Euromissile forces and the ''Star Wars'' program would have
to be treated as a ''package.''

Before the Reykjavik conference, Mr. Gorbachev had always been willing to
negotiate a separate deal on Euromissiles, such as the Soviet SS-20 and the
American Pershing and cruise missiles.

Some Tough Language

The final communique from Gleneagles, which ''fully endorsed the United States
positions at Geneva on intermediate-range, strategic and defense and space
systems,'' also demanded that the Kremlin ''reaffirm its commitments'' to
negotiate for a separate deal on intermediate systems, not holding them
''hostage'' to the antimissile research.

''A failure to do so would destroy the credibility of the highest Soviet
assurances,'' the communique declared.

It was, said a senior American official, ''the toughest language I have ever
seen'' in such a NATO document, and a direct attack on Mr. Gorbachev's policy
reversal.

Mr. Weinberger himself had been criticizing the Soviet Union all along.

In a speech to senior Chinese military men at the National Defense University in
Peking, he mentioned the Russians more than three dozen times. In a major policy
address in Anchorage, as he left on this trip, he said he would accept only
concrete actions, not conciliatory remarks like those of Mr. Gorbachev in
Vladivostok last August, as markers of good will in the Asian and Pacific
region.

And he scoffed at Moscow's withdrawal this month of six combat regiments from
Afghanistan, calling it a ''ruse.''

That remark caught the Russians' attention. A Soviet General Staff officer
called the Defense Secretary's comment ''a deliberate lie . . . provocative
fabrications . . . falsification.''

In fact, a Pentagon analysis of Soviet press reports on Mr. Weinberger suggests
that the Kremlin watches him carefully, and has paid particular attention to his
views since 1983, the time when the antimissile plan became a Reagan priority.

''Although the Soviets depict Weinberger as a villain throughout this period,
they have emphasized Weinberger's influence and policy stances particularly
during the last quarter of 1985 and throughout 1986,'' as Mr. Reagan and Mr.
Gorbachev began talking, the Pentagon's analysts wrote.

In Washington, the report seemed to be suggesting, the Defense Secretary's
influence might be dismissed by some. But perhaps not in the Kremlin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Caspar Weinberger (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
To Correct Moral Erosion

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 749 words


PROF. JAMES M. BUCHANAN of George Mason University, this year's winner of the
Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science, argues that politics can be subjected
to the same analysis that economists apply to markets, since individuals in both
realms essentially seek to serve their own interests, rather than those of
society.

This approach to politics is not unique to Dr. Buchanan. Indeed, an earlier
winner of the economics prize, Prof. Herbert Simon of Carnegie-Mellon
University, holds that corporate actions are shaped by the personal interests of
high-level executives, not just by the assumed profit-maximizing objectives of
the corporation.

It makes a big difference in understanding corporate behavior to focus on the
complex - and sometimes conflicting - aims of individual executives, board
members or stockholders, rather than treat the corporation as though it were an
organic being with decision-making powers of its own. The same holds for the
state. Is this way of analyzing political or corporate behavior value-free or
does it imply a moral judgment? Throughout his career, Dr. Buchanan has tried to
be objective and ''positive'' and to avoid moralizing. In recent years, however,
he has become increasingly concerned with moral issues; he describes the
''observed behavior'' of the modern American as ''excessively self-interested.''

He is afraid that moral constraints, essential to a healthy and effective
society, are breaking down. He contends that the huge increase in the nation's
population, its mobility, urbanization, the spread of national markets, the
politicizing of more and more realms of social life, and the erosion of the
family, religion and the law are undermining the communal basis of morality. As
a result, he believes that ''Homo economicus'' - the self-seeking economic man
of the textbooks - has assumed the dominant role in the real world, endangering
the community.

What can be done about it? Dr. Buchanan would try to build greater competition
into institutions to restrain the corrupt or wasteful use of power. In all
countries, whether nominally capitalist or Socialist, one-party governments are
far more likely to grow corrupt and inefficient than those subject to political
opposition. The same is true at the state or municipal level. In a genuine
democracy, the disorder of political competition is the price of a valuable
public good.

In the effort to strengthen a nation's unity and morality, Dr. Buchanan denies
that there is such a thing as the ''moral equivalent of war.'' Indeed, 10 years
ago he told the American Economic Association: ''Since Vietnam, we must question
whether war itself can serve'' such a moral function. But he conceded that war
or the threat of war may sustain a governmental ''Leviathan'' - Thomas Hobbes's
term for the authoritarian state.

He finds it ominous that Presidents, after elections, tend to shift their
attention from the divisive issues of domestic politics toward those of foreign
affairs, and warns: ''We must beware the shades of Orwell's '1984,' when
external enemies are created, real or imaginary, for the purpose of sustaining
domestic moral support for the national government.''

Like Jean-Jacques Rousseau in the 18th century, Dr. Buchanan believes that
morality requires smaller and closer communities, but insists he is not some
''agrarian utopian calling for a return to the scattered villages on the
plains.'' Rather, he considers himself a ''constitutional Utopian'' and calls
for an overhaul of the Constitution, especially to create a more effective
federalism, with more decentralization of power.

''Constitutional revolution,'' he says, ''need not require the massive
suffering, pestilence and death associated with revolution on the left or
right.''

But, as population growth, urbanization and the other factors Dr. Buchanan has
described threaten the bases of morality even within a nation, the rapid growth
of the global economy and changing technology are now creating political, social
and moral problems - from financial instability to drugs to illegal migration to
threats to national security - that individual nations seem incapable of
solving.

Yet, as happened in the 18th century with the rise of the modern democratic
state, the perceived dangers to people living and working together on a
shrinking planet could lead to a new form of ''social contract,'' lest the
unbridled pursuit of self-interest, whether individual or national, create
misery for all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 25, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PREPARING LONG-RANGE BOMBERS FOR NONNUCLEAR MISSIONS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: OMAHA, Oct. 23


The Strategic Air Command has ordered its bomber crews to prepare for making
attacks with conventional explosives as well as with nuclear bombs, according to
Gen. John T. Chain Jr., SAC's new commander.

General Chain said in an interview that the new assignment was intended to make
fuller use of the ''huge latent capabilities'' of the bomber force and to give
the President, Secretary of Defense and Joint Chiefs of Staff more flexibility
in military operations.

Under the concept, he said, operations anywhere in the world could be supported
by B-52 bombers, which were workhorses of the war in Vietnam; by B-1 bombers,
which are just coming into the force, and by the advanced-technology Stealth
bomber of the 1990's.

General Chain said the long-range bombers would continue to be based in the
United States and would not need foreign bases. The United States would thus not
require the permission of a foreign government to mount a bombing strike.

'A Matter of Hours'

''From the United States of America, I can attack anybody that I'm directed to
attack,'' he said.

For instance, to mount a strike against Libya, bombers based in the United
States would fly to their targets, attack and return home, being refueled by
aerial tankers along the way. Last spring the United States launched smaller
bombers from aircraft carriers and from bases in Britain to attack Libya. The
action touched off widespread political protest in Britain.

Gen. Bernard W. Rogers, commander of American forces in Western Europe, has
spoken publicly of attacking Libya with B-52's rather than carrier-based or
foreign-based aircraft. Until June, General Chain was General Rogers's chief of
staff.

General Chain said his experience in Europe had shown that General Rogers's
forces, which are separate from SAC, would have to use nuclear weapons ''very,
very quickly because he doesn't have the conventional force to fight for very
long'' if the Soviet Union attacked.

The addition of SAC's long-range bombers carrying conventional explosives, he
said, would help to stave off the need to use nuclear weapons against the Soviet
Union's larger conventional ground and air forces.

Use of Cruise Missiles

General Chain said that missiles that could be launched 50 to 500 miles from a
target would be emphasized for use by B-52 bombers, to enable them to attack
well-defended targets without flying over them.

Many of these standoff weapons, such as jet-powered cruise missiles that hug the
terrain, have already been developed, General Chain said, and some conventional
arms may be developed from nuclear weapons. Existing air-launched cruise
missiles, for example, have nuclear warheads. General Chain said making similar
missiles with conventional warheads would not be difficult.

''The weapons will have to be accurate enough to blow up a specified building or
bridge or a railroad track,'' the general said. Other munitions would be bombs
that spray clusters of grenades over a wide area and similar weapons.

Cost Not Yet Estimated

General Chain said his staff was still trying to estimate how much the program
would cost. The main costs would be for new munitions, with smaller costs for
bombing ranges, practice bombs and training for people to handle bombs and
missiles on the ground.

Crews and planners would be trained within a year, he said.

General Chain said he had instructed his staff to devise new tactics and
procedures for conventional operations. ''I don't want people with the Vietnam
mentality,'' he said. ''The world has changed since that time and I'm not going
to have people flying around at 20,000 feet in trail dropping iron bombs and
hoping they survive. There are too many densely defended areas today.''

The general said delivery of new munitions would begin within two years,
although it has not been decided whether to seek new funds or switch funds from
another program. In either case, Congress would be asked to approve.

Fourth Assignment for B-52

For the 260 B-52 bombers in the SAC force, the new assignment is the fourth. The
aircraft was designed in the 1950's as a nuclear bomber, then converted to
conventional bombing for Vietnam. After that, the B-52 reverted to its original
nuclear role, with only a few crews trained in conventional operations. Now the
bomber has been given both missions.

The first squadron of 16 B-1 bombers became operational this month at Dyess Air
Force Base in Texas. One hundred of the planes, which were designed primarily to
be nuclear bombers, are due to be in operation by the end of 1988.

The development of the Stealth bomber, which is intended to evade detection by
radar, is on schedule, General Chain said, and the first planes are to be
delivered in the early 1990's. Critics have asserted that the Stealth bomber
could not carry a bomb load sufficient for conventional operations.

''That's fundamentally incorrect,'' General Chain said. ''It will be very, very
efficient carrying a conventional load and it's going to be able to carry a lot
of bombs and it's going to be able to carry them a long way.''

He said one Stealth bomber could have conducted the entire raid on Libya, in
which the United States used 18 Air Force F-111 medium-range bombers, 15 Navy
bombers, 28 aerial tankers, several electronic warfare aircraft, control
aircraft and fighter planes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 25, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By WALTER SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 666 words


Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, who won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in
1937 for his isolation of vitamin C, died Wednesday of kidney failure at his
home in Woods Hole, Mass., it was reported yesterday. He was 93 years old.

The career of the Hungarian-born biologist was marked by a variety of medical
accomplishments and political activities. In 1954 he won an Albert Lasker Award
for his research on heart muscle contraction, including his discovery of
actomyosin, a complex of the proteins actin and myosin, and its role in muscle
contraction. The award, at that time, was given through the American Heart
Association.

Dr. Szent-Gyorgyi spent World War II in Hungary and was an anti-Nazi activist,
taking refuge in the Swedish Embassy as the war drew to an end to avoid arrest.
After liberation by the Soviet army he was offered the presidency of the
Hungarian Republic. He declined the post and instead became head of the
Hungarian Academy of Science.

''After two years, I became disillusioned and left my country,'' he later said,
adding that he began to dislike the growing Soviet dominance of his native land.
He applied for admission to the United States, but acceptance was delayed six
months, reportedly because he was thought to be too sympathetic to the Soviet
Union.

His most recent associations were with the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods
Hole, Mass., and the National Foundation for Cancer Research in Bethesda, Md.,
which has explored his bioelectronic theory of cancer. His theory did not gain
wide acceptance and after 1974 he was no longer able to obtain Federal financing
for his cancer research.

In 1934 Dr. Szent-Gyorgyi (pronounced Saint GEOR-gie) created a sensation at a
meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in Aberdeen in
Scotland when he spoke of his attempts to identify the ingredient in fruits and
vegetables, as well as the adrenal glands of humans and cattle, that prevents
scurvy.

His research led him to the slaughter houses of Chicago where, aided by money
from the Josiah Macy Jr. Foundation, he said he obtained ''literally tons'' of
cattle adrenals. From them he extracted traces of vitamin C. He then returned to
Hungary and began testing paprika. His tests on paprika yielded substantial
amounts of the vitamin, also known as ascorbic acid, which was reported to be
effective in treating such ailments as purpura, nephritis, and various
hemorrhagic diseases, as well as for scurvy.

Dr. Szent-Gyorgyi was born in Budapest to a prominent family. He entered medical
school in 1911. In World War I he served in the medical corps on the Polish
front, was wounded and decorated for bravery. He earned his medical degree in
1917 and then obtained a doctorate in physiology at Cambridge University in
1927.

When he became the first resident Hungarian to win a Nobel Prize he became a
national hero, but went into hiding when his anti-Nazi activities and British
associations became known.

Asked once to define research, he said: ''Research is four things; Brains with
which to think, eyes with which to see, machines with which to measure, and,
fourth, money.'' He was described by an interviewer as ''articulate, witty, and
highly convincing,'' speaking accented but fluent English.

In later years he spoke out frequently against the war in Vietnam and in favor
of disarmament. He wrote 10 books including, ''Science, Ethics and Politics,''
''The Crazy Ape,'' and ''What's Next?.'' Other books, such as ''The Living State
and Cancer,'' dealt with his theory that on the submolecular level electrons
play a special role in many biological processes.

In the 1950's he headed the Institute of Muscle Research at Woods Hole. Early
this year the Albert Szent-Gyorgyi Institute was formed there to further pursue
his electron theory with himself as scientific director. He moved to the United
States in 1947 and became a citizen in 1955.

He is survived by his wife, the former Marcia Houston, of Woods Hole.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Albert Szent-Gyorgyi

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 25, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AUTHOR ACCUSES CBS OF HARASSMENT

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 521 words


Renata Adler, the author of a forthcoming book about two recent well-publicized
libel suits, has charged CBS and its law firm, Cravath Swaine & Moore, with
harassment and with trying to intimidate her as well as The New Yorker magazine
and Alfred A. Knopf, the publisher.

''But, for all the First Amendment implications of trying to pursue the tactics
of the litigation to the point of trying to suppress and delay a book of
reporting on the trials,'' Ms. Adler writes in a coda to her book, ''the text is
virtually identical to what appeared in The New Yorker.'' The network's and the
law firm's ''harassment,'' she said, did not lead to or require a single change
in the manuscript.

CBS denied yesterday that it had tried to intimidate either Ms. Adler or her
publishers.

The book, ''Reckless Disregard: Westmoreland v. CBS et al, Sharon v. Time,'' is
to be published by Knopf on Nov. 13. Derived from two articles in The New Yorker
last June, the book was originally scheduled for publication this month, but the
release was postponed for a legal review.

CBS Documentary Criticized

The New Yorker articles were highly critical of CBS News's 1982 documentary,
''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' which prompted a suit by Gen.
William C. Westmoreland. The retired general charged that he had been libeled by
the documentary's assertion that his command conspired to underreport enemy
troop strength prior to the Tet offensive during the Vietnam War to withhold
information that might lessen public support for American involvement in the
war. Last February, after 18 weeks of trial in Federal District Court in
Manhattan, the general dropped the suit.

Ms. Adler's articles described the documentary as ''factually false and
intellectually trivial,'' and she said its underlying thesis was
''preposterous.''

Ms. Adler also criticized Time Inc., based on her analysis of the unsuccessful
libel action against Time by Ariel Sharon, Israel's former Defense Minister.
Time responded that the Adler articles were ''one-sided.''

Last July, CBS News sent a 49-page critique to William Shawn, the editor in
chief of The New Yorker, describing what it said were ''misrepresentations'' and
''errors,'' and suggesting that the magazine ''should undertake a thorough
review of that article.'' The covering letter was signed by Van Gordon Sauter,
who was then president of CBS News.

Magazine Stands By Articles

Soon afterward, a spokesman for the New Yorker replied that its editors had
carefully studied the CBS memorandum. ''As far as they can see,'' the spokesman
said, ''Ms. Adler's facts are solid and her opinions are supported by her
facts.''

Yesterday John Scanlon, a spokesman for the network, said: ''CBS tried to
intimidate no one. We legitimately challenged an institution which we respect,
and appealed to its editorial conscience. We felt and continue to feel that Ms.
Adler's work contains glaring examples of false reporting, and grossly
misrepresents the record of the trials.''

Cravath Swaine said the only person in the firm authorized to comment was
unavailable yesterday afternoon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY SUNDAY, OCTOBER 26, 1986

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


The World A Soviet official quoted the President in Moscow to show that Mr.
Reagan agreed in Iceland to eliminate all strategic offensive forces, not just
ballistic missiles, as the White House has said. Page 1 The White House restated
its position that Mr. Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev had discussed the
elimination of all nuclear weapons, but that the talks had never reached even a
tentative agreement. #12 Britain called on the Soviet Union to announce publicly
its rejection of state-supported terrorism. The request came after London said
it had evidence that Syria was involved in an El Al bomb plot. #1 British agents
eavesdropped on conversations verifying the complicity of the Syrian Ambassador
in the plot to bomb an Israeli airliner, according to Government officials. #6 A
vote to oust the South African delegation from a Red Cross conference was made
as a protest to apartheid, many countries said. It is the first delegation to be
excluded since the Red Cross began. #1 G.M.-I.B.M. moves in Pretoria 14
Financial deficits grieve the Vatican, which urgently needs greater
contributions from Roman Catholics, according to a commission of cardinals. The
Holy See suffered a shortfall of $39 million in 1985. #9 A trial in Nicaragua is
set to proceed in the case against the American captured from a downed rebel
supply plane. A tribunal is expected to spend the next 8 to 12 days judging the
case, political analysts say. #10 How to spend contra aid 1 Elections in a
Mexican state are expected to focus on violence, drug trafficking and charges of
corruption in the ruling party. Polls open today in Sinaloa on the Pacific
coast. #11 Enrile again criticizes Aquino 3 Ramos holds key to power 3 Official
slain in Basque region 4 U.N. protest on ABC-TV series 17 Iraqi bombers affect
Iranian oil 19 A gloomy picture of Vietnam 22 Dissidents accuse Seoul on press
23 The Nation ''Nationalizing'' the 1986 campaign is a strategy that Republicans
are trying by invoking President Reagan's record, while Democrats, having some
success with their own national theme of economic trouble, stress individual
candidates' strengths. #24 An Indiana pastor seeks a House seat. Donald Lynch, a
Republican whose top issues include AIDS and abortion, is waging an uphill
battle against the Democratic incumbent, Philip R. Sharp. #24 Talking Politics
24 Reagan: Economy accelerates 25 Eight people were killed and seven were
injured in a fire in a two-story duplex in Minneapolis. A mother threw three of
her children out of a second-floor window before jumping herself with another
child. #20 Koreans are part of Texas culture. More and more of the border
businesses serving a predominantly Mexican clientele are run by Koreans, whose
presence is worrying some longtime businessmen. #20 6 heirs of $240 million
remain unsure about why they received the money. A Beverly Hills oil heiress
left the bequests of $40 million each to 4 schools, a hospital and a clinic when
she died last year. #21 Attorneys in the ''Twilight Zone'' involuntary
manslaughter trial charged that the Los Angeles County Fire Department had
attempted to cover up its role in the movie's fatal helicopter crash. #26
Judges' rulings are not grounds for impeachment, says the House Judiciary
Committee. In the first explicit statement of a widely accepted tenet, the panel
refused to act against three Federal judges. #31 Questions on immigration bill 1
Jet failures prompt changes 20 Work rules gain as labor issue 28 1948 crash
victims to remain 29 Ozone may cause cancer 33 Alaskans renew land bill efforts
34 Washington Talk#54 Environmentalists turn new leaf The Region A defendant
refused to answer questions about code words used in his business affairs. The
defendant, Gaetano Badalamenti, has been identified as a Mafia member. He said
his answers could be used against him in Italy. #36 A panel is drafting cable TV
rules to combat political control of local cable groups. The state commission's
chairman said the proposals were prompted by disclosures of political influence
over such groups. #42 Brooklyn saw a rise in employment this year that is likely
to continue through 1990, according to a new study. The rise comes after a
decade of losing jobs and population. #36 O'Rourke may drop TV debate 1 Higher
rents in Hudson County 35 Immigration myths debated 40 Exhibit at black culture
center 41 Beach project may begin in 1987 42 Trial in slaying of Jersey trooper
43 Face of the city, ever-changing 47 2 states vote to clean up wastes 48 L.I.
police enter computer age 48

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRIAL IN NICARAGUA IS SET TO PROCEED

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Oct. 25


After four days of pretrial maneuvering, a Sandinista political tribunal is now
expected to spend the next 8 to 12 days judging the case against the American
captured from a downed rebel plane.

Political analysts inside and outside the Nicaraguan Government say they believe
that if punishment is ultimately meted out, it will depend less on legal
arguments in the courtroom than on a calculated political decision by the
Sandinista leadership, which controls the political tribunal.

The American prisoner, Eugene Hasenfus, was captured after a supply plane was
shot down three weeks ago over Nicaragua while trying to drop guns and
ammunition to anti-Government units. The Nicaraguan Government has treated the
incident as a major political issue and as conclusive evidence of American
aggression against Nicaragua.

Some political analysts inside the Government, including militant members of the
Sandinista Front, say they think Mr. Hasenfus must be imprisoned to satisfy
demands of the new ruling party that he be punished and also to set an example
for other Americans who might be tempted to assist the rebels, who are known as
contras.

'The Smartest Thing' to Do

But other Government officials, as well as foreign diplomats with close
Government contacts, say that although they expect Mr. Hasenfus to be judged
harshly by the political tribunal, they believe he may then be released in a
carefully considered political gesture intended to show the world, and the
American public in particular, that the Sandinistas are not vindictive.

''It would be the smartest thing they could do,'' a Western diplomat said. ''He
goes through the political tribunal, but is then released in show of
magnanimity.''

Foreign Minister, Miguel d'Escoto Brockmann has indicated that Mr. Hasenfus will
be treated generously, and President Daniel Ortega Saavedra seemed to signal a
degree of tolerance as well, telling reporters that the Government considered
Mr. Hasenfus as no more than a low-level employee of the rebel supply operation.

But Mr. Ortega also said that justice would have to be done in the case - a
consideration that might mean a jail term for Mr. Hasenfus, who has told
reporters he did intend to drop guns to guerrillas. He is charged with political
crimes that carry a maximum penalty of 30 years in prison. There is no death
penalty in Nicaragua.

The Problem with a Pardon

The problem with pardoning Mr. Hasenfus, say members of the Government and
ruling Sandinista Party, is that it might anger Sandinista militants and those
who have lost friends and family in the war that is now spreading over the
northern regions of the country.

Mr. Hasenfus presents an unlikely object of the debate. Until four months ago,
he appears to have lived quietly with his wife and three children in Marinette,
Wis. Urged by an old friend from the Vietnam War days, he says he flew to
Central America to work on rebel flights mainly because he needed the money and
it was an adventure.

Mr. Hasenfus says he thought he had joined an operation backed by the Central
Intelligence Agency. But he cannot prove that assumption, and he seems
bewildered and irritated by the repeated assertions of American officials that
he was not working for any branch of the Government.

Because his case is being handled by the Sandinista political court, known as
the Peoples Anti-Somocista Tribunals, Mr. Hasenfus has few legal rights and
almost no access to his Nicaraguan lawyer, nor to his American legal adviser,
former Attorney General Griffin B. Bell.

Mr. Bell said Friday that the Sandinistas were making Mr. Hasenfus a scapegoat
for more than 100 years of Nicaraguan altercations with the United States and
that the imprisoned American stood little chance of fair treatment. He called on
the Nicaraguan Government to narrow its case to specific charges, like arms
smuggling, that Mr. Hasenfus could reply to.

Mr. Hasenfus's Nicaraguan lawyer, Enrique Sotelo Borgen, has tried to challenge
the legitimacy of the political court, and the Minister of Justice who controls
it, to judge the case. But the political tribunal, which is made up of
Sandinista supporters appointed by the Government, rejected that argument, and
it will now try Mr. Hasenfus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Janette Sandino reading the defense's answers to the charges
against Eugene Hasenfus (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COVER-UP IS CHARGED AT RIAL ON MOVIE DEATHS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 623 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 25


Defense attorneys in the manslaughter trial over three deaths in ''Twilight
Zone: The Movie'' have repeatedly charged that fire officials tried to cover up
their department's role in a fatal helicopter crash.

They argued this week that a county fire safety officer who was on the set the
night of the crash, July 23, 1982, had predicted the disaster to his supervisor
but that the superior failed to act on the warning and the department then
covered up its role.

''If the fire safety officers thought it was dangerous and didn't do anything,
how could they expect the defendants to know it was dangerous,'' said Leonard
Levine, an attorney for one of the five defendants, Dan Allingham, the film's
production manager.

The defense attorneys argued that a grand jury that investigated the case would
never have returned involuntary manslaughter indictments against the film
director, John Landis, and the other defendants had it known that fire officials
had failed to act on the warning.

Department Declines to Comment

Battalion Chief Gordon S. Pearson, a spokesman for the Los Angeles County Fire
Department, refused to comment on the allegations of a cover-up.

The actor Vic Morrow and two children were killed when the helicopter crashed
after it was damaged by special effects explosions in a Vietnam War scene.

The fire safety officer, Richard Ebentheuer, testified last week that he had
warned his supervisor, George Hull, of the danger. Mr. Ebentheuer testified that
he had told Mr. Hull he ''felt certain'' after a scene filmed with special
effects explosions three hours before the crash that additional detonations
''would put the helicopter on the ground.''

Deputy District Attorney Lea Purwin D'Agostino, disputed the defense attorneys'
contention that the Fire Department had failed to act, and she said officials
therefore had ''no reason'' to cover up anything.

Inaction Charge Is Rebutted

Prosecutors argued in open court Oct. 15 that Mr. Hull, who on the night of the
crash was stationed on a cliff above the set with Mr. Ebentheuer, did in fact
relay the warning to another fire safety officer who was stationed below.

Mrs. D'Agostino said Mr. Hull would testify that the third fire safety officer,
Jack Tice, spoke with the helicopter pilot, Dorcey Wingo, who is a defendant.
According to Mrs. D'Agostino, Mr. Hull will testify that Mr. Wingo told Mr. Tice
that the helicopter would be repositioned away from the explosions.

All six fire safety officers who worked on the ''Twilight Zone'' set prepared
memorandums of their recollections of the incident. Sgt. Tom Budds of the Los
Angeles County Sheriff's Department had testified that the memorandums were
destroyed. But a District Attorney's investigator reported Thursday to Judge
Roger Boren of Superior Court that they had been found.

Mrs. D'Agostino first viewed the previously missing memorandums Thursday and
said they contained no significant evidence. She distributed them to defense
attorneys Friday. None of the lawyers disclosed the contents of the memorandums,
which were discovered Wednesday night in a Fire Department batallion chief's
personal file. Mrs. D'Agostino interviewed the battalion chief, Gary Nelson, on
Friday. Mr. Nelson has declined to disclose the contents of the memorandums to
reporters.

Meanwhile, illnesses afflicting Mr. Wingo and one of the jurors restricted
testimony to only one day this week. The trial resumes Monday.  In addition to
Mr. Landis, Mr. Allingham and Mr. Wingo, the other defendants in the case are
George Folsey Jr., the associate producer, and Paul Stewart, the special effects
coordinator. The two chidren who died with Mr. Morrow, 53, were Myca Dinh Le, 7,
and Renee Shinn Chen, 6.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TALKING POLITICS;
A Fonda Connection

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 24, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 201 words


Red meat, it turns out, can be a tender political issue in some parts of the
country, particularly true in South Dakota, a major beef-producing state.
Senator James Abdnor, a Republican, has produced television commercials
criticizing his Democratic challenger, Representative Thomas A. Daschle, for
accepting a campaign contribution from Jane Fonda.

The Fonda connection is supposed to reflect badly on Mr. Daschle not because the
actress went to Hanoi in the 1960's to criticize the American military role in
Vietnam, but because she urges people, especially students in her physical
fitness program, to avoid red meat in their diet.

Fortunately for Gov. Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee, he is not seeking
re-election this year. He, too, tripped over the red meat issue, and without any
help from the actress.

Mr. Alexander recently signed a proclamation declaring ''World Vegetarian Day''
in Tennessee. The state's livestock industry and rural legislators demanded an
apology or an explanation. Mr. Alexander's press secretary quickly put out the
word that the Governor is ''a hamburger man.'' The Governor, red-faced, signed
another proclamation urging Tennesseans to ''eat more beef.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW PARTY CHIEF OFFERS GLOOMY PICTURE OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 666 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 25


Hanoi's new Communist Party leader, in a series of tough speeches over the last
week setting the agenda for a party congress, is portraying Vietnam as a
troubled country that has squandered its material and human potential through
its own mistakes.

In speeches to preliminary party meetings held by the army and the City of
Hanoi, the party leader, Truong Chinh, who replaced Le Duan as General Secretary
of the Communist Party of Vietnam in July, attacked economic policy and
described in harsh terms the consequent problems of corruption, unemployment and
a dispirited and deprived population.

''Prices fluctuate wildly, and life is unstable,'' he was reported to have said
last Sunday. ''Negativism has developed, traditional ethical and spiritual
values are eroded and socioeconomic activities are thrown into prolonged chaos,
causing widespread doubt about the future and a lack of confidence in the
party's leadership.''

He told his audience that these were matters to consider at a party conference
that Vietnamese officials have suggested will be held around the end of the
year, although no date has been announced.

Excerpts from the speeches have been repeatedly broadcast all week by the Hanoi
radio, in English for foreign audiences and in full-text Vietnamese versions for
domestic listeners.

The remarks by Mr. Chinh reflect in part the calls for ''renovation'' of the
Communist system made by the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

''Socialism must strive to prove its all-round superiority over capitalism,''
said Mr. Chinh, 79 years old, a member of the Ho Chi Minh generation of
hard-line Communists.

But his criticism drew attention to ''great difficulties'' that have held back
Vietnam's development in the years it has been under the tutelage of Moscow.

Diplomats in the region appear divided on whether Hanoi believes it has received
the wrong kind of aid or whether Moscow has concluded its assistance has been
squandered. When Mr. Chinh went to the Soviet Union for a meeting in August, his
reception was described as less than enthusiastic.

Hanoi, diplomats say, has been watching events in China very closely, while
continuing to reject a radical move away from the Communist system. The
leadership, which is still largely North Vietnamese, has also been influenced to
some degree by the formerly free-enterprise South Vietnam, which remains the
country's most dynamic region, according to Bangkok-based international
economists. Several South Vietnamese officials are thought to be making their
way into the country's ruling circles.

In addition, young Vietnamese tell visitors that they have been greatly
impressed by the material progress they encounter when sent to study or work in
the Soviet Union or Eastern Europe, and this raises questions about why
development has not kept pace in Vietnam.

Speaking to a Hanoi party audience, Mr. Chinh appeared to confirm what visitors
to Hanoi have noticed for the first time over the last year: a growing and
outspoken public disenchantment with both the policies and the practices of
government. Speaking to the army, the party leader also called for more
''material and morale support for the front line.''

More than 11 years after the end of the Vietnam War, the country, now at war in
Cambodia, remains one of the world's poorest nations, falling farther and
farther behind its non-Communist Southeast Asian neighbors.

Mr. Chinh singled out for special attack in talks to both military and political
audiences the policy of concentrating on heavy industry at the expense of crafts
and cottage industries or expanded commodities production.

Many of Vietnam's largest projects, in industry and energy, have been developed
with Soviet aid and advice. Mr. Chinh's rejection of ''doing things on a larger
scale than our capability permits'' is interpreted by some diplomats in the
region as an expression of annoyance with the poor results of more than a decade
of dependence in Moscow for development.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
MEET DOCTR SPIN

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 761 words


''Spin doctors'' are the hot new item in 1986 politics, though they have long
been with us under other pseudonyms. However called, they ''put the right spin
on the ball'' in 1968, when they saw light at the end of the tunnel in Vietnam;
and in whatever guise, they were setting up the hitters in 1981 with the message
that taxes could be cut, military expenditures raised and the budget balanced
nevertheless.

Spin doctors will discover ''encouraging progress'' in a poll showing their
candidate 20 points behind; or if he is 20 points ahead, their fund-raising
letters will declare him in mortal peril. If unemployment is 7.15 percent this
month as against 7.25 last month, spin doctors see the economy on a roll.

Now, in our time, we've been privileged to meet the one and only Doctor Spin
himself, the master curve-baller, illusionist and smoke-blower of the day, maybe
the all-time champion of dipsy-do. He turns out to be - not unlike the Wizard of
Oz - President Ronald Reagan, as friendly and lovable as Frank Morgan.

How do we know? The recent achievements of the maestro provide the only needed
verification (one of his terms of art): 1. Who but he could have swapped a
Soviet spy for an American journalist while assuring the nation that it wasn't
really a swap - or, if it was, our horse-trader got the better of their
horse-trader? 2. When leaked White House documents documented a government
''disinformation'' campaign aimed not at the Soviet press but at the U.S. press,
was the doctor dismayed? Not in the least; he denied that disinformation had
been planned or planted - while junior spinners asserted that if it had been, it
would have been justified. 3. When a U.S. plane formerly used by the C.I.A. and
owned by a company with links to the C.I.A. was shot down in Nicaragua, a
surviving American crewman said he had been told that he worked for the C.I.A.,
then named a supervisor with links to the C.I.A. and to Vice President Bush. A
former C.I.A. director, Doctor Spin and all the little spinners explained that
they knew of no links between the plane and the C.I.A. - and anyway, since the
Sandinistas are a bunch of Reds, what's the beef?

But all of this masterful bridging of Credibility Gap was eclipsed by the
legerdemain of Doctor Spin and his stage hands in the aftermath of the Iceland
summit's collapse. P.R. men as yet unborn will someday curse the fate that
denied them an eyeball view of the master's peak performance.

Secretary of State Shultz, seeming near tears, told a national television
audience on Sunday night that he was ''deeply disappointed'' by the summit
failure. But by Monday a fully orchestrated Administration, with the Doctor on
the podium, was spinning out the melody that ''breakthroughs'' and ''sweeping
potential agreements'' (breathtaking phrase!) had been achieved.

In this ''post-summit phase'' (more genius), White House spinners logged 71
''media events'' (a golden oldie), 53 involving top spinners like Donald Regan
and Mr. Shultz - who, quickly recovering from his disappointment, personally
spun out the good news for the networks and The New York Times. Peter Roussel, a
deputy spinner, was moved to speak pridefully of a ''media blitz.''

Some carping was heard. Mikhail Gorbachev, unfortunately, does not seem to
believe that the superpowers are as close to an agreement on nuclear testing as
U.S. spinners say they are (''No, no there couldn't be such, and there wasn't,''
he insists), and the records of the summit talks in Iceland, such as they are,
suggest that the two sides only reiterated their basic incompatible positions.

Mr. Gorbachev declared also that any concessions he had made at Iceland were
part of a package that represented ''a balance of interests and concessions''
and concluded: ''No package - no concessions.'' But that was duck soup for the
doctor, who knows the value of an up beat: ''It's heartening,'' he said in
Missouri, ''to find Mr. Gorbachev agreeing with me that the proposals we made in
Iceland are still on the table.''

Even at home cynical senators want to know if the President agreed at the summit
to the ultimate elimination of strategic ballistic missiles, or - as Mr.
Gorbachev asserts and Mr. Reagan himself once seemed to confirm - to doing away
with all strategic nuclear weapons, a far different matter.

The White House hasn't yet found just the right spin to put on that ball; but
the polls are up and Doctor Spin is on the campaign trail. One more win for the
Gipper may be in sight and that, fellow rubes, is the name of the game.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE AMERICAN WIFE

BYLINE: BY ANNE TAYLOR FLEMING; Anne Taylor Fleming is a writer living in Los
Angeles

SECTION: Section 6; Page 29, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4383 words


IN A LARGE, EXPEN-sive house in one of those sprawled-out suburbs of Los
Angeles, the family of Oma Minyard had gathered to commemorate the birth of her
first grandchild and the possible death of her marriage. As they talked, their
tears got all mixed up. The house was darkened against the summer heat. The
television was on in the den. Oma's mother and her second husband and Oma's son
and his pretty young wife, the baby's mother, were handing the baby around and
picking at last night's leftover fried chicken.

The man of the house was missing. He'd been gone at that point for just three
months and the family's attention to his absence was palpable. It felt as if he
were just out playing golf or off on some manly weekend errand to the hardware
store from which, at any moment, he would return. Everyone seemed poised for
that possibility. Except maybe Oma herself.

She had been married to Ken Minyard most of her life. In fact, she married him
twice. The first time was two weeks before her 18th birthday. ''It was August
1958, and I was probably the first of my friends, but I would say within a
year-and-a-half to two years at most, all of my close girlfriends were married.
Getting married was the first most important thing you did.'' And then you had
babies. Oma had one at 18, got pregnant again and got out of the marriage
because, she says, her husband was too domineering and she was too submissive.
Their time apart was four years, during which each of them married someone else.
But the children kept them connected and the pulls were strong. Finally, they
both divorced and married each other again. And their second one had lasted 24
years, during which time Ken Minyard became a successful radio personality and
Oma Minyard became what she calls ''a dinosaur.''

''All I ever wanted to be was a wife and mother,'' she said. ''I was really
entrenched in my role. So intellectually, through all these last 20-something
years, I have agreed with much of what has happened and yet I didn't feel it
necessary for me to participate. I think I am just a dinosaur, a throwback.
Maybe Ken wants something different now. Maybe he wants a young career woman.
Maybe he wants someone more, you know, someone more like you.''

She didn't mean it personally and she didn't mean it meanly, because Oma Minyard
is bone-deep sweet. I am just a generic rival, a younger woman, a woman with a
career. Seeing her sit there on her bed in her pretty pastel bedroom, which she
was not yet used to being alone in, sleeping alone in, I hated her pain and the
implication that I, or someone like me, could cause it. I did that. I am already
someone's young second wife.

I MARRIED IN MARCH OF 1972, 14 years ago and 14 years after Oma Minyard first
walked down the aisle. The aisle I walked down was on my father's terrace, where
an unexpected warm Santa Ana wind rattled the heavy plastic curtains hung to
shield the guests from the night. I was 22. Nobody gave me away and nobody asked
me whether I would honor or obey the man I was marrying. That tradition was
gone. My friends were not getting married in churches and were not wearing fancy
gowns. They were writing their own ceremonies, keeping their own last names and
often making their own wedding dresses and wedding cakes - carrot cakes, of
course.

We were still in the 60's mentality and the idea was to minimize the ritual, not
only of the marriage ceremony but of the marriage itself. Not for us the old
rules, the old roles. No way was I or any of my friends going to be just a wife
and mother. No way were we going to do all the housework. No way were our
intimate lives going to be less happy than those of our husbands. We were not
going to be long-suffering the way some of our mothers had been.

If that sounds defiant, it was, because we were, deliciously defiant. That's the
way it felt then. And as the women's movement, then in its first angry bloom,
was acquainting us with our strength, the Vietnam War, also in angry bloom, was
acquainting men of our generation with the limits of theirs. The double whammy
of that war and feminism muted their maleness, tenderized them.

How quickly it all seems to have changed . . . or changed back. Big weddings are
back; Rambo and his like are the male cultural icons while the tenderized men of
the 70's are now scorned as wimps, and the 50's husband and President, Ronald
Reagan, is hugely popular, as is the chic wraith-like wife who clearly dotes on
him. Gone is the outspokenness even of Betty Ford, though when you think about
it, if we'd thought about it - we women who so admired her - her strength was
based on admitting weakness (i.e., a dependency on drugs) and so was acceptably
female. Her successor, Rosalynn Carter, did not fit the role as well and was
much derided as a pushy female, even by allegedly liberated women.

It is clear in 1986 that the notion of being a wife, of a wife's proper place,
hasn't changed as much as we blustery young brides thought back then, and that
even then we carried that notion deep within ourselves, no less than Oma
Minyard. We may not have been deferential to men, but we were deferential to
marriage. For all their early bravado, the wives I know kept right on cooking -
in fact, even more extravagantly and competitively than their mothers had. And
they kept right on wearing lacy underthings beneath their serious suits, a
gesture of covert coquettishness by which they assured themselves that, even as
they were trying to make their professional marks, they were still feminine,
desirable, wifely.

So it's not surprising that women are now in a world that seems in a lot of ways
to be going backward. It is a world in which the bookracks are full of best
sellers with titles like ''Too Smart For Her Own Good?'', ''Women Who Love Too
Much,'' and ''Smart Women, Foolish Choices,'' postliberation primers on how to
please, get, hold and handle a man. It is a world in which even once-determined
career women are celebrating refound domesticity and child-rearing with
unblushing enthusiasm, and a world in which single women, however successful,
are portrayed as lonesome rejects done in by their ambitions. If you're female
and 30 and white and college-educated and still unmarried, you have only a 20
percent chance of ever being wed; over 40, you can pretty much forget it - that
was the gist of a recent Yale-Harvard study trumpeted by the media, which
extended a kind of gloating sympathy to the new breed of old maids.

In this brave new/old world, the hottest television star is a soft-pedaled
patriarch named Heathcliff Huxtable - a k a Bill Cosby -whose wife maneuvers him
with the deft maternal finesse all those sitcom moms of the 50's used on their
husbands. In deference to the 80's, Huxtable's wife does have a career of her
own, despite which she's always ready to cook for her family or cuddle with her
man. And clearly, they are the true focus of her life, just as Oma Minyard's
family and husband are the focus of hers.

IT WAS OMA'S SOFT, slightly abashed face I carried with me as I moved around the
country interviewing other American wives. She was the first wife I interviewed,
and she was, finally, not that different from the rest - a 50's wife in 80's
America, whereas a lot of them are 80's wives in 50's America, flip sides of the
same dilemma, all laboring under the expectations and limitations of both
decades, all trying to find the right balance between dependence and
independence.

It was strange moving around the country talking to wives. The last time I
interviewed a lot of women was almost 10 years ago, when I was writing a story
for this very magazine. Women were still angry then -angry at themselves, at
''the system,'' at men. But I heard none of that this time, only a little at the
end when I talked to some battered wives, and theirs wasn't anger so much as
anger trying to be born.

Even friends I saw along the way this time urged me to write a happy story, to
say something positive. The wives I interviewed were doing precisely that,
telling me stories of their perfect partnerships, in which the husband did his
share and was very supportive of his wife's work, whether in the home or out.
But then a crack, a fault line would appear, only as an aside, a remembered
remark by a husband or child about a meal, a thickening waistline, mommy not
being home. And the perfect American wife with the perfect American family would
come perfectly close to tears.

Let me not exaggerate. It didn't always come to that. There are some marriages
in which neither the chores nor the dreams are divided by gender. And it's not
strictly generational or geographic. I talked to women Oma Minyard's age whose
marriages evolved as they did.

I think of Barbara B. Kennelly, a terrifically alive woman who was, she says,
the perfect 50's wife and mother and is now a United States Representative.
''I've been liberated for 10 years,'' she said, ''and they've been the best 10
years of my life.'' But, she added with a laugh, when she flies home to
Hartford, Conn., every weekend to be with her husband (that's part of their
bargain, that he didn't have to move to Washington with her), she still does all
the cooking, often stopping at the grocery store on her way home from the
airport.

Then there are the clear-eyed couples who have divided the marital turf like
lawyers without somehow losing the zest, spark, romance. I think of the Abbotts
of Oakland, both 39. Ida is, in fact, a lawyer with a big San Francisco firm;
Myles is a pediatrician. It was he who pushed his wife to have a career. ''You
don't want to just sit at home and be a doctor's wife,'' he told her. ''You'll
be bored.'' Now they both have full-time jobs and two young boys and not too
much time together, but they like their lives, insistently giving each other
silly surprise birthday parties year after year.

In rural America, too, there are happy wives, a particular kind of happy.
Sitting in Cheryl Basnar's tidy little farmhouse in Cordele, Ga., surrounded by
land that had been scorched by the summer sun, her friends talked of their
affection for their homes, which they might lose, and their husbands, whom they
regard as heroes engaged in an elemental struggle. And I wondered, watching the
love in their faces, thinking of Nancy Reagan's face, her adoring eyes, whether
all wives, on some primal, preliberated level, want to be able to look at their
hus-bands that way and feel that way about them, and feel cheated if they don't.

These, then, were the happy faces, the happy stories, the kind my friends urged
me to tell. I understand. I like happy stories. But what about all the other
wives whose lives are meaner, sadder, poorer, certainly poorer - what to do with
them, leave them out? It is one of the unpleasant little truths about
postliberation American wives at the top end of the economic scale that, in
keeping with the times, they don't think too much about the wives at the other
end, just as we younger brides didn't and don't like to think too much about the
older wives we've replaced. Too much pain. Too much guilt. Too much a reminder
that the American wife is replaceable.

American men marry - the vast majority of educated, successful men are married -
and married American men have the best mental health because, experts say, their
wives shield them from emotional distress. No doubt that's part of the reason
why American men of all economic and educational levels still say they're
happier if their wives are at home - the shield in place - and why they don't
stay single long. Divorced men are more likely to remarry than divorced women
(well over twice as likely in the 45-to-65 age group) and the odds are that,
unlike men, every woman in the country is likely to be single a significant
portion of her life.

Is that the fear, then - that we wives will be alone, replaced, dispossessed of
our marital status, the status that, despite any or all of our own achievements,
buys us a life we can't buy ourselves or don't yet believe we can or should?
Money is a factor, certainly, a huge factor. Fifty-nine percent of married women
now work outside the home, but still earn only 65 cents to the average man's
dollar. In fact, the median income of married women is still less than $11,000 a
year, regardless of what their husbands make. And when a couple splits up, the
man's standard of living goes up 42 percent while the woman's (and children's)
drops 73 percent. Divorce often means financial hardship for a woman.

But there's a loss beyond money, which is what Oma Minyard was staring down,
because in her case there would be money and she knew it. What she would be
losing is a phrase; she'd be losing hearing someone say, ''. . . and this is my
wife, Oma.'' If Oma Minyard did it all right by the 50's script, Laura Handman
Ickes is trying to do it all right by the 80's script, which means she's trying
to do it all. A lovely young woman with a high-paying, high-prestige New York
law career, a husband with a similar career and a new baby, some days she feels
absolutely pulled apart. Raised in New York City by a politically active mother,
and a member of Yale's first entering class of women, Laura Handman was
absolutely groomed for success. For 34 years it was straight ahead, straight up,
until she ran into motherhood and it all stopped dead, her heart did, when she
beheld and held her newborn. What is corporate life, after all, beside the
miracle of life?

That's the question a lot of young wives are asking themselves, stunned by the
sweetness of motherhood and by their own sweetness, against which they had been
so long steeled in order to succeed in a man's world. The fact that the
professional world continues to discriminate against them in pay and promotions
and child-care arrangements has just made motherhood all the more attractive.
Almost a third of the women who received M.B.A.'s 10 years ago have left
management ranks, many to raise children - a move duplicated by a number of
female lawyers who, by fulfilling the old expectations of women, that they breed
and nurture, are trying to confound the new expectations, that they work and
excel.

Laura Handman Ickes (her husband, Harold, is the son of the former Secretary of
the Interior) feels all kinds of pressure to stay on the career course: ''I'm
used to people bragging about my achievements. My sense of attractiveness is
tied up with achievement. I'd be less attractive as a wife and less attractive
as a daughter if I didn't work.''

Laura's mother, Barbara Handman, has had one long happy marriage, during which,
she says, she has done a little of everything -from tending family to working as
a political consultant. She thinks that Laura and her younger sister should do
it all. ''I think one of the most marvelous things in life, particularly for
gifted people, is to fulfill your potential - that is it, boy. And I don't want
my children to ever stop at anything less; that is what I consider my mother's
role. I really have the idea that Laura has a star and better reach for it.''

''My mother should have been the lawyer,'' Laura says, with affection. She
clearly likes her mother, as she clearly likes her husband, though she's had to
learn to respect his ''remoteness,'' his privacy. ''I've had to learn not to
want to infiltrate every part of his life,'' she says. ''There is always this
tension of a man wanting independence, privacy and a woman always tearing at it.
I've learned to reduce my smothering instinct; I can thank my career for that .
. . but you can't smother a little baby.''

There are the echoes of the past again, from a smart, ambitious career woman - a
yearning for closeness that isn't always possible with a man, even a husband.
That's what babies are giving women, as they no doubt gave them for centuries, a
love with no lines, with an intimacy that is easier and often sweeter than sex.
Bright-eyed women would lean forward and in a soft voice confess to me not that
they were having affairs, but that they weren't having much sex at home because
they were all tied up with their babies, or, in some cases, their work. How much
of that is natural and how much is anger and how much is just plain tiredness
the women themselves can't seem to untangle or don't want to.

That absence of sex is another one of the little secrets of young, upscale
postliberation wives who are no doubt more conversant with their own sexual
pleasure than were wives in the past. But they continue to worry, again, as have
women through the centuries, that their husbands are having affairs, especially
now that there is an enormous pool of single women out there, 40 million of
them, many of whom are not carrying any postpartum pounds or marital grudges.
New numbers; old worries. American wives still rate fidelity as the most
important ingredient in a marriage; and if the 50's wives worry about the young,
hip career wives, the young, hip career wives worry about their husbands'
secretaries or single colleagues, who may be less tired and driven and scratchy
than they are. As one overworked wife told me: ''I hate to say it, but I
understand why most American men don't want their wives to work, because when I
come home after a rough day at the office, especially when my male bosses have
been abusing me, I don't even want to talk. All I want to do is watch something
really dumb on television and be left alone.''

HAVING TIME alone, finding a place to be alone, is often the biggest luxury for
any American wife. If you live in a four-bedroom house with five children and a
husband who makes $34,000 a year and you're home all day and you want to be left
alone for a minute, you've got no place to go but the bathroom. That's where
Linda Branch periodically hides, in one of the bathrooms of her well-kept house
in a suburban subdivision in Columbus, Ohio. Her husband, Mike, kids her about
it, and in his kidding is, quite clearly, affection.

He was a prisoner of war in ''Nam'' for five years and he came back quieted down
and longing for a family. But the wife he had then hadn't waited and their two
children had been too young to remember him, so he lost all of them. On that
wound, he started a new family with Linda, who herself had two kids by a Vietnam
veteran, and they had three more together, all of them ''unplanned.'' Linda
misses the days when she had a waist, when she and Mike were best friends and
when he was different, not so much the head-of-the-household that he's become.

''It's not like it used to be,'' she says. ''As the kids have gotten older, he's
gotten harder, with me too. I guess I expected more of a partnership, though I
don't know anyone who has a 50-50 relationship. I make $75 a week babysitting
and I piddle in Avon, but his attitude is, 'Well, if you go out and make as much
as I do, then we'll be equal.' It seems like men just want to dominate you. I
love my husband and I want to make it work. I don't want another divorce, but I
know that over a prolonged period anything can die.''

Life at this level is certainly different from Laura Handman Ickes's or Oma
Minyard's. It's a life in which a night out means dinner at Burger King with the
kids; where the wife does all the housework whether she also has a job or not;
where pregnancy is not the great magic miracle it is to the so-called superwoman
but a fate, a curse, an accident that happened in her teens or early 20's,
setting her life off on a course she struggles to control.

But here too, the same themes play themselves out, all exaggerated, of course,
by the lack of money. These wives, no less than the ones up the economic scale,
worry about whether they can stay home with their children and should, whether
their husbands can't be more helpful and more tender.

PATRICIA SWANSON IS A 37-year-old woman with a luminous face. She had her first
child at 22, did not marry the father, then got married at the age of 29 and had
three more, like Linda's, all unplanned - all loved, she adds, but all
unplanned. She works at a day-care center in Atlanta and makes $14,000 a year;
her husband works as a warehouse man for Du Pont Chemical and makes $22,000 a
year. Last year, they were able to buy their own house.

Once every four or five months, they might go out, just the two of them; once
every two weeks, they might take the kids to McDonald's. All the other nights,
Patricia Swanson makes dinner after she gets home, then washes, cleans and mops
the kitchen, never getting to bed before 11. Some nights, her husband doesn't
eat with them. He just disappears and she says she's learned just to let him go,
not to ask questions, though sometimes, when she's made something special to
eat, her feelings do get hurt.

''Like I was telling this girlfriend the other night, we were discussing why
some men never show any affection and she said her husband's the same way. He
doesn't walk up to her and put his arms around her and say, 'I love you; I
appreciate you being the mother of my children.' And my husband doesn't do this
either. And we figured out that they feel like if they did that, it makes them
seem like they're henpecked or weak. I thought I was the only one who felt that
way. I try to open up to him and to feel real, real close anyway, but it's hard.
A lot of times I just say, 'Well you go your way and I'll go mine.' That's just
the attitude I have.'' And when she said that, full of a plucky resignation -
the 80's pluckiness and the 50's acquiescence - there were those tears again,
what I'd begun to call, as I neared the end of my trip around the country, the
tears of the American wife.

My trip ended one Saturday in a locked community center in a Los Angeles suburb
near where I live. Nine women had gathered, as they do every Saturday morning,
to talk about being beaten up by their husbands or the men they live with. For
the two-hour session, they were safely locked in, but when it was over, a number
of them would willingly go back to their batterers. That's what they call them,
''my batterer,'' with the same passiveness with which, a year or two or 10 years
before, they might have said, ''my boyfriend'' or ''my fiance.'' The meeting had
an eerie normalcy, just a group of women talking about their lives, which just
happen to include regular beatings.

Maybe I was inured to it somehow; I'd heard it on the road. Women told me that
they had been knocked around, or that their daughters had, or their sisters. On
and on, I'd heard it; violence runs like a vein through the heartland of wives,
all shapes, sizes, incomes and ethnic backgrounds - more than 50 percent of
American women, it is estimated, will at some point in their lives be subjected
to domestic violence. And a lot of them will stay around for more -whole married
lives of it.

I'd never understood why, not truly why, until I watched the women in the group.
Some of them were silent through the entire session, crumpled up in apologetic
postures. Others told chillingly violent stories with the flip humor of the
deeply pained. How could they stay? How could they go? One young woman said she
had just gone back to her batterer. She had gotten him out once, but he'd come
bearing gifts, flowers, and he was the father of her children and he loved her,
however ineptly, however violently. He was her husband, she was his wife, and
their marriage was better than no marriage at all. ''I'm so ashamed,'' she kept
saying, over and over and over.

That young woman didn't seem all that different from a lot of the other wives
I'd already talked to who felt deeply tethered but somehow hurt - not
physically, but hurt in marriage, by marriage, by men. Almost 40 percent of the
women in a recent Woman's Day magazine poll said they would not marry their
present husbands again. But they've stayed, so far.  The reason is economic,
certainly, but it's also ego -not enough ego. Not enough to leave a violent
husband or to fend off an offending remark from even a loving one. Not enough to
ask for full-hearted help around the house but enough to brood and nag and
withhold sex - the old female game - or to brood and withdraw and throw
themselves into work - the old male game turned into the new female one. Not
enough to live in a messy house and be done with it. Not enough to live alone if
you have to and wait until the terms of marriage, of wifehood, of child-rearing,
are redefined further.

That's what those battered women are trying to do every Saturday morning:
redefine the terms, learn how not to get hurt. That's what Oma Minyard is also
trying to do, redefine the terms. Her husband would very much like to reconcile
now. So would she. They're talking. But this time, she says, it has to be
different.

For certain American wives, it already is. They've got husbands who help them,
hope for them, encourage them without pulling them home or pushing them out.
Those wives radiate good fortune and a determination to match their husbands'
fairness with their own. If he wants to take time off, she'll work; if she feels
it's important to stay home with the children, he'll work, and he won't make her
feel the lesser partner for her decision.

But the rest are struggling, mostly quietly, since anger is once again
considered unfeminine and femininity is once again high on the list of desirable
qualities for the American wife, just as a kind of hip insensitivity is now
considered desirable again in American men. It's all so strange. I still shake
my head; I can't believe so little has changed when so much has. I think of all
the wives I talked to - 60 or 70 of them. Their faces blur, diverge and blur
again, and I wonder how many of them will still be married in a year's time, or
10, and whether they'll be happy.

Right now, at a time when there is no discernible women's movement left, so many
of them seem caught between the parts of themselves they can't reconcile -the
part that wants a hero for a husband and the part that wants a partner; the part
that wants to be the perfect, ever-present mother and the part that wants to be
the perfect career woman. They're caught and they're uneasy, wondering just how
much backsliding is going to go on and just how much of it comes from the
irreconcilable differences within their own psyches.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Oma Minyard and Congresswoman Barbara Kennelly with husband
James and son John (Paul Fusco/Magnum; Arlene Gottfried); Photo of Linda and
Mike Branch in Grove City, Ohio (Arlene Gottfried); Photos of Cheryl Basnar with
mother and daughter and Patricia Swanson with children Crystal, Daniel and
Danielle (Arlene Gottfried); Photo of Ida Abbott and husband Miles (Paul
Fusco/Magnum)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NEW SOCIAL REFORMERS

BYLINE: BY CRYSTAL NIX; Crystal Nix is a reporter on the metropolitan desk of
The Times

SECTION: Section 6; Page 107, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3723 words


VISITS TO DE-crepit buildings in Pittsburgh have replaced stays at five-star
hotels in London and Munich. His $200,000-plus annual salary has dropped 75
percent. And instead of hammering out multimillion-dollar deals on Wall Street
at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., Bart Harvey is concentrating on improving housing
for families with annual incomes at the $10,000 level.

Bart Harvey - born Frederick Barton Harvey 3d -surveys rickety floors, peeling
paint and broken windows in an abandoned two-story house in a poor black and
Hispanic neighborhood. ''How much will it cost to renovate?'' he asks a
construction company employee. ''How long will it take?''

Unusual concerns for a man who has spent most of his life acquiring the
traditional hallmarks of success: prestige, money and the power money buys. He
had, after all, grown up with the comforts of affluence: a large, country house
in a Baltimore suburb, vacations in Europe and easy access to the Old Boy
networks his Harvard education provided.

But two years ago, Harvey decided to trade his job as a Dean Witter managing
director for corporate finance for a position in Columbia, Md., as deputy
director of The Enterprise Foundation, which helps local groups around the
country to revitalize decaying inner-city communities.

''My value system had narrowed too much,'' says Harvey. ''I had become too
focused on money.'' He had also become troubled, he recalls, by disparities
between his affluent world and the decaying, crime-filled communities he saw in
parts of Harlem and the East Village where he sometimes ventured for meals and
entertainment. ''I would see people living like rats in insufferable
condi-tions,'' he says. ''I kept saying, 'Somebody ought to do something about
this.' It finally dawned on me that I was as good a 'somebody' as anyone else.''

In an era of the Yuppie, pre-professionalism and waning social activism, a small
but surprising number of careerists like Harvey have left high-paying,
high-powered and prestigious jobs in fields as diverse as advertising, medicine,
law and the theater to work full time for the poor, the homeless, the
unemployed, the disenfranchised.

Maria Foscarinis left the Wall Sreet law firm of Sullivan & Cromwell to help the
homeless. Dr. Donald Martin gave up a 19-year medical practice in Maryland to
work at a clinic for the poor. Merrell M. Clark left his management consulting
job to aid troubled youths and overwhelmed teen-age parents.

They have joined a resurging breed of social reformers intent on using their
skills, their educations at some of the best schools in the country and their
ties to corporate America to further causes in which they believe.

Their reasons for change are varied. Some were bored or frustrated with their
highly specialized jobs and the impersonal, bureaucratic corporations for which
they worked. Others felt a need to act on deep-seated social values instilled by
religious convictions or concern for the poor. Some still aren't sure why they
made the change. How long they will stay on in their new careers remains to be
seen.

What is certain is that their career moves have produced dramatic changes in
values, life styles and social circles. Their actions have also aroused
skepticism, criticism and admiration blended with guilt from their families,
friends and colleagues. But, in return, they say they are doing more interesting
work from which they derive enormous personal satisfaction.

What makes these professionals so interesting is not their numbers - Dr. Douglas
LaBier, a psychoanalyst in Washington who interviewed 230 successful careerists
for his just-published book, ''Modern Madness: The Emotional Fallout of
Success,'' says they represent less than 5 percent of their corporate peers.
What is most striking is their willingness to run counter to the prevailing
mores in a social climate that does little to encourage or applaud activism,
except for such occasional group aberrations as Hands Across America.

The social climate has changed dramatically from the 1960's, when activism
reached its peak and Americans became embroiled in battles over civil rights,
the Vietnam War and feminism. Today's new breed of activists feel compelled to
do battle for those who have fallen through the safety net of America's reforms,
all but forgotten in the current wave of national conservativism.

''There are a lot of challenges in the world, and it isn't for a lack of ideas,
or even for a lack of ideals, that they aren't getting solved,'' says John
Graham, who after 15 years as a foreign service officer resigned to join The
Giraffe Project, a Seattle-based nonprofit organization begun by his wife, Ann
Medlock; the project encourages people to become involved in social reform.
''What seems to be the weak link,'' he says, ''is getting people off their butts
and into action.''

H ELEN HERSHKOFF was mingling with other Harvard Law School alumni at a cocktail
party in Sotheby's art gallery in New York a few years back when an older lawyer
asked her where she worked.

''I told him I did legal-services work and he said, 'God bless you.' I said,
'You mean better me than you.' ''

Everyone, she says, approves of social service, they just want someone else to
do it. But Ms. Hershkoff, who graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Harvard in 1973 and
went to Oxford University on a Marshall Scholarship before returning to enter
Harvard's Law School, is disturbed that social-service jobs do not get the same
respect or have the same allure as corporate work.

She enjoyed her litigation work at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, but
does not regret leaving to do legal-services work. Her classmates who made
partner at Paul, Weiss this year are earning up to $200,000 a year, while her
present income is $39,000.

At Paul, Weiss, Ms. Hersh-koff was considered an ''extraordinary lawyer'' with
an excellent chance of making partner, according to Peter L. Felcher, a partner
at the firm. Now on leave from the Legal Aid Society until January, she is
teaching two courses at the City University of New York's Law School. Merrell M.
Clark, a Yale graduate, left his management consulting job at Knight, Gladieux &
Smith 14 years ago and became vice-president at the philanthropic Edna McConnell
Clark Foundation. In 1978, he founded Elder Works, a mentors program that pairs
elderly people with troubled youths and matches teen-age mothers and fathers
overwhelmed by the problems of raising their children with older adults willing
to counsel them.

Clark traces his reformer bent to his earlier days as an advertising executive.
''I saw my tombstone,'' he says, in connection with some of the accounts he
oversaw. ''A 5,000 percent increase in corn-oil sales is not an impressive
epitaph,'' he decided.

Others, like Peter M. Leslie, a Princeton graduate who gave up his partnership
in the New York investment banking firm of Leslie, Weinert & Company and is now
a member of the Maine Health Care Finance Commission, downplay their career
change.

''You're looking for someone like Mother Teresa, who really lives in poverty,
identifying with the poor and the oppressed,'' he says. ''That's not me. After
25 years of banking I just figured that was enough. I don't need any more money.
That's not very noble is it?''

E XACTLY WHY SUC-cessful professionals would give up their comfortable corporate
nests or take 50 percent or 75 percent paycuts is sometimes difficult, even for
them, to articulate. Some, like Dr. Donald Martin and Dr. Janelle Goetcheus, who
left her Marion, Ind., medical practice 10 years ago to work at Christ House, a
shelter for the physically ill who are homeless, came to believe that their
Christian convictions demanded a simpler life. ''It's hard for me,'' Dr.
Goetcheus says, ''to know how to love God without equally loving my neighbor,
particularly a neighbor who is oppressed.''

Others, like Maria Foscarinis, were influenced by their ethnic upbringing. As
the only child of middle-class Greek immigrants who lived in Manhattan, she
developed concern for the poor while visiting family and friends across the East
River, in Astoria, Queens. ''It was filled with people who left the old country
in extreme poverty and were still living in generally poor conditions here,''
she says. ''That gave me a different way of looking at things.''

Psychologists and social theorists have their own explanations. ''They recognize
the value and benefits they experienced in their corporate careers,'' says Dr.
LaBier, but ''they want to do something that makes a real difference in people's
lives rather than simply enriching the pockets of clients.''

''What a successful person is really trying to find out is, do people love me
for who I am or what I do,'' says Dr. Steven Berglas, a clinical psychologist
and a Harvard Medical School instructor at McLean Hospital whose book, ''The
Success Syndrome: Hitting Bottom When You Reach the Top,'' was published last
month, ''It's almost impossible to tell once you're rich or famous.

William Drayton, who was assistant administrator in the Environmental Protection
Agency during the Carter Administration, started the Ashoka Society in
Washington to identify and fund social reformers in the United States and abroad
who are ''on the cutting edge of new ideas.'' Many of them, he says, have the
same characteristics of private-sector entrepreneurs: independence, creativity
and a willingness to take risks. The only difference, he contends, is their
social bent. ''I call them public-service entrepreneurs,'' he says.

Many of these former careerists say they have nothing against success or earning
money, and they acknowledge that it is the wealthy who often provide funding for
social programs. But they stress that it is possible to live well with less and
still help others.

''I'm not suffering,'' says Bart Harvey. ''If you think you're making a
sacrifice, you haven't done it right.''

Harvey often finds his strongest satisfactions involve interacting with the
people he tries to help. On a trip to Pittsburgh, he admires the new
refrigerator and wooden kitchen cabinets in a just renovated two-story home.
''This whole place has changed so much,'' he tells the occupant. ''It's really
incredible.''

Marty Stewart smiles contentedly. She moved to the home with her husband,
Charles, and their three children from a crowded apartment in a nearby depressed
steel-mill town. ''Tomorrow, I'm having all the people who worked on the house
over for lunch,'' she tells Harvey. ''I really appreciate all that they've
done.''

B ART HARVEY AND the other professionals who left their jobs believe that those
who never succumbed to temptations for money or power are the true heros.

''I don't see what's so special about them,'' agrees Douglas H. Lasdon, a
Cornell Law School graduate who is the director of the Legal Action Center for
the Homeless in New York City and also teaches metropolitan studies at New York
Univerity. ''A lot of us could have had those jobs but never chose to.''

Many sociologists and historians, however, say that professionals who have
worked in the corporate world will ultimately be more effective in improving the
lot of the poor than complete outsiders because they understand the inner
workings of big business and have the connections to get the resources, the
funding and the advice they need.

''You feel more comfortable working with someone who comes from a similar
firm,'' says Rod DeArment, a partner doing pro bono work for the homeless at
Covington & Burling, one of Washington's top law firms. ''Maria is one of us.''

He is speaking about Maria Foscarinis, of the National Coalition for the
Homeless, an advocacy group, who came to his firm for advice on a bill she is
pushing in Congress, the Homeless Persons Survival Act.

As she shuffles through a stack of briefs and yellow legal pads, Foscarinis
tells DeArment and his associates about the small number of Congressmen and even
fewer Senators who have agreed to back the bill. In the Senate, she says, only
Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Albert Gore Jr. have signed on. From the Ways and
Means Committee, she adds, ''I tried to get Ford but I was told he was into
teen-age pregnancy this year, not health care.'' She was referring to Harold E.
Ford, a Democrat from Tennessee. Everyone laughs. He has since been persuaded to
support the bill.

It is not hard to see why DeArment feels comfortable with her. A Columbia Law
School graduate, law review editor and clerk for a judge on the United States
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, Maria Foscarinis knows the law and
knowledgeably tosses around the names of all the heavy hitters in Washington.

Until 10 months ago, she was an associate at Sullivan & Cromwell, earning
$70,000 a year. She speaks fondly of her years there, and says she had
aspirations of becoming a partner. ''There was a part of me that wanted to do
that,'' she acknowledges.

But when Robert M. Hayes, the homeless coalition's founder and himself a former
S. & C. associate for whom she had done pro bono work, asked her to start a
Washington office, she decided to act on her principles.

A $7,000 bonus she received from Sullivan & Cromwell when she left helped to
cushion the change to her $10,000-a-year salary. But for days on end, she ate
lunch for $1.10 in a cafeteria or at a fast-food restuarant where hamburgers
sold for 99 cents. She dipped into her modest savings once to buy a no-frills
$6,000 car, which she needed for work.

''Some people become involved in a movement for social justice because they
themselves are discriminated against,'' she says. ''But someone not in that
group can also have real reasons for becoming involved. For me, it has to do
with the kind of world I would like to live in.''

Working in a cramped one-room office, Ms. Foscarinis now triples as her own
secretary, messenger and telephone receptionist. Her apartment is somewhat more
spacious, but it borders on Washington's red-light district. Even with a raise
to $25,000, her salary provides for none of the luxuries that had once been
commonplace.

Dr. Donald Martin and his wife, Ellen, sold their suburban Maryland nine-room
house and their three rental properties when they moved to the Adams Morgan
section of Washington so that he might offer medical care to poor blacks and
Latin American refugeees.

The Martins live now in an apartment on the top floor of Christ House. ''It was
difficult to move to the city,'' Ellen Martin says. ''I really don't like it. I
never came to the same strong sense that Don did that this was something we had
to do.''

Dr. Janelle Goetcheus, who lives in Christ House with her husband and three
children, now teen-agers, says she sometimes feels guilty about moving her
family to the inner city. ''My children felt a lot of anger,'' she says. ''They
were brought in to the city, mugged on the street, and had their stuff stolen.''

W HEN WEEKLY visits to the Columbia Road Health Services clinic across from his
new present home in Washington became too tiring, Dr. Martin stopped going.
Months later, however, images of some clinic patients - a woman with no job and
four children, a family newly arrived from El Salvador - haunted him. ''I began
to realize,'' he says, ''that there weren't many people standing in line ready
to care for them.''

Nor are there many churches like the ecumenical Church of the Saviour, to which
he and Dr. Goetcheus belong. It has no building of its own and no large
endowment, but, in a two-block radius in Adams Morgan, its 120-member
congregation runs the Columbia Road Health Services clinic; Christ House, the
shelter for the physically ill who are homeless; Washington's Jubilee Housing,
nine renovated apartment buildings for low-income families; Sarah's Circle, an
apartment for poor elderly families; Potter's House, a coffee shop and Christian
bookstore, where the church members worship, and the Samaritan Inn, which
provides a group home for once-homeless men.

I F IT WEREN'T FOR people like this, there would have been a lot of us
displaced,'' says Rosa Hatfield, the community management coordinator for
Jubilee Housing, who formerly lived in one of its units.

Rose Hatfield, like many others, was not always so appreciative. ''In the
beginning, there was a lot of hostility and suspicion that had to be slowly
broken down,'' says the vice president of Jubilee, Robert Boulter, ''A bunch of
residents had the impression that it was a bunch of white, middle-class people
coming in to sell the neighborhood out from under them.''

Critics of careerists-turned-activists say that it is nearly impossible for
those people to truly understand the deep-seated cycles of poverty or the psyche
of the men and women they are trying to help. ''I appreciate what they're doing
but I wish we had total independence,'' says Wheeler R. Winstead, executive
director of Garfield Jubilee housing, a Pittsburgh nonprofit group that receives
(Continued on Page 114) technical assistance from Bart Harvey's Enterprise
Foundation. ''Sometimes,'' he adds, ''I wish foundations would give us the
money, instead of giving it to someone else who gives it to us.''

Such concerns are legitimate, Harvey acknowledges. The goal of The Enterprise
Foundation, he says, is to provide the skills and technical know-how to make
community groups self-sufficient. At the same time, he points out, many
community groups do not have the technical skills and resources to build
low-income housing.

Bart Harvey and James W. Rouse, who left The Rouse Company, which developed the
South Street Seaport and Faneuil Hall Marketplace in Boston, to start The
Enterprise Foundation, believe in self-help and the private sector shouldering
the responsibility for the poor. Their foundation is setting up national models
of low-income housing built more efficiently than those built by Federal
programs. Its private-development subsidiary is pouring all its profits into the
housing effort while creating jobs, including one-third for minorities.
Additional financing for the housing effort comes from corporations and
foundations that otherwise might not be involved.

Harvey winces at suggestions that this makes him a Reaganite. ''It is important
that people take some control over their lives, but there is no way possible to
ever deal with the problem unless resources from the Government are put in,'' he
says. ''The needs are too overwhelming.''

Ms. Foscarinis is even more adamant: ''I've never spoken to anyone who enjoyed
living in a shelter or living on the street.''

Dr. Martin, however, understands suspicions that the poor are not doing enough
to help themselves, because he, too, once shared some of those doubts. ''I put
myself through college and medical school and I guess part of me used to think,
'O.K., more of you guys could do it,' '' he says.

He changed his mind after seeing the obstacles they faced - the wretched living
conditions, the inadequate education, the poor nutrition and discrimination. .
''If you took away all my breaks,'' he now says, ''and put all the obstacles
there, I would be exactly the same as they.''

Whether these former careerists will be able to continue to resist the seduction
of large bank accounts, luxury living and life-time job security remains to be
seen. The psychoanalyst Douglas LaBier maintains that once professionals break
their ties, they usually stay broken. But a number of
careerists-turned-reformers believe in the wisdom of the phrase ''Never say
never.''

Burnout rates in their new fields are high, salaries are low, the hours long,
and for people used to having all the resources they need at their fingertips,
asking for help instead of giving it can be unsettling.

Some are encouraged to return by their former colleagues. In the corner of Bart
Harvey's office in Columbia, Md., hangs a Dean Witter poster with this note
attached: ''We want you to see each day how much you are missing and hope you
will consider returning to the fray sometime soon.''

This, Harvey says, is not inconceivable, particularly if he were to get married
or have children. ''I would want to send them to the best possible schools and
have them live in reasonable surroundings,'' he says. ''All that takes money.''

Sometimes, too, Harvey is troubled by his distance from the corporate world.
''The longer I stay out, the less able I will be to go back in a senior
capacity,'' he says. ''Contacts are very important in corporate America. You
lose those over time.''

Others, like Merrell Clark, are convinced they will never return. ''I've spent
the last eight years getting Elder Works to run,'' he says firmly. ''I expect to
spend 35 more.''

M ARIA FOSCARINIS SITS at a fold-up table in a rundown shelter for the homeless.
Across from her, a couple is complaining about a landlord who has just cheated
them out of $220, all the money they had, and evicted them from their one-room
apartment.

''We rented the place for a month and paid in cash,'' Nancy, an articulate young
woman is telling Miss Foscarinis. ''She told us after a week that we had to get
out.''

A year ago, Maria Foscarinis was defending clients like Exxon, Ford and Kidder,
Peabody in securities and antitrust litigation. But on this night, she is bent
over a receipt Leroy, Nancy's boyfriend, has just handed her. The expiration
date on the apartment has been scratched out and a new one, three weeks earlier,
has been scribbled in. ''This is very good,'' she says. ''I think you can do
something about this.''

These are not the kind of clients she was trained to help, but without her, they
would get no help. ''A lot of people become so demoralized they lose sight of
the fact they have rights,'' she says. ''They do have rights and it's important
they get them.''

In appearance, education or achievements, there is little to separate Maria
Foscarinis and her activist peers from the colleagues they left behind. Except
for one thing. Their measuring rod of success.

''Unless some of us are willing to make sacrifices, the problems are not going
to be solved,'' Dr. Martin says. ''I can't prove that I'm making any difference,
except for my patients,'' he adds. ''But this is something I can do. The point
is, if you get enough people of good will together, you can get something
done.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Maria Foscarinis with a resident at a shelter for the homeless
(David Wells/J.B. Pictures)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LOONY HORROR OF IT ALL- 'CATCH-22' TURNS 25

BYLINE: BY JOHN W. ALDRIDGE; John W. Aldridge, a professor of English at the
University of Michigan, is the author of ''After the Lost Generation,'' ''The
American Novel and the Way We Live Now'' and other books of criticism.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2513 words


Looking back today at ''Catch-22''- which was published 25 years ago this month-
we are able to see that it has had a remarkable, if not altogether unclouded,
literary history. It has passed from relatively modest initial success with
readers and critics - many of whom liked the book for just the reasons that
caused others to hate it - through massive best-sellerdom and early canonization
as a youth-cult sacred text to its current status as a monumental artifact of
contemporary American literature, almost as assured of longevity as the statues
on Easter Island.

Yet it is only in recent years that we have begun to learn how to read this
curious book and, as is the case with those statues, to understand how and why
it got here and became what it is instead of what we may once have believed it
to be. The history of ''Catch-22'' is, in effect, also a significant chapter in
the history of contemporary criticism - its steady growth in sophistication, its
evolving archeological intelligence, above all its realization that not only is
the medium of fiction the message but that the medium is a fiction capable of
sending a fair number of frequently discrete but interlocking messages,
depending of course on the complexity of the imagination behind it and the
sensibility of the receiver.

The truth of this last is attested to in perhaps a meretricious sort of way by
the large diversity of responses ''Catch-22'' received in the first year or two
following its publication in 1961. They ranged from the idiotically
uncomprehending at the lowest end of the evaluative scale to the prophetically
perceptive at the highest, and in between there were the reservedly
appreciative, the puzzled but enthusiastic, the ambivalent and annoyed, and more
than a few that were rigid with moral outrage.

One of the best examples of the many mixed responses was Richard G. Stern's
brief but eloquent review that appeared in these pages on Oct. 22, 1961. Mr.
Stern saw the book as ''a portrait gallery, a collection of anecdotes, some of
them wonderful, a parade of scenes'' presented with ''much passion, comic and
fervent.'' But ''it gasps for want of craft and sensibility'' and finally it is
not a novel. ''Joseph Heller is like a brilliant painter who decides to throw
all the ideas in his sketchbooks onto one canvas, relying on their charm and
shock to compensate for the lack of design.''

Way over at the other end of the critical combat zone were those who were
extravagant in their praise of the book and entirely untroubled by its
eccentricities of form. Most notable among these were Nelson Algren and Robert
Brustein. Algren, writing in The Nation, called ''Catch-22'' ''not merely the
best American novel to come out of World War II; it is the best American novel
to come out of anywhere in years.'' Mr. Brustein, in his New Republic review,
was so superbly intelligent about the book that much of the later criticism has
done little to improve his essential argument. He saw at once, for example, that
the Air Force setting in World War II is only the ostensible subject of the book
and that Mr. Heller's achievement lies in his brilliant use of that setting as a
metaphor or ''a satirical microcosm for many of the macrocosmic idiocies''
afflicting the postwar era in general. Mr. Brustein was also able to foresee
what later critics, after considerable equivocation, came to acknowledge: that
the descent into phantasmagoric horror, which occurs in the concluding chapters
of the book, is not a violation of the comic mode but a plausible vindication of
it, since, as he put it, ''the escape route of laughter [is] the only recourse
from a malignant world.''

Finally, following the same pioneering logic, Mr. Brustein recognized that,
given the premises Mr. Heller had established, Yossarian's decision to desert,
which has been much debated by critics, far from being a poorly justified
conclusion for the novel, is in fact a meticulously prepared-for conclusion. It
represents an act of ''invested heroism,'' ''one of those sublime expressions of
anarchic individualism without which all natural ideals are pretty hollow
anyway,'' if only because it is proof that Yossarian, alone of them all, has
managed to remain morally alive and able to take responsibility for his life in
a totally irresponsible world. IF responses as appreciative as Mr. Brustein's
were a rarity in 1961, one reason may be that most reviewers were locked into a
conventional and - as shortly became evident - an outmoded assumption about what
war fiction should be. They had, after all, been conditioned by the important
novels of World War I and reconditioned by the World War II novels of Norman
Mailer, Irwin Shaw, John Horne Burns, James Jones and others to expect that the
authentic technique for treating war experience is harshly documentary realism.
The exceptions, of course, were the sweetly hygienic productions of Marion
Hargrove and Thomas Heggen, which were comic in an entirely innocuous way and
depicted military life - mostly well behind the combat zone - as being carried
on with all the prankish exuberance of a fraternity house beer party.

Coming into this context, ''Catch-22'' clearly seemed anomalous and more than a
trifle ominous. It was a work of consummate zaniness populated by squadrons of
madly eccentric, cartoonographic characters whose antics were far loonier than
anything ever seen before in war fiction - or, for that matter, in any fiction.
Yet the final effect of the book was neither exhilarating nor palliative. This
was a new kind of comedy, one that disturbed and subverted before it delighted
and was ultimately as deadly in earnest, as savagely bleak and ugly, as the most
dissident war fiction of Erich Maria Remarque, Dos Passos or Mr. Mailer. In
fact, many readers must have sensed that beneath the comic surfaces Mr. Heller
was saying something outrageous, unforgivably outrageous, not just about the
idiocy of war but about our whole way of life and the system of false values on
which it is based. The horror he exposed was not confined to the battlefield or
the bombing mission but permeated the entire labyrinthine structure of
establishment power. It found expression in the most completely inhumane
exploitation of the individual for trivial, self-serving ends and the most
extreme indifference to the official objectives that supposedly justified the
use of power. It was undoubtedly this recognition that the Continued on page 55
book was something far broader in scope than a mere indictment of war - a
recognition perhaps arrived at only subconsciously by most readers in 1961 -
that gave it such pertinence to readers who discovered it over the next decade.
For with the seemingly eternal and mindless escalation of the war in Vietnam,
history had at last caught up with the book and caused it to be more and more
widely recognized as a deadly accurate metaphorical portrait of the nightmarish
conditions in which the country appeared to be engulfed.

Ironically, in the same year that ''Catch-22'' came out, Philip Roth published
in Commentary his famous essay ''Writing American Fiction,'' in which he
expressed his feelings of bafflement and frustration when confronted with the
grotesque improbability of most of the events of contemporary life. In a
frequently quoted paragraph he said that ''the American writer in the middle of
the 20th Century has his hands full in trying to understand, and then describe,
and then make credible much of the American reality. It stupefies, it sickens,
it infuriates, and finally it is even a kind of embarrassment to one's meager
imagination. The actuality is continually outdoing our talents.'' MR. ROTH then
proceeded to discuss the work of certain of his contemporaries (most notably,
Norman Mailer, J. D. Salinger, Bernard Malamud, William Styron and Herbert Gold)
and to find in much of it evidence of a failure to engage the American reality -
an inevitable failure, he believed, because ''what will be the [writer's]
subject? His landscape? It is the tug of reality, its mystery and magnetism,
that leads one into the writing of fiction - what then when one is not mystified
but stupefied? Not drawn but repelled? It would seem that what we might get
would be a high proportion of historical novels or contemporary satire - or
perhaps just nothing. No books.''

Mr. Roth was, of course, writing out of an era that was particularly notable for
unbelievable and often quite repellent happenings. There had been the fiascoes
of the Eisenhower Presidency, the costly Korean War, the sordid inquisitions of
the McCarthy era, the Rosenberg executions, the Nixon-Kennedy debates. But then,
Mr. Heller was writing out of the same era, and what makes Mr. Roth's essay
historically interesting is that nowhere in it does he show an awareness or even
imagine the possibility that the effort to come to terms with the unreality of
the American reality might already have begun to be made by such writers as
William Gaddis and John Barth, whose first works had been published by 1961, and
would continue to be made by Thomas Pynchon, whose ''V.'' came out two years
later, as well as by Joseph Heller in ''Catch-22.''

These writers were all, in their different ways, seeking to create a fiction
that would assimilate the difficulties Mr. Roth described. And they achieved
this by creating an essentially new kind of fiction that represented an
abdication of traditional realism - a form rendered mostly ineffectual because
of those very difficulties - and that made use of the techniques of black humor,
surrealism and grotesque metaphor to dramatize unreality, most often by making
it seem even more unreal than it actually was.

The complexity and originality of the work these and other writers have produced
imposed demands upon criticism that have forced it to grow in sophistication and
have obviously contributed to such growth in the criticism of ''Catch-22.'' As
evidence of this, we need only observe that most of the questions that perplexed
or annoyed critics of the novel in the years immediately following its
publication have now been answered, and as this has occurred, the size of Mr.
Heller's achievement has been revealed to be far larger than it was first
thought to be.

Recent studies have shown, for example, that two initially worrisome aspects of
the novel are in fact quite adequately prepared for in the development of the
action. The first is Yossarian's decision to desert, for which Mr. Brustein's
early explanation remains the most convincing and widely shared. The second is
the ostensibly sudden transition in the closing chapters from hilarious comedy
to scenes of the blackest horror. The more sensitive of later critics have
demonstrated - again following Mr. Brustein's lead - that the horror has
actually been present from the beginning, but its force has been blunted and, in
effect, evaded by the comedy. Through a complicated process, involving countless
repetitions of references and details and a looping and straightening inchworm
progression, the moment is finally reached in the Walpurgisnacht ''Eternal
City'' chapter when the humor is stripped away and the terrified obsession with
death, from which the humor has been a hysterical distraction, is revealed in
full nakedness. IT has also been demonstrated that the tangled, excessively
repetitive structure is a perfectly convincing formal statement of the novel's
theme, even of the reiterated double bind of the central symbol, Catch-22. The
opening figure of the soldier in white, whose bodily fluids are endlessly
drained back into him, the soldier who sees everything twice, the constant
raising of the required number of bombing missions, the massive incremental
enumeration of detail -all these come together to suggest a world based upon a
principle of quantitative evaluation in which more is better and most is best.
Yet it is a world in which the accumulated excess of any one element may at any
moment be neutralized by the greater accumulated excess of an antithetical
element, as the comedy is finally neutralized by the weightier force of terror
and death, as the fateful ubiquity of Catch-22 finally eclipses all demands for
logic and sanity.

As is the case with many original works of art, ''Catch-22'' is a novel that
reminds us once again of all that we have taken for granted in our world and
should not, the madness we try not to bother to notice, the deceptions and
falsehoods we lack the will to try to distinguish from truth. Twenty-five years
later, we can see that the situation Mr. Heller describes has, during those
years, if anything grown more complicated, deranging and perilous than it was in
1944 or 1961. The comic fable that ends in horror has become more and more
clearly a reflection of the altogether uncomic and horrifying realities of the
world in which we live and hope to survive.

BRITAIN BEAT US TO IT

The first chapter of ''Catch-22'' appeared in New World Writing, Issue No. 7, in
1955. It was titled ''Catch-18.'' Several years later, while Joseph Heller was
writing promotional copy at McCall's magazine as head of a small department
called advertising presentations, his agent, Candida Donadio, submitted part of
the novel to a few publishers. ''It was never rejected,'' Mr. Heller recalled
the other day. ''My editor, Robert Gottlieb, who was then at Simon & Schuster,
accepted it. The publishing contract called for $750 on signing and another $750
on acceptance of the manuscript.'' He added, ''Now I get more.''

When the novel came out in October 1961, its title was changed to ''Catch-22''
to avoid confusing it with Leon Uris's novel ''Mila 18.'' Mr. Heller said: ''It
got a terrible review in The Times Book Review and The New Yorker. Maurice
Dolbier, the book columnist and critic at The New York Herald Tribune, later
told me that while he was interviewing S. J. Perelman, Perelman told him that a
new book called 'Catch-22' was terrific. Mr. Dolbier gave it a very good review,
and afterward so did Orville Prescott in the daily New York Times. The book
never made any best-seller list. It was a word-of-mouth success - about 30,000
hard-cover copies were sold the first year. Raymond Walters Jr. wrote a column
in The Times Book Review just before it appeared in paperback, saying there was
a 'Catch' cult. That helped a lot.'' Mr. Walters noted that ''the British took
it to their hearts more quickly than us Yanks,'' and that one week after its
publication by Jonathan Cape, the book ''zoomed to No. 1 on their best-seller
list.'' Dell brought it out in paperback in October 1962; over two million
copies were sold the first year.

Although a World War II novel, ''Catch-22'' also appealed to the Vietnam
generation. Mr. Heller said that Dell has sold over eight million copies in the
United States, and Corgi, the London paperback house, has sold another two
million copies in Britain. ''What happened to 'Catch-22' was rare,'' Mr. Heller
said. ''So many good books just fade away.''     - Herbert Mitgang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Joseph Heller in 1961 (Seymour Linden)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE F.B.I.'S NEW PSYCHE SQUAD

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN G. MICHAUD; Stephen G. Michaud is the author, with Hugh
Aynesworth, of ''The Only Living Witness,'' the story of the serial killer Ted
Bundy

SECTION: Section 6; Page 40, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4170 words


THE POLICE IN A SMALL MID-dle Western community were recently confronted with
the case of a petite young nurse who vanished into the night from the parking
lot of the local medical center.

The next day, her car was found nearby, its interior bare, save for the nurse's
white left shoe.

Twenty-four hours later, her body was discovered, partially covered by brush,
along a little-used country lane not far from where she'd been abducted. The
nurse had been raped and stabbed wildly, front and back, through her clothing.
No murder weapon was found, but her wounds appeared to have been inflicted by a
short-bladed instrument, such as a pocketknife. Missing, too, was the nurse's
distinctive engagement ring. It was the sort of brutal, random crime that lately
has begun to plague police agencies across the country. (To protect the
confidentiality of Federal Bureau of Investigation records, identities, dates
and locations have been withheld.) Still, because murder in the United States
remains primarily a matter involving people who know each other (58 percent of
1985's reported 18,980 homicides were slayings by relatives or acquaintances),
in this case the police properly focused their investigation on the victim's
fiance, her family and her friends. When no good suspect emerged from this
group, however, the local detectives were left to speculate that their Unsub, a
police term for Unknown Subject, was either a transient serial killer or perhaps
some recently released mental patient.

Only after two months of fruitless investigation did an inspiration prevent the
nurse's murder from becoming one of the 5,000 or so homicides that go unsolved
each year in this country. A police sergeant suggested a call for help to the
F.B.I.'s National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime, headquartered at the
bureau's academy on the Quantico Marine Base in rural eastern Virginia. Within a
month, the center's team of criminal personality profilers, as they are called,
sent back their analysis. The nurse's killer, said the center's report, wasn't
likely to be such a mysterious stranger after all. Look for a community
resident, a youngish male of slight frame who lived within walking distance of
the medical center. Chances were good he lived with a woman - his mother or a
girlfriend - who helped support him. There was reason to believe that his name
was already known to the police for chronic assaultive behavior. This probably
was his most serious crime, but having killed once, he appeared to be someone
who might well kill again.

THE F.B.I.'S CRIMINAL profiling service, officially christened the National
Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime in June 1985, has evolved from informal
beginnings in the late 1960's to become the world's clearinghouse for the
pursuit and capture of irrational, abnormal offenders, the most difficult of all
criminals to apprehend. Working largely from police reports, autopsies, photos
and the like - the center's nine profilers rarely visit the scene of a crime -
they ferret out strictly behavioral clues to the identities of Unsubs and
produce multipage, typewritten analyses, often in startling clarity and detail.

The analysis center's current cases range from the 1982 Tylenol murders in
Illinois and one this year in New York, to arsons, bombings and a fearsome array
of degenerate crimes. The bureau also accepts an increasing number of
international cases, including the open investigation of a Florentine Unsub who
has terrorized Tuscany for more than eight years, killing one or two victims a
year.

According to two internal F.B.I. studies, the center contributes significant aid
in 80 percent of the more than 600 cases it now accepts each year. ''It's the
only service like this there is, or ever has been,'' says the center's senior
profiler, 49-year-old Robert K. Ressler. ''We're available to law enforcement on
a 24-hour basis, 365 days a year.''

None of the analysis center's profilers is a psychologist or psychiatrist,
though all hold advanced degrees in one of the social sciences. ''The thrust
here is on the psychology of criminal behavior from the law enforcement side,
not the therapeutic or diagnostic side,'' says Alan E. Burgess, 48, chief of the
center's Behavioral Science Investigative Support Unit.

All the profilers have substantial investigative experience, and the key to
their expertise is their unique familiarity with the workings of the irrational
criminal mind. A forensic psychiatrist, Park Elliott Dietz, a professor of law
and behavioral medicine and psychiatry at the University of Virginia, who served
as the prosecution psychiatrist in the trial of John W. Hinckley Jr. for the
attempted assassination of President Reagan, says the F.B.I.'s experts have no
peers. ''I think I know as much about criminal behavior as any mental-health
professional,'' he says, ''and I don't know as much as the bureau's profilers
do.'' In the United States, all violent crime has been on the increase,
particularly deviant acts, such as forcible rape. Rape remains a seriously
under-reported crime; Federal officials continue to believe that about half of
these assaults are brought to police attention. The number of known incidents,
however, rose from 17,190 cases in 1960 to more than 87,000 in 1985. Meanwhile,
the percentage of those cases cleared by arrest has fallen off alarmingly. There
are as yet no reliable figures to describe the precise dimensions of the problem
posed by the offender who is a stranger to his victim, but the number of
notorious recent cases of aberrant killers - names such as David (Son of Sam)
Berkowitz, John Gacy, Wayne Williams and Ted Bundy come to mind - suggests a
grim, rising trend. ''In my experience, there has been an increase in stranger
homicides,'' says Lieut. Comdr. Vernon J. Geberth of the New York Police
Department and the author of a standard police text, ''Practical Homicide
Investigation.'' ''And there has been an increase in sexually sadistic
homicides.''

Whatever its frequency -or cause - stranger, aberrant crime lately has come to
trouble both small-town police forces unaccustomed to dealing with it, as well
as big-city cops. ''I believe that to a very large extent crime adjusts to the
environment,'' says Roger Depue, the 48-year-old administrator of the National
Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime. ''We've become a highly-transient,
stranger-to-stranger society. Criminals are going to take advantage of that.''

AT THE F.B.I., EDUC-ing an offender's general characteristics, such as sex and
race, is often fairly simple. In the murder of the Middle Western nurse,
profilers knew the Unsub was probably a white male; rape-murders overwhelmingly
are intraracial crimes. But achieving a higher order of precision requires
considering evidence in the context of both the circumstances of the crime and
the established patterns of criminal behavior.

The bureau's files bulge, for example, with detailed dossiers of serial killers,
men who kill intermittently, often over the course of many years. (Mr. Ressler,
in fact, started using the term because such an offender's behavior is so
distinctly episodic, like the movie-house serials he enjoyed as a boy.) These
case histories indicate that if a killer gets away with his first crime, his
method in subsequent crimes is often more refined; his behavior pattern is
marked by evolution. The serial killer habitually uses his own vehicle; not, as
the nurse's killer had, his victim's. Further, this Unsub knew of a convenient,
local lane in which to carry out his crime. And because the nurse's car was
returned to the medical center's immediate vicinity, the killer likely had no
vehicle of his own, and thus probably lived nearby.

Another important insight: ''In our research projects, we're beginning to see
that the most successful violent criminals are not crazies,'' says Mr. Depue,
who was a police chief in Clare, Mich., before he came to the bureau 18 years
ago. The majority of them are intelligent.'' So the nurse's slayer was by no
rule of experience an outwardly bizarre character.

The bureau has distinguished between what it terms Organized or Disorganized
Unsub behavior. This offender appeared Organized; that is, he acted in a
controlled, methodical manner from the point of abduction to the moment he raped
his victim. This suggests that sexual assault was his primary motive, which,
because rape is a deviant manifestation of aggression, makes it likely the Unsub
was angry that night. The young nurse alone in the parking lot was a tragically
opportune target.

From the evidence, however, he hadn't reckoned with her anger, or perhaps
hysteria, following the rape. The shoe found in her car, plus the fact that the
nurse was stabbed through her clothing, were consistent with the victim's having
turned violently emotional as she dressed. The bureau profilers understand the
Organized criminal's absolute need for mastery, and the panic he feels if he
loses control. That's when he reaches - in fear - for a weapon, anything handy,
such as a pocketknife.

Moreover, an experienced rape-slayer habitually brings with him a favored
weapon. His method of murder has a practiced look to it, not the sloppy pattern
of wounds found on the nurse. The front-and-back series of stabs suggested a
pitched struggle. So the Unsub appeared not only youthful and inexperienced, but
also not much larger than his diminutive victim.

THE BUREAU'S first serious student of the irrational offender was Agent Howard
D. Teten, a veteran of the San Leandro, Calif., police department's evidence
unit who joined the F.B.I. in 1962 and in 1969 arrived as an instructor of
applied criminology at the bureau's old training division in Washington. As an
instructor, Mr. Teten added to his store of expertise whatever he thought
useful, wherever he found it.

He made sure, for instance, to tap the wizardly Dr. James A. Brussel. A New York
psychiatrist, Dr. Brussel had pioneered profiling in 1956 with his uncannily
precise analysis of New York City's ''Mad Bomber,'' who had intermittently
terrorized the city with his homemade explosives for more than a decade. Dr.
Brussel even accurately predicted that the bomber, George Metesky, would be
brought in wearing a double-breasted suit, neatly buttoned. ''Dr. Brussel and I
spent a great deal of time together comparing notes and techniques,'' says Mr.
Teten, now 53 and an independent investigator in northern Virginia.

Mr. Teten even absorbed some practical investigative philosophy from Sherlock
Holmes. ''Two points,'' he says. ''The most obvious thing is probably the
correct one. And, if you've eliminated all the other possibilities, whatever is
left, however improbable, is what happened.''

In 1972, Mr. Teten was joined at the new F.B.I. academy at Quantico by Patrick
J. Mullany, a one-time Christian brother who, as an F.B.I. agent, had also
conceived an interest in the aberrant criminal. Their students, agents and
selected police officers, soon were bringing every manner of odd case to Mr.
Teten and Mr. Mullany for behavioral analyses. ''And the more we did it,'' says
Mr. Mullany, now 51 and director of international security for First Interstate
Bank in Los Angeles, ''the more we realized the possibility of practical
applications.''

Their opportunity arose in early 1974. The previous June, 7-year-old Susan
Jaeger, on a camping trip with her family in Montana, was snatched in the
predawn hours from the children's tent as her parents slept nearby. The case
came to Mr. Teten and Mr. Mullany and Mr. Ressler, then a new
instructor-profiler at the academy, via Pete Dunbar, then an agent in the
bureau's Bozeman office. Together, the three profilers concluded the Unsub had
come upon the family during a habitual night prowl and impulsively took his
victim by cutting through the tent with his knife. He appeared to be a young,
white male, a loner who lived not far from the campsite. They warned Mr. Dunbar
that Susan was probably dead. And from their knowledge of Organized criminal
behavior, they came to the grisly conclusion that her killer would be saving
remembrances of his act, perhaps body parts.

Among Mr. Dunbar's early suspects was David Meirhofer, a 23-year-old Vietnam
veteran whose name was offered by an informant. By coincidence, Mr. Dunbar, now
the United States Attorney for Montana, knew the young man personally. ''David
was well groomed, courteous and exceptionally intelligent,'' he remembers. ''He
was the gentlest of persons, too.''

Nothing substantive tied Mr. Meirhofer to the Jaeger murder. But then, in
January 1974, an 18-year-old woman who had spurned his attentions was found
incinerated in the woods. A suspect again, Mr. Meirhofer readily volunteered to
take a polygraph exam and to be questioned under truth serum. ''He passed them
both with flying colors,'' says Mr. Dunbar. ''After that, I didn't think he did
it.''

The Quantico profilers were unconvinced. The psychopath they believed had killed
both females might easily pass any truth test. ''We just kept going on him,''
says Mr. Mullany. ''We kept saying, 'No! He's our boy!' ''

On the first anniversary of Susan Jaeger's disappearance, a man who claimed to
be keeping her, alive, telephoned Susan's parents at their home in Farmington,
Mich. As she had been advised by the bureau, Marietta Jaeger kept a tape
recorder by the phone, and she flipped it on when the conversation began.

''He was very smug and taunting,'' Mrs. Jaeger recalls. ''But my reaction was
not what he was expecting. I felt truly able to forgive him. I had a great deal
of compassion and concern, and that really took him aback. He let his guard down
and finally just broke down and wept.''

According to a voice analysis, the caller was Mr. Meirhofer. But such evidence
was then insufficient in Montana to obtain a probable-cause search warrant. At
this juncture, Mr. Mullany offered a bold suggestion. ''It was a last-ditch
thing,'' he says. ''But after listening to that tape, I felt that Meirhofer
could be woman-dominated. I suggested that Mrs. Jaeger go to Montana and
confront him.''

Marietta Jaeger first met David Meirhofer at his lawyer's office, and begged him
to tell her about Susan. But Mr. Meirhofer appeared unmoved. ''He was very
careful,'' says Mrs. Jaeger, ''not to incriminate himself.''

She returned to Michigan with her husband, William, both of them certain her
pleas had had no effect. They were wrong. Presently there came a collect
telephone call from Salt Lake City. A ''Mr. Travis'' wanted to explain that he,
not this man up in Montana, had abducted Susan. But before Mr. Travis could go
on with his confession, Mrs. Jaeger interrupted him. ''Well, hello, David,'' she
said.

Largely on the strength of Mrs. Jaeger's sworn affidavit, Mr. Dunbar got his
search warrant. In Mr. Meirhofer's residence, Mr. Dunbar found remains of both
Susan Jaeger and the older female. The young man then confessed to the murders,
as well as to the unsolved kill-ings of two local boys. Within a day, Mr.
Meirhofer hanged himself in his jail cell.

BY CRACKING MR. Meirhofer's psychopathic shell, Mr. Teten and Mr. Mullany
ratified their belief in behavioral analysis as an investigative tool. It was
Mr. Ressler and another young agent at Quantico, John E. Douglas, who took the
nascent craft the next step toward becoming an avowed F.B.I. discipline. As a
boy in Chicago, Mr. Ressler eagerly followed local murder stories in the papers.
He went on to earn a master's degree in criminology at Michigan State, and was
an officer in the Army's Criminal Investigation Division before joining the
F.B.I. in 1970. Four years later, he came to the academy as an instructor.

Mr. Douglas, in contrast, never expected to become a Federal agent. Tall and
dark, soft-spoken and one of the analysis center's nattier dressers, Mr.
Douglas, 41, also joined the bureau in 1970, after being recruited out of
graduate school at the University of Wisconsin. A native of Hempstead, L.I., and
an Air Force veteran, he had intended to become an industrial psychologist. ''I
knew nothing about the F.B.I. or anything that it did,'' he says. By 1976, he
was at Quantico. In 1977, Mr. Ressler and Mr. Douglas began the bureau's first
research survey into the aberrant mind. They wanted to test the validity of the
Organized-Disorganized criminal models. They also wanted to examine some hoary
truisms. Does, for instance, a killer always return to the scene of his crime?

''We wanted to find out factors that predisposed the guy,'' Mr. Ressler says.
''What went on during the assault? What did he do after the crime? How did he
cope? Did he take souvenirs? Take photographs? What part did pornography play? A
lot of this stuff had been thrown around, but no one had ever really traced it
right to the source.''

So Mr. Ressler and Mr. Douglas embarked on an interview survey in the nation's
prisons, visiting with a de-tailed questionnaire more than 50 notorious inmates,
including Sirhan Sirhan, Charles Manson, Richard Speck, David Berkowitz and John
Gacy. Very few of the interviewees proved reticent to discuss their crimes. Many
were flattered by the bureau's attention. And some were simply eager for the
chance to relive their deeds. ''They'd get all glassy-eyed,'' says Mr. Ressler.
''One of the guys even wanted John and me to stay for dinner.''

This altogether unique survey revealed the Organized offender to be of at least
average intelligence, and socially and sexually competent. He was apt to be born
early into a family in which the father held steady work, but in which parental
discipline was inconsistent. This killer often lives with a woman. He drives a
well-maintained car. He commonly commits his crimes after some stressful event.

His prey, almost always a stranger, nevertheless conforms to a type; one
interviewee was drawn exclusively to solitary females driving two-door cars. The
Organized offender often takes souvenirs, but he is very controlled. He doesn't
leave his weapon or other incriminating evidence at the scene, and he takes care
to hide his victim's body.

The Disorganized offender, as a rule, is not nearly so bright. He is often
overtly inadequate, a deluded loner given to solo sex. He kills spontaneously,
often brutally, with minimal thought for hiding the act.

These designations are not absolute. Mr. Meirhofer was a prototypical Organized
killer, but the Unsub in the case of the Middle Western nurse was what the
F.B.I. calls ''mixed,'' one who typically proceeds in an
Organized-Disorganized-Organized pattern.

The killer survey and subsequent researches have greatly expanded the range of
services of the National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime. In the case
of the 1979-81 Atlanta child murders, for instance, Mr. Res-sler, Mr. Douglas
and another profiler, Robert (Roy) Hazelwood, described the personality of a man
who might hunt and kill a number of young black males. Mr. Douglas then
consulted in the prosecution of Wayne B. Williams.

''Douglas,'' says Jack Mallard, the Fulton County assistant district attorney
who presented much of the case, ''indicated to me he thought if we kept Williams
on the stand as long as possible and cross-examined him in certain ways, he
might break, he might show his true nature.''

For two days, Mr. Mallard hammered relentlessly at the defendant. ''Then he
began lashing back,'' says the district attorney, ''calling me names, the F.B.I.
'goons' and so forth.'' Mr. Mallard calls this sudden eruption ''the turning
point in the cross-examination.'' He says, ''It helped for the jury to see that
Williams had another side to him.''

The F.B.I.'s researches have continued to help sharpen the analysis center's
profiles. Thus, in the case of the Middle Western nurse, the bureau was able to
suggest that the Unsub possibly quarreled with his female companion the night of
the murder, and that he had probably been drinking. He would have returned home
agitated, disheveled and possibly spattered with blood. The next day, the
profile continued, the Unsub would invent some excuse to be taken to, or near,
the scene of the crime to inspect his handiwork. And the killer had taken the
victim's engagement ring, which he might later offer as a gift to his female
companion. In the end, providing the local press with some of these indicators
netted the police an informant. A telephone caller directed them to the doorstep
of their astonished quarry, no longer an Unsub. He is now in prison.

THE LATEST ADDI-tion at Quantico is the Violent Criminal Apprehension Program, a
computerized log of the unsolved cases reported to the National Center for the
Analysis of Violent Crime by police agencies. Up to now, the bureau, like all
law enforcement agencies, has had to track these criminals primarily by means of
computerized newspaper indexes.

From this new program, it is hoped, the first clear picture of stranger violence
in America will emerge. It is the brainchild of a former police detective,
Pierce R. Brooks, now a criminal investigative consultant in Oregon, who also
helped set up the system at Quantico. Mr. Ressler, now manager of the
apprehension program, says that within a few years the system should contain as
many as 10,000 cases, each fully described and cross-referenced for key clues
and indicators.

The program, for example, might flag a murder in Pittsburgh if it is similar to
one committed in Buffalo. If a third such killing is then reported in Akron, the
system may have detected a serial killer. Then the evidence from all three cases
can be examined together. Moreover, suspects can be eliminated - or focused upon
-based on their whereabouts at the times of the three killings. According to
Robert D. Keppel, chief criminal investigator for the Washington State Attorney
General, had the program been available to him in 1975, he might have stopped
the serial killer Ted Bundy long before he was captured in Florida. Mr. Bundy
began his murderous rampage in Seattle in the early 1970's; by his 1979 arrest,
he was specifically linked to the killings of 23 females across the country.

Still another advantage of the program, says Mr. Ressler, will be to
short-circuit grisly hoaxes like the one perpetrated by Henry Lee Lucas and
Ottis Toole, a pair of drifters who startled the police in 1983 by confessing to
upwards of 600 murders nationwide. It required an exhaustive review by a team of
reporters at The Dallas Times Herald to determine that almost all of the
confessions were fraudulent. Two or three years from now, Mr. Ressler says, a
Henry Lucas won't be able to pass off fictitious information like that. ''And
theoretically,'' he says, ''there aren't going to be any more Ted Bundys.''

The National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime also is now training
selected police detectives to become profilers themselves. Five already are in
place in Los Angeles, Austin, Tex., Washington, Baltimore and New York. ''I
thought I knew how to thoroughly investigate a crime before I went down there,''
reports Detective Raymond Pierce, New York City's newly trained profiler. ''It
was amazingly well done.''

Mr. Pierce says he also discovered that profiling requires a sturdy psychic
constitution. Mr. Mullany, a former profiler, agrees: ''There are very serious
emotional risks. Long-term ones. A person really can't stay with that stuff for
very long.''

Some profilers-in-training can't distance themselves from the horrors they
analyze. ''To assess these crimes,'' Mr. Ressler explains, ''you have to think
like the offender.'' Extreme weight loss and bouts of unruly emotion are not
unknown at the National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime.

Mr. Douglas, for example, remembers what happened to him two years ago in
Seattle, under the enormous pressure of trying to capture the Green River
Killer, who is still at large and thought to be responsible for the murders of
at least 40 prostitutes from that area.

''I almost died,'' he says. ''I came down with viral encephalitis, and the
doctors said it was stress-related; the stress lowered my resistance. I was in a
coma for a week. I was paralyzed. I was out of work for five months. My hand's
still stiff today.'' Such stresses may be the price of success; profiling's
demonstrated value as an investigative tool has created a barely manageable
workload at the National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime. There is hope
that in the future a newly begun artificial-intelligence project - a program to
impart to computers at least some of the profilers' logic and expertise - will
ease the burden.

Yet the better the bureau gets at detecting these offenders, the less its
experts can foresee any future age of push-button sleuthing.

''Any time you're working with human behavior, you're going to find atypical
situations and variables you haven't encountered before,'' says Mr. Hazelwood.
''There's no cookbook, and there never will be a cookbook.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of F.B.I. investigators Alan E. Burgess, Roger Depue, John E.
Douglas and Robert K. Ressler (Brad Markel); Photo of F.B.I. instructor with
class of agents (Owen Franken)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
'Reckless Disregard'

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 761 words

DATELINE: MINNEAPOLIS


Beware daring to criticize a media giant.

Renata Adler is a respected author and critic with training in both journalism
and the law. In two long articles in The New Yorker this summer, she examined
the reportorial excesses exposed in the libel trials of Sharon v. Time and
General Westmoreland v. CBS. Her critical judgments, based on sworn depositions
and the trial record, were devastating. She concluded that Time and CBS, both of
which escaped libel judgments, had been shown to be guilty of twisting facts and
lying to cover it up.

Book publication was scheduled for September. But then the media empires,
supposed defenders of the First Amendment, and their far-left bedfellows went to
work.

Time's editor wrote a letter to the editor of The New Yorker, attaching a
lengthy refutation of the Adler series and asking the magazine to run it.
Nothing wrong with that; The New Yorker ought to run letters from targets, as
Time does.

But then Time erred egregiously. The letter was transmitted by Time's counsel,
Robert P. Marshall. A lawyer's cover letter automatically sets off libel bells,
putting lawyers at The New Yorker and at the prospective book publisher, Alfred
A. Knopf, on notice.

Time's improper pressure may have been inadvertent, but CBS is going all out to
suppress the book and harass the author. Van Gordon Sauter, then head of CBS
News, drew up a 10,000-word assault, and CBS hired press agent John Scanlon - an
engaging panjandrum of the East Hampton rat pack - at $5,000 a month to
discredit the charges.

In early July, even before a copy of the CBS counterblast was delivered to
Knopf, digs began appearing in gossip columns and in the far-left press. Sly
suggestions impugned Ms. Adler's motives. Such publicity may have helped to
generate a libel threat from one of the former spooks who testified on CBS's
behalf at the Westmoreland trial. Probably emboldened by this heat, CBS's main
accusatory source in its ''Vietnam Deception'' show warned Ms. Adler at a Yale
symposium this weekend, ''You'll be hearing from me.''

As a result of all this pressure, abetted by Time's use of a lawyer in its
objections, the book's publication date keeps slipping. A detailed rebuttal of
the detailed whining by CBS and Time had to be prepared to satisfy well-chilled
Knopf lawyers.

Maybe Ms. Adler's book, with a epilogue that exposes this harassment, will come
out in November; maybe not. Kitty Kelley's ''His Way'' had only Frank Sinatra's
legal intimidation to contend with, and she was able to publish; Renata Adler's
''Reckless Disregard'' faces an array of offended media giants, radical hatchet
men and suing spooks.

This is a case of prior book restraint triggered by powerful news organizations
quick to denounce prior restraint by government. The danger to their reputations
from the Westmoreland and Sharon cases is as nothing compared with the damage
they do to press freedom by this furious, vindictive attack on a reporter who
dares to touch their most sensitive nerves.

Time should immediately withdraw its oh-so-polite lawyer's letter; if its
editors want to savage Ms. Adler's criticism in print, whole pages of Time's
book review section are available, and it is free to ignore the writer's
stinging counter-rebuttal.

At CBS, chief executive Laurence Tisch cannot blame this breach of ethics, abuse
of power and waste of assets on previous management. His press agent insisted
this weekend that ''CBS tried to intimidate no one,'' and charged that ''Ms.
Adler's work contains glaring examples of false reporting, and grossly
misrepresents the record of the trials.'' Mr. Tisch should publicly dissociate
his company from all lawsuits and efforts to block publication of this book.

The media conglomerate that owns Alfred A. Knopf should tell its in-house
lawyers, Whitelipt and Trembling, to stiffen their sinews and get on with
publication. ''Reckless Disregard,'' no matter how condemned by the
strange-bedfellowship of radicals and wounded media giants, is likely to be a
best seller and sure to be required reading at Syracuse University's Newhouse
School of Journalism.

I thought Generals Westmoreland and Sharon were wrong to bring their libel
suits, and was glad that the press's freedom to be unmaliciously sloppy was
upheld at their trials. But the vehement arrogance of media overreaction to the
close study of the trials' records suggests that the trials served a good
purpose.

Get out of the suppression business, CBS. Those who dish out accusations of
''conspiracy'' should be able to take criticism.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE IN HONG KONG: THE BITTER LAST STOP

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


One of the inmates of Hong Kong's refugee detention camps hanged himself this
month. After trying vainly for eight years to escape the camp by winning
permanent sanctuary in some country other than Vietnam, he had finally given up.

Eleven years after the end of the Vietnam War, thousands of escapees from
Vietnam continue to languish in Hong Kong detention camps with little prospect
of ever resuming normal lives.

Of some 33,000 Vietnamese refugees living in detention camps in eight Asian
countries, the largest contingent - about 8,500 - are held in Hong Kong's five
camps. A few hundred of them gain freedom each month by obtaining permits to
settle in the United States or one of a handful of other countries that accept
refugees. But others continue to arrive from Vietnam aboard junks, sampans and
rescue ships, and the 4.2-percent birth rate in the camps themselves swells the
population of detainees still more.

''In terms of resettlement, we seem to have just about reached the end of the
line,'' said Glenn F. Schwerdt, Hong Kong director of the International Rescue
Committee, one of the main relief agencies working with the refugees. ''The
great majority of refugees remaining in Hong Kong's camps have been refused
permission to settle in any of the countries to which they applied. Many have
lost hope of ever becoming free men and women.

'Starting to Get Suicides'

''After all,'' Mr. Schwerdt said, ''more than 900 of them have been seeking
resettlement for more than seven years. We're starting to get suicides now, and
in the two open camps, where refugees are allowed to come and go during the day,
drugs are becoming a major problem. Many of these people have come to believe
that the world has forgotten them, and they may be right.''

Relief workers agree that Hong Kong treats Vietnamese refugees more humanely
than do the other nations and territories providing the refugees with temporary
sanctuary. The British crown colony has never turned Vietnamese ''boat people''
away, and this fact has contributed to a continuing influx of refugees; during
the first 10 months of this year, nearly 2,000 Vietnamese refugees have arrived
in Hong Kong. The great majority are from southern Vietnam.

But Hong Kong is one of the most densely crowded urban territories on earth, and
refugees have packed it to the bursting point. Hong Kong's population of 5.4
million includes 630,000 legal and illegal immigrants who have have entered the
colony from China in the last 10 years alone. Since the fall of Saigon in 1975,
Hong Kong has also accepted 14,500 Vietnamese refugees as permanent immigrants.

The Vietnamese not accepted for permanent settlement in Hong Kong were initially
quartered in two ''open'' transit camps, whose residents are free to come and
go, and even to hold temporary jobs in the city. Since July 2, 1982, however,
all Vietnamese arrivals have been assigned to three high-security camps
administered as part of Hong Kong's penal system. There is no reprieve from
these camps, except by resettlement abroad or death.

The Sound of Singing

The most desirable of the three closed camps, to which inmates of the other
closed camps may ''graduate'' after proving themselves cooperative, is the
Bowring camp in Hong Kong's New Territories. (The two other closed camps, where
general malaise sometimes leads to violence, are on islands relatively remote
from urban Hong Kong.) Bowring consists of a cluster of barracks huts ringed by
double aprons of chain-link fencing topped with barbed wire. Prison guards from
the colony's Division of Correctional Services carefully screen visitors.
Incongruously, however, the sound of singing issues from crowded schoolrooms
inside the compound, and women hoe and weed patches of flowers and herbs
interspersed between the barracks.

Refugees working in Bowring's blue-jeans factory, machine shop and other cottage
industries can earn up to $17 a month and deposit their income in personal
savings accounts or spend it in the camp's modest commissary.

''But we can't pretend that the morale of these detainees is good,'' said the
camp warden, Francis Wang. ''Very few of them are being resettled anymore. Most
have been turned down by the United States and Australia, and their best chances
may be in Canada or Western Europe. Even those countries are accepting very few
refugees these days. When Hong Kong is taken over by China 11 years from now,
the Vietnamese refugee camps may still be full. Who knows what will happen then?
Personally, I don't intend to be around to find out.''

''Some relief workers believe that teaching English to the children in the
closed camps may be a cruel deception,'' Mr. Schwerdt said, ''It creates
unwarranted expectations that they will be resettled in the United States,
Canada or Britain. The trouble is, most of the refugees refuse to learn
Cantonese, the language that will be most useful if Hong Kong turns out to be
the end of the road for them. Those whose hopes for the future have not been
extinguished by long years in the camps still insist upon studying English.''
Little Chance to Reach U.S. American criteria for accepting Vietnamese refugees
exclude most of the applicants still awaiting resettlement. Unless a would-be
immigrant has parents, children or a spouse living in the United States, or can
prove that his or her life would be endangered on political grounds by remaining
in Vietnam, chances of admission to the United States are remote.

Even when American immigration criteria are seemingly met, unexpected obstacles
often intervene, as one of the residents of Jubilee Refugee Transit Center, an
open camp, discovered. The refugee, Phan Sau, was able to prove that he had been
a helicopter mechanic in South Vietnam's Army and therefore qualified as an
authentic political refugee.

But in the mistaken belief that his wife had died, he remarried after arriving
at the Jubilee camp more than six years ago. He later discovered that his first
wife was still alive and that in the eyes of American law he was therefore a
bigamist, a criminal and automatically barred from entering the United States.
Mr. Sau subsequently signed an affidavit renouncing one of his marriages, but
agents of the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service have declined
to reopen his case.

''Mr. Sau's expert assistance in running the Jubilee camp has been valuable to
us and we'd really hate to lose him,'' Mr. Schwerdt said, ''but it is terribly
unfair that he is forced to remain here because of a cruel accident of fate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of detention center for Vietnamese refugees (Le Lieu Browne)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

LAWYER FOR HASENFUS SUGGESTS AN EXCHANGE

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Oct. 27


Former Attorney General Griffin B. Bell, who is helping in the legal defense of
an American captured while flying supplies to insurgent forces, suggested to
Nicaragua today that some form of prisoner exchange with the United States could
lead to his client's release.

Mr. Bell, a lawyer who served in the Carter Administration, gave the Government
a list of 19 Nicaraguans being held in Federal prisons in the United States.

The lawyer said he gave the list to Saul Arana, a middle-ranking Foreign
Ministry official with whom he met this morning to discuss the case of his
client, Eugene Hasenfus.

Mr. Hasenfus parachuted safely from a C-123 transport plane when it was shot
down last month by Nicaraguan forces as it flew arms and other supplies to
rebels in southerm Nicaragua. The American pilot, a third American crewman and a
man identified as a rebel were killed. The Reagan Administration has denied any
United States Government involvement.

Prison Chief Provides Names

Mr. Bell said he did not know who the 19 Nicaraguan prisoners on the list were
or what crimes they had committed. He said at least one was imprisoned on
drug-related charges.

Mr. Bell said he had received the names from the director of the Federal prison
system, who was his subordinate when he served as Attorney General. But he said
he did not know if the Nicaraguan Government would be interested in any kind of
exchange.

''I don't have any indication that there's anyone on this list of 19 who they
might want,'' Mr. Bell said. He also said he did not know if the prisoners could
legally be freed even if Nicaragua expressed interest in receiving them.

Mr. Bell said he had not discussed the possibility of an exchange with any
senior American officials, but added, ''I don't mind asking our Government for
help if it comes to that point.''

Mr. Bell appeared frustrated at the course of the legal proceedings against Mr.
Hasenfus, whose plane was shot down Oct. 5. The trial is being conducted by a
people's tribunal, where rules of procedure and evidence are flexible and where
political factors are often paramount. Many convictions are based solely on the
testimony of prosecutors.

'We're Just in Limbo'

''I assume he could be convicted now on the basis of the evidence the Government
gave in the opening presentation,'' Mr. Bell said of his client.

Mr. Bell, who described himself as ''a stranger here,'' characterized the works
of the tribunal as ''arcane'' and ''unusual.'' He said he was having ''a very
hard time'' understanding them.

''We're just in limbo,'' he said. ''We are anxious to move the case along. The
Government is not moving it along.''

There have been indications that the Nicaraguan Government is considering
releasing Mr. Hasenfus once it concludes that his imprisonment serves no further
political purpose.

At a public meeting Saturday, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra called Mr.
Hasenfus ''another victim of the United States Government, like those who were
sent to die in Vietnam or who came back mutilated.''

'Not an Innocent Dove'

''If Hasenfus had had work, if Reagan had been able to give him work, this man
would not be in Nicaragua,'' Mr. Ortega said. But he added that the pilot ''is
not an innocent dove, because he knew well that what he was going to drop from
his plane was not beans or rice or milk, but weapons to kill our people.''

Mr. Ortega said Mr. Hasenfus would be treated ''with firmness and justice,
bearing in mind the generosity of the revolution.''

Part of the defense strategy, Mr. Bell said, will include arguments that Mr.
Hasenfus was simply a contract employee and was not involved in planning the
American-sponsored war against the Sandinistas. ''He was not attuned to the
political controversy that's going on between Nicaragua and the United States,''
Mr. Bell said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of former Attorney General Griffin B. Bell (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS GAIN IN SENATE RACES, PRESSURING G.O.P.

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1919 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Oct. 28


As the 1986 political campaign enters its final week, the Democrats appear to
have slightly improved their chances of posting the net gain of four or more
seats they need to take control of the Senate.

To meet the challenge in close races, the Republicans are spending millions to
bring the voters out and are relying heavily on President Reagan's popularity to
help tip the balance.

''Either the President is going to do it for us,'' said one Republican
strategist, ''or we're not going to do it. He's our last, best hope of keeping
control of the Senate until 1988.''

In his latest campaign swing, Mr. Reagan stepped up his attacks on the
Democratic Party as spendthrift, weak on the military and soft on criminal
justice. [Page A22.] Gains in Four Close States Democratic candidates in four
closely contested states have gained ground on their Republican opponents in the
last two weeks while Republicans have closed in on Democrats in only two of the
battleground states, according to opinion polls and local political analysts. If
the election were held tomorrow, the Democrats would probably pick up four seats
now held by Republicans and the Republicans would be likely to win one seat now
held by a Democrat. This would bring about a net gain of three for the
Democrats.

That outcome would make the partisan alignment in the new Senate 50 to 50, a tie
that Vice President Bush could break in favor of the Republicans.

But there are six more states where the contests appear too close to call. If
all the other races go as they now seem likely to, the Republicans would still
lose the Senate for the last two years of Mr. Reagan's second term unless they
took a clear majority of the six pivotal tossup contests.

Large Number of Close Races

An unusually large number of races remain very close - at least 11, including
the six tossups - and the final week could produce sudden changes of fortune.
With voter apathy endemic, most politicians expect a very small turnout, which
means that victory in many races could go to the candidate who does the better
job of getting out his vote.

That could tip things to the Republicans, who are spending millions of dollars
on voter-turnout operations, including telephone calls to voters in closely
fought states using Mr. Reagan's recorded voice.

The President is also stumping personally in a larger number of states than
previously planned. His aides hope he can guarantee party victories in states
where Republicans already seem to be well ahead, such as Georgia and Oklahoma,
and pull Republican candidates through in such states as Washington, Idaho,
Alabama and Colorado.

Relying on polls showing that the Reykjavik summit meeting bolstered his
standing with the electorate, Mr. Reagan is trying to turn voters' attention
away from the economy, which appears to be helping Democrats, and toward foreign
policy.

Many Targets for Democrats

In the absence of any powerful national issue, the Democrats' biggest advantage,
now as when the campaign began in earnest on Labor Day, is the great number of
targets they have to shoot at. Because 22 of the 34 seats up this year are held
by Republicans, the Democrats do not even need to win a majority of the races.

The two key regions are the Northwestern and Southeastern quadrants of the
country, with few close contests in the Northeast, the Southwest or the Middle
West. In the Northwest, particularly the farm states, and to a lesser degree in
the Southeast, there are spots of economic dislocation that contrast with the
general national prosperity.

With six days of campaigning left, Republican candidates appear to be
comfortably ahead in 13 states where the party is defending seats it now holds,
and Democrats appear to be well ahead in defending 8 seats. Those numbers are
the same as two weeks ago, but one race that had seemed all but decided at that
time, in Alabama, now appears too close to call, and another that then seemed
close, in Pennsylvania, now seems safe for the Republicans.

In Alabama, where Senator Jeremiah Denton was considered by even his fellow
Republicans to be vulnerable as the campaign year began, his Democratic
challenger, Representative Richard C. Shelby, got off to a slow start, his
campaign all but engulfed in disputing over who had won his party's nomination
for Governor. But in recent days he has begun to get his message across, local
politicians report. A Davis-Penfield poll, completed Oct. 21, showed Mr. Denton
with only a one-point lead, 45 percent to 44 percent, a statistically
insignificant edge well within the margin of sampling error, plus or minus four
points.

Specter Ahead in Pennsylvania

In Pennsylvania, however, Senator Arlen Specter, a Republican who had expected a
close race, has pulled far ahead of his challenger, Representative Bob Edgar.
Short of money, Mr. Edgar has been forced to cut back his television
advertising.

One Democratic Senator, Alan Cranston of California, is clinging to a slight
lead. In the most expensive contest in the country, with each candidate
expecting to spend more than $3 million in the final month, the Republican
challenger, Representative Ed Zschau from the electronics area around San Jose,
has failed to gain further ground in recent days. Two late polls show Mr.
Cranston with a lead, although they disagree on its size.

Surprisingly, the Democrats also appear to have a good chance to hold the seat
of Senator Russell B. Long, who is retiring in Louisiana. Representative W.
Henson Moore was a solid favorite to win there for the Republicans, but he
failed to close out the race by polling the requisite 50 percent in the primary
on Sept. 27. Since then, his Democratic rival, Representative John B. Breaux,
has unified his party, and New Orleans experts now give the Democrat a small but
growing edge.

In four other states, changes in party seem probable. But only one of them
involves a potential switch from the Democrats to the Republicans. That is in
Missouri, where Senator Thomas F. Eagleton is retiring. Former Gov. Christopher
S. Bond, a Republican, has maintained a small bit steady lead over Lieut. Gov.
Harriett Woods, a Democrat, according to several published polls.

Likely Democratic Gains

Of the four seats now Republican where Democrats are leading, two seem highly
likely to fall to challengers. In Florida, Gov. Bob Graham, a Democrat, has
never trailed Senator Paula Hawkins and appears about to unseat her. The Polling
Report, a Washington newsletter that compiles such data, says three Florida
polls completed in the last week show Mr. Graham with leads ranging from 6 to 12
percentage points. And in Maryland, Representative Barbara A. Mikulski, also a
Democrat, seems to have withstood the pointed attacks of Linda Chavez in the
contest to succeed Senator Charles McC. Mathias Jr., a Republican.

In the two other states, the Democrats' leads are smaller. In Nevada,
Representative Harry Reid, a moderate Democrat, continues to hold off former
Representative Jim Santini, who switched to the Republican Party to seek the
seat being vacated with the retirement of Paul Laxalt. In North Dakota, in
another major surprise, the Democrat, Kent Conrad, the 38-year-old State Tax
Commissioner, has opened up a lead over Senator Mark Andrews, according to a
poll taken for him by Peter Hart. Andrews backers concede that the 60-year-old
Senator is in serious trouble.

These are the five tossups in addition to Alabama:

Colorado: This is the only Democratic seat on the list, so it is perhaps the
most pivotal of all. A Republican victory in the race for the seat of Senator
Gary Hart, the Democrat who is retiring, would make the Democrats' job much
harder. Representative Timothy E. Wirth, a Democrat, had been holding a slim
lead over the Republican, Representative Ken Kramer, but a new Denver Post poll,
completed Oct. 26, shows a three-point Kramer lead, less than the margin of
sampling error.

Idaho: A dead heat from the start, the race between Senator Steven D. Symms, a
conservative Republican, and Gov. John V. Evans, a moderate Democrat, is still
tight. A survey by Mr. Hart, one of the most respected poll takers, shows the
two candidates almost exactly even. A televised debate between the two does not
appear to have had a major impact.

North Carolina: Senator James T. Broyhill moved out to an early lead when he was
named to succeed the late Senator John P. East, but the 69-year-old Democratic
nominee, former Gov. Terry Sanford, has startled observers in the state with the
vigor of his campaign. The latest Charlotte Observer poll shows him narrowly
ahead, and the momentum, for the moment, seems to be with him.

South Dakota: Despite the farm crisis and his own lackluster campaign style,
Senator James Abdnor has caught up to his energetic Democratic challenger,
Representative Thomas A. Daschle. Hard-hitting television commercials may have
played a role, and politicians in the state are betting on Senator Abdnor.

Washington: Senator Slade Gorton, a freshman Republican, and former
Transportation Secretary Brock Adams finished within 500 votes of each other in
the state's open primary, and many people in the state think the election could
be almost as close. If Mr. Gorton wins, he will owe much to the warning he got
in the primary, which has led him to fight much harder than he had previously
done.

THE CLOSE SENATE RACES

Alabama: Senator Jeremiah Denton, a former prisoner in Vietnam and a hero of
that conflict, is a conservative Republican. His opponent, Representative
Richard C. Shelby, is a conservative Democrat. Their contest has been somewhat
obscured by a fierce Democratic dispute over who won the party's nomination for
governor.
  Colorado: This is the seat being relinquished by Gary Hart, the Democrat. The
contest pits two members of the House against each other. Representative Timothy
E. Wirth, the Democrat, is attacked by his Republican rival, Representative Ken
Kramer, as being too liberal and too slick. Mr. Wirth and his followers accuse
Mr. Kramer of being too far to the right.
  Idaho: Ever since Idaho's popular Democratic Governor, John V. Evans,
announced his candidacy to oppose the freshman Republican, Senator Steven D.
Symms, this race has been considered almost exactly even. A proposal on the
ballot to undo the state's law outlawing the union shop could influence the
outcome.
  North Carolina: President Reagan campaigned in Charlotte yesterday in behalf
of Senator James T. Broyhill, Republican, in what was regarded as an indication
that Mr. Broyhill's early lead had slipped. His opponent, former Gov. Terry
Sanford, Democrat, recently stepped down as president of Duke University. The
seat was held by Senator John P. East, Republican, who committed suicide last
June.
  South Dakota: In a state hard hit by a farming depression, Senator James
Abdnor, Republican, who unseated Senator George McGovern in 1980, is being
challenged by Representative Thomas A. Daschle. The two men differ both in
philosophy and in style, with Mr. Daschle more polished and Senator Abdnor
relying on hard-hitting commercials.
  Washington: Senator Slade Gorton, a freshman Republican, and former
Transportation Secretary Brock Adams finished within 500 votes of each other in
the state's open primary. Mr. Gorton has campaigned hard since Congress
adjourned, but the race remains one of the closest in the nation between two men
generally regarded as moderate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan (AP); photos of candidates running for the
Senate (Page A22)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IT'S REALLY OVER: CITY FETES THE METS

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words


Like true sons of Queens, the world champion Mets crossed the river yesterday to
celebrate in Manhattan, proceeding in triumph and exultation from sun-washed
Battery Park to the steps of City Hall before one of the largest parade crowds
in New York history.

Ticker tape alone was not sufficient for the team that won 116 games, the last
two with tension enough to induce a stroke. Wall Street counts its money on
computers now, so the city threw a printout parade, nearly burying the Mets and
a crowd estimated by police at 2.2 million beneath billing reports, shipping
orders and stock records.

''New York is Metsmerized,'' said Eddie Muszynski, a fur dresser from Woodhaven,
Queens. ''This is amazing. This is crazy. I had to wait 31 years to be here. And
who knows when I'll get to see another one.''

Around him, fans in Met blue and orange pressed 20 or 30 deep along lower
Broadway, some pushing and surging toward the front, others clambering onto milk
crates and mailboxes and anything elevated to catch a glimpse of their heroes.
Computer paper drifted and swirled in the clear October air, tangling in trees
and around flagpoles and piling on the sidewalks like blizzard snow.

'All One Family'

Yet for all the grandiose scale of the day, New York somehow seemed an overgrown
small town, a Farm Belt hamlet with grain elevators and a courthouse square
whose football team had just brought home the state title. It was sports victory
as civic feel-good.

''The Mets made us a family,'' Mayor Koch said in the City Hall ceremony at
which each Met received a key to the city. ''The Mets made us a small town with
love and affection. Today we're all one family.''

The celebration not only brought the world's financial center to a midday halt,
but swept over the entire city the way Liberty Weekend had four months ago.
Indeed Keith Hernandez, the Mets' first baseman and team leader, told the City
Hall audience that it was the fans who had really beaten Boston in the
spellbinding sixth and seventh games.

New York offered one tableau after another of adulation. On a southbound R
train, a group of 50 young women knelt in worship before a milk advertisement
featuring the outfielder Darryl Strawberry. Then one of them took down the
poster and clasped it to her heart, in a scene like something out of
Beatlemania.

'A Great Feeling'

About 30 people, meanwhile, held a victory party atop a six-floor building at
Broadway and Vesey Street, indulging in candy bars, sandwiches and beer by the
case and gazing down on the madness below, as the Met motorcade followed twin
lines of blue and orange paint north through lower Manhattan's ''Canyon of
Heroes.''

''We had a hell of a time trying to get up here,'' said Jay Stewart, a
16-year-old from Flushing. ''Not only did we have to fight the crowds - and I'll
tell you some of them would have sold their mothers for a view - but we had to
climb up real fast before the cops saw us.''

Not many fans enjoyed a similar vista, but even those who missed sight of the
Mets could hear the shouting blocks away from the parade route. ''I've been
there and it's a great feeling,'' said James Hartley, who had marched in the
parade last year that honored Vietnam veterans. ''It's a great feeling, to be in
the middle of all that cheering. Makes you feel good. Makes you feel welcome.
Makes you feel you are somebody.'' Gooden Misses Parade Oh, the Mets were
somebodies all right. More people in the crowd seemed to recognize the relief
pitcher Roger McDowell than the man next to him on a firetruck - Senator Alfonse
M. D'Amato, out seeking votes for his re-election bid. A woman held a small
handlettered sign saying, ''I Love You Len Dykstra - Maryann.'' While the
players were gathering in the Blue Room of City Hall, and the impatient crowd
outside was chanting ''Bor-ing, bor-ing,'' the pitcher Ron Darling waved through
an open window and transformed the complaint to cheers.

One by one, the Mets were introduced to the City Hall assemblage, beginning with
the third-base coach Bud Harrelson, a vestige of the 1969 ''Miracle Mets,'' and
proceeding from sundry assistant trainers through Gary Carter, the star catcher,
and Ray Knight, the third baseman voted most valuable player in the World
Series. Notable in his absence was the pitcher Dwight Gooden, who Mets officials
later said had overslept.

''This was so much fun, we ought to try to do it again next year, same time,''
Manager Dave Johnson said after receiving his key to the city. Mookie Wilson,
the center fielder who endured the Mets' barren seasons in the early 1980's,
shouted to the crowd, ''Nineteen eighty-six, Year of the Mets. Nineteen
eighty-seven, Year of the Mets. Nineteen eighty-eight, Year of the Mets.'' An
ovation drowned him out before he reached the 1990's.

A city could not afford a day like yesterday much more than once a year.
Restaurants sat empty at noon, while liquor stores sold every last case of
champagne. Gridlock struck Church, Vesey and Fulton streets and Broadway north
of the parade route. As for attendance in the New York public school system,
officials said they had no firm statistics, but one offered, ''Why don't you
reporters take attendance outside City Hall? That's where all our kids are.''

Wearing a Red Sox Cap

Despite the presence of 2,500 police officers, the crush of spectators broke a
large plate glass window at Modell's discount store at Broadway and Chambers
Street. In addition, a 1985 Cadillac belonging to Jackie Friedman, the deputy
director of the Mayor's Office of Special events and the wife of the Bronx
Democratic leader, Stanley M. Friedman, was broken into near City Hall shortly
after the celebration.

The police reported 8 arrests, 41 summonses and 65 injuries, none of them
serious, to civilians and police officers. The police, who based their crowd
estimate on aerial surveys of the parade route and reports from commanders on
the street, said the problem was sheer density rather than any particular
rowdiness. The 2.2 million represented a record for the lower Broadway parade
route, surpassing the 2 million for the 1984 United States Summer Olympic team.

And in the throngs, no one may have felt worse than Tom Cronin, the bartender at
Martin's Pub on lower Broadway. Mr. Cronin, a Yankee fan and Met hater, took in
the parade wearing the same Red Sox hat he had sported during the series. He
seemed to be sane, anyway.

''Hey, I'm going to be big about it,'' said Mr. Cronin, a Bronx resident. ''I
rooted for the Sox and even if they lost, I'll wear the hat.'' A passer-by
inquired after his safety. ''I haven't suffered any physical abuse yet,'' Mr.
Cronin said, shrugging. ''Just some very strange looks.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of ticker tape parade for New York Mets (NYT/Neal Boenzi); photo
of the Mets players during City Hall ceremony (NYT/Sara Krulwich) (page B14);
photo of Mets fans cheering as their team passed by (NYT/Neal Boenzi) (page
B14); photo of Ray Knight of the Mets (NYT/Sara Krulwich) (page B14); photo of
Darryl Strawberry and his son (NYT/Sara Krulwich) (page B14)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TICKER-TAPE PARADES: WHICH WERE BIGGEST?

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 273 words


Thousands of tons of paper have descended on the heads of heroes since Theodore
Roosevelt was honored in 1910 in the first ticker-tape parade up Broadway from
Battery Park to City Hall.

But the modern era has seen a decline in the paper blizzards along the
traditional financial district parade route. Miles of ticker tape have been
replaced by piles of shredded computer paper, and many new office buildings have
sealed windows.

How the Mets fared yesterday in tonnage swept up and weighed by the Department
of Sanitation, the customary way parade rankings are determined, should be
disclosed today. By that measure, the five biggest parades up lower Broadway in
the last 20 years were these:

* Jan. 30, 1981 - 971 tons, for the American hostages returned from Iran.

* Oct. 20, 1969 - 578 tons, for the Mets after they beat the Baltimore Orioles
to win their first World Series.

* May 8, 1985 - 468 tons, for the Vietnam veterans.

* Aug. 15, 1984 - 325 tons, for America's Olympic medalists.

* Aug. 13, 1969 - 300 tons, for the three astronauts who traveled to the moon,
Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins and Edwin E. Aldrin Jr. Longer parade routes,
of course, have produced greater tonnage. In 1951, for example, 3,249 tons of
paper showered on Gen. Douglas MacArthur as his motorcade wended its way through
19 miles of Manhattan streets, including the mile-long stretch on lower
Broadway.

And 3,474 tons drifted down on the astronaut John Glenn in 1962 as his motorcade
went from LaGuardia Airport in Queens to upper Manhattan, down the East Side to
the financial district and back up to the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 30, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FEDERAL EFFORTS ON AIDS CRITICIZED AS GRAVELY WEAK

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1338 words


The National Academy of Sciences charged yesterday that the Federal Government's
response to the AIDS epidemic had been dangerously inadequate and called for a
$2 billion-a-year educational and research effort to avert a medical
catastrophe.

The Academy said in a report that the AIDS problem was becoming so urgent that
it required ''perhaps the most wide-ranging and intensive efforts ever made
against an infectious disease.''

Dr. David Baltimore of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, co-chairman of
the report committee, said at a news conference in Washington that the Academy
was ''quite honestly frightened'' by the AIDS virus's potential to spread.

'A National Health Crisis'

''This is a national health crisis,'' he said, ''of a magnitude that requires
Presidential leadership to bring together all elements of society to deal with
the problem.''

''If the spread of the virus is not checked, the present epidemic could become a
catastrophe,'' the report warned. ''The situation demands both immediate action
to stem the spread of infection and a long-term national commitment to produce a
vaccine and therapeutic drugs.''

Dr. Robert E. Windom, an Assistant Secretary of Health and Human Services, took
issue with the report. ''I would say there has been a conscientious effort to do
a good job,'' he said.

Acquired immune deficiency syndrome is a deadly disease that cripples the body's
defenses against infection. More than 25,000 Americans have contracted the
ailment; about half have died.

Team of Experts Assembled

The views of the Academy, generally considered the nation's most prestigious
scientific organization, were set forth in a 390-page report, ''Confronting
AIDS,'' which was prepared by a large team of public health experts and
scientists assembled by the Academy and its principal health unit, the Institute
of Medicine. The report was described by the Academy as ''the most comprehensive
study of the AIDS epidemic to date.''

The report was notable for its authoritative endorsement of the gravity of the
AIDS epidemic and its polite but firm criticism of current efforts to deal with
the problem as inadequate.

Despite the Federal Government's insistence that AIDS is its No. 1 health
priority, the report concluded that the nation's response to the AIDS epidemic
has been inadequate in many key aspects. The Academy team expressed ''major
concern'' over ''lack of cohesiveness'' in planning the attack on AIDS and
charged, ''There has been inadequate Federal coordination of vaccine
development.'' It complained that Federal programs to educate the public about
how to avoid AIDS had been ''woefully inadequate.''

In an interview, Dr. Windom of the Department of Health and Human Services said
the Government was already increasing its efforts to educate people about AIDS.
He said he did not know whether the Government would be justified in spending $2
billion a year on AIDS by 1990, as the Academy recommended.

In Rapid City, S.D., Albert R. Brashear, a White House spokesman traveling with
President Reagan, said, ''We would have to wait and take a look at the Academy's
report before we comment.''

The Academy's judgments carry weight because of its reputation and function.
Although it is a private organization, it has been chartered by Congress to
provide advice to the Federal Government on a wide range of technical issues.

Some Echoes of Surgeon General

The Academy's report echoed some of the advice issued last week by the Surgeon
General, C. Everett Koop, in a 36-page report on the need for explicit public
education to stop the spread of AIDS. But the Academy panel went far beyond the
Surgeon General's proposals in calling for a major infusion of new Federal funds
to carry out a coordinated program of education, public health and research that
would cost an estimated $2 billion a year by 1990.

According to unofficial estimates, only a few hundred million dollars were spent
on such activities in the fiscal year 1986, which ended Sept. 30.

''The $2 billion yearly expenditure proposed for responding to the epidemic is a
small fraction of the billions of dollars for care that the epidemic is sure to
cost, especially if it is not rapidly curbed,'' the Academy said.

Dr. James Chin of the University of California at Berkeley, a member of the
report committee, emphasized at the news conference yesterday, however, that the
amount was proposed ''for control'' of the epidemic, not health care for its
victims. Health care may cost up to $16 billion, he said.

The academy called for creation of a new national commission on AIDS to monitor
the epidemic and offer advice on how to coordinate the attack on it.

Dr. Sheldon Wolff, chairman of the department of medicine at Tufts University
School of Medicine, a co-chairman of the Academy committee on a national
strategy for AIDS, tempered the criticism yesterday by applauding Dr. Koop's
report last week as ''clearly a step in the right direction.''

Rapid Spread Predicted

The primary victims of AIDS in this country have been homosexual men and
intravenous drug users, although increasing attention has been given to
heterosexual transmission. The disease is caused by a virus and is transmitted
primarily through sexual contact or contaminated needles.

The Academy team's independent assessment largely agreed with estimates already
issued by the Public Health Service that AIDS will continue to spread rapidly in
the United States, with the cumulative death toll rising to more than 179,000 by
the end of 1991. Indeed, by carrying some projections farther ahead than the
Public Health Service, the Academy painted an even bleaker picture of the
disease toll. The report estimated that up to half of all those infected with
the virus might develop full-scale AIDS within 10 years and that the percentage
could even be higher.

''Beginning in 1990,'' warned Dr. Frank Press, president of the Academy, ''we
will lose as many Americans each year to AIDS as we lost in the entire Vietnam
War.'' About 58,000 Americans died in the war.

The committee expressed doubt that a vaccine would be developed ''for at least
five years and probably longer.'' It also warned that an effective drug that can
be taken safely for years at a time ''may also not be available for at least
five years.'' Although one drug, known as azidothymidine or AZT, has shown
short-term effectiveness in one class of patients, the committee called for
further evaluation of its long-term safety and effectiveness in all patients.

''We suspect it is not the ideal drug by any means,'' said Dr. Paul Volberding,
chief of the AIDS Activities Division at San Francisco General Hospital.

In remarks paralleling the Surgeon General's, the Academy called for a
large-scale campaign in the news media, in education and by public health groups
to warn people, in explicit, understandable language, to protect themselves
against AIDS by using condoms, avoiding anal intercourse with infected
individuals, and not sharing needles and syringes for injecting drugs.

''Education should begin at least at the time of the beginning of sexual
activity,'' Dr. Wolff said.

Indeed, Dr. Baltimore said, ''We discovered that there is very little knowledge
about sexual practices in the U.S. at all. So we have called for increased
social science research focused on questions of sexuality, because that is a
very important part of teaching ourselves about the problem we have.''

Recommendations of Panel

The report called for experimental projects in which drug addicts would be
supplied with clean needles in an effort to stop the spread of infection. It
also recommended voluntary, confidential blood tests to identify those infected
with the virus.

But the Academy's experts expressed strong opposition to mandatory screening
programs to detect infected individuals, except possibly in the military
services, where all may be called upon to donate blood. The committee also
opposed quarantining infected people.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 30, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ASSISTANT ON FATAL FILM SAYS HE DIDN'T WANT CHILDREN IN SCENE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 507 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 29


A defendant in the trial over the deaths of an actor and two children in the
filming of ''Twilight Zone: The Movie'' rejected a plan to film the fatal
helicopter scene without the children, according to testimony today.

The second assistant director of the film, Anderson House, testified that he had
suggested to the unit production manager that children in the scene be
photographed separately and the film then be incorporated into the shot
involving a helicopter and special effects explosives.

He said he had also suggested the possibility of replacing children in the scene
with either dummies or stunt doubles. The production manager, Don Allingham, one
of the five defendants, rejected the idea, Mr. House testified, adding that he
called Mr. Allingham back later and asked if he would get John Landis, the
director, ''to look at and meet with the doubles.''

Ground Was Covered, He Says

Mr. Allingham then ''indicated it was ground that had already been covered, and
that it was rejected,'' Mr. House testified.

In a third conversation, Mr. House testified, Mr. Allingham ''told me he wanted
to close the subject with me and that's all he wanted to hear about it.''

Mr. House said he did not express his concern again when the filming began on
location because ''people were getting tired of listening to me.''

Mr. Allingham and Mr. Landis are on trial in Los Angeles Superior Court on
charges of involuntary manslaughter in the deaths, which occurred on July 23,
1982. The other defendants are the associate producer, George Folsey Jr., the
special effects coordinator, Paul Stewart, and the helicopter pilot, Dorcey
Wingo.

They Were Killed by Helicopter

Vic Morrow, 53 years old, an actor, and two children, Myca Dinh Le, 7, and Renee
Shinn Chen, 6, were killed when the helicopter, disabled by the detonation of
special-effects explosions, crashed on them in a Vietnam War scene being filmed
at Indian Dunes Motorcycle Park, 40 miles north of Los Angeles.

Mr. House testified that his ''primary'' concern in warning Mr. Allingham
involved the illegal hiring of the children, who were to be filmed after dark
and without permits, in violation of California's child labor Laws.

A week before filming of this scene began, Mr. House said, he expressed his
concern to the movie's first assistant director within earshot of Mr. Landis.

Anxiety on Labor Laws

''I expressed my concern that by using the children, we were violating the labor
laws,'' he testified, ''and not only would the child labor permits be revoked
from John Landis, but from Warner Bros. as well.''

''John asked me to repeat what I had said,'' Mr. House testified. ''Then I was
kind of speechless.'' ''I wasn't up to questioning John Landis,'' he continued.
''I was intimidated.''

Mr. House said he also felt ''uncomfortable'' with the potential hazards of
filming the helicopter in the same scene as special effects explosives. At the
court's 1984 preliminary hearing, Mr. House said ''I certainly feared'' the
scene was dangerous.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 30, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AND HANOI HOLDING TALKS ON SERVICEMEN LOST IN WAR

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 208 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 29


Four United States military specialists went to Hanoi today for technical talks
aimed at resolving the status of 1,786 Americans listed as missing in action in
the Vietnam War, which ended in 1975.

The talks, the fourth round this year, had been set for Oct. 8, but were
suddenly canceled by Vietnam with no explanation. The technical talks began in
December 1982.

The American. delegation is headed by Lieut. Col. Joe Harvey, commander of the
Honolulu-based United States Joint Casualty Resolution Center, the military unit
in charge of settling the issue.

The other Americans are two officers of the center's Bangkok office and Thorne
Helgeson, chief of the Army Central Identification Laboratory in Honolulu, which
analyzes remains to determine if they are those of missing Americans.

The Vietnamese side is headed by Nguyen Can, head of a Foreign Ministry office
for resolving the question.

Washington and Hanoi do not have diplomatic relations.

One American goal in the talks is to win an agreement on a second United
States-Vietnamese excavation of a warplane crash site to search for remains.
Last year, the first joint dig produced wreckage of a B-52 bomber and bone
fragments. It was regarded as a milestone in the search effort.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
The Mets and the Moon

BYLINE: By Ira Berkow

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 937 words


We knew the baseball game last Monday was important, but we didn't realize just
how big it was until Mayor Koch himself was discovered in the Mets' dugout near
the end of Game 7, trying desperately to avoid the glare of television cameras.

And if for some reason a camera shot did find him, he wore a Mets hat for
disguise.

What was he doing there? Was he offering himself up to Davey Johnson as a
pinch-hitter? Did he want a baseball? Is he just one of the guys from the
neighborhood whom you see pop up in a crowd on television: ''Hey, look, there's
Weird Lenny - sitting next to the President!''

Or was Mr. Mayor doing what politicians are nurtured from birth to do, that is,
glom onto winners?

Regardless, the Mets became baseball champions of North America -of Canada and
the United States, at any rate - and politicians and fans exulted.

There are three-pipe problems, 21-gun salutes and now 500-ton celebrations. Six
hundred forty-eight tons of shredded paper, weighed to the last ounce by the
Department of Sanitation, were showered on the conquering baseball heroes
Tuesday after their 8-5 victory in the seventh game of the World Series, and a
city was overjoyed.

The Mets were a delicious entertainment for much of this season, and especially
the last few weeks, and many stayed up very late, thanks to the rapacity of the
television networks.

''It's such a great game,'' a man was saying, ''and it triumphs despite the
businessmen in it.''

On the second night after the Mets won the championship, a woman of our
acquaintance who only recently embraced the game said she had trouble falling
asleep.

''I had to get up early to go to work the next day, but I couldn't stop thinking
of the Mets,'' she said, ''and whether Strawberry could have caught that
thing.'' She referred to the ball that dropped out of Darryl Strawberry's glove
and over the fence for a home run in Game 7.

''But I finally did drop off to sleep,'' she said. How did she manage that? ''I
started thinking about football,'' she said.

Baseball will be missed this winter, but not the cant of some politicans and
fans that has gone with it, especially the talk of ''winners'' and ''losers.''

The fact that a baseball team won baseball games is said by some to transform a
city, and make it a better place to live. The Mayor, when he was finally able to
scramble out of the dugout and grab a microphone for dear life, said that the
World Series triumph makes us in this city ''a family.'' Perhaps a transitory
diversion such as provided by the 1986 version of the New York National League
Baseball Club of Flushing, operated by Doubleday Sports Inc., this charming
traveling show, might make us love each other as never before, might wish us to
turn the other cheek, and clasp our fellow man to our bosom.

And a baseball team that wins a championship might make the city a better place
to live, but it seems unlikely (although it has surely made it a harder place to
sleep). The essential concerns of city living are unchanged: Is the police
blotter still loaded? Was the garbage picked up? Are the streets safe to walk at
night? When will the D train show up, anyway?

After the Mets won the 1969 World Series similar thoughts of togetherness were
expressed, and more. This was a team that had come into existence only seven
years before - they were Casey Stengel's ''Metsies'' -and had finished 10, 10,
10, 10, 9, 10 and 9. It was a team that could do virtually nothing right on the
field or off. When its star-crossed first baseman, Marvelous Marv Throneberry,
turned the knob of the manager's door after a heart-to-heart with Stengel, the
knob came off in Marv's hand.

But in 1969 as now, the town went wild as the Mets went from second place in
August to overtake the Cubs, beat the Braves in the first regularly scheduled
playoff series, and then in the World Series take four games out of five from
the powerful Orioles (whose second baseman, coincidentally, was Davey Johnson,
the current Mets manager). At one point in 1969, the young, idealistic pitching
star of the Mets, Tom Seaver, was supposed to have suggested, ''If the Mets can
win the World Series, we can resolve Vietnam.'' Seaver's optimism might not have
seemed so misplaced in hindsight; after all, a man had only three months before
actually strode on the moon.

Yet the Mets were in a second World Series four years later, and still the
United States had soldiers dying in Vietnam. Political passions might have been
even greater in 1969 than now. Flower children were strewn through the streets,
Kent State was half a year away, and Nixon and Agnew were defiling the two
highest elected offices in the United States.

The world was little changed after the Mets won the World Series, other than in
those sweet moments of pleasure, and in dreamy memory.

It can hardly be any different for the 1986 Mets.

But they have diverted attention, perhaps even from some of the more important
areas - the economy, race relations, even gridlock - and politicians understand
and exploit this.

In 1969, as Robert Lipsyte recalled in his splendid book, ''SportsWorld,'' there
was a bitter mayoral campaign and that tense National League pennant race, and a
sociologist stood on a midtown New York street corner and questioned 150
passersby, ''Who is going to win?''

One hundred and three answered, ''The Mets.''

The following year, the Mets dropped to third place. Euphoria no more. Fans were
disgruntled, and spoke of the Mets' ''collapse.''

It's doubtful we were any more or less a family after the 1970 season than after
the 1969 season, or that we are today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Mets

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 1, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW BEST-SELLING NOVEL AT NAVAL INSTITUTE PRESS

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 701 words


With another best-selling novel to its credit, the Naval Institute Press is now
batting a thousand as a publisher of fiction. Its new book, only the second
novel the press has published in its 114-year history, is ''Flight of the
Intruder'' by Stephen Coonts, an account of Naval aviators at war over Vietnam.

In The New York Times Book Review tomorrow, ''Flight'' will be listed as the No.
12 hard-cover book of fiction. It follows by 20 months the appearance on that
list of Tom Clancy's ''Hunt For Red October,'' which not only vaulted Mr. Clancy
to fame but also brought a measure of fame and fortune to the Annapolis, Md.,
publisher.

Now Mr. Coonts is well on his way to reaping the rewards that come with best
sellers. There are 125,000 copies of ''Flight'' in print. Pocket Books bought it
for $341,000 at a recent auction. In a recent trans-Atlantic telephone auction,
Pan Books won the British rights with a bid of £100,650 - about $140,000. And
Dutch and Italian rights have also been sold.

''I'll tell you, I wasn't expecting anything like this,'' said the author, a
40-year-old Denver lawyer who flew A-6 Intruder warplanes against targets in
North and South Vietnam and in Laos.

Rejected in New York

A major reason for his surprise, he said, is that when he tried to sell the book
to the New York publishing houses, most of those that bothered to reply to his
query letters turned him down cold.

''But I wasn't too discouraged,'' he said in a telephone interview yesterday,
his voice bearing the traces of his West Virginia upbringing. ''I had never
written anything else, and when I wrote this, I would have been delighted if
somebody offered to print 3,000 to 4,000 copies in paperback.''

Instead, after reading ''Red October,'' Mr. Coonts - his manuscript having been
rejected by then by four New York publishers - sent ''Flight'' to Mr. Clancy's
publisher. Now it shows signs of eclipsing even its predecessor's impressive
sales record. For one thing, it made it onto The Times list within seven weeks
of publication, whereas it took ''Red October'' about five months.

''Flight'' has been helped by a blurb from Mr. Clancy - he describes it as
''Extraordinary!'' - and by the fact that the Naval Institute Press is no longer
an unknown quantity to most booksellers. Also, the major book chains, which
ordered Mr. Clancy's book in large numbers only after it was well on its way to
becoming a best seller, placed big orders for ''Flight'' well before
publication.

Advancing Naval Knowledge

The purpose of the Naval Institute, a private, professional society of naval
officers, is to advance ''professional, literary and scientific knowledge in the
naval and maritime services.'' Its press serves in effect as the university
press of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, of the Naval War College
at Newport, R. I., and of the Navy's postgraduate school at Monterey, Calif.

''The editorial board is made up of eight active duty officers from the Navy,
Coast Guard, Naval Reserve and Marine Corps,'' said Susan Artigiani, the
publicity manager of the press. But when ''Flight'' came before the board, its
members chose to rely on the recommendations of the press director.

To insure authenticity, the manuscript was sent to naval aviators. To no one's
surpise, it was authentic. The publisher's biographical sketch reveals that Mr.
Coonts -who was discharged in 1977 after nine years on active duty - made two
combat cruises aboard the Enterprise. He had 1,600 hours in Intruders and made
305 carrier landings, including 100 of them at night. His many awards included
the Distinguished Flying Cross.

Deborah Guberti, the acquisitions editor of the press, said the number of
unsolicited novels submitted to the press had almost quadrupled in the last
year, but ''Flight'' was the only one the press chose to publish.

As a result, it is on the fall list along with such other Naval Institute Press
titles as ''Fleet Tactics: Theory and Practice'' by Wayne Hughes; the fourth
edition of ''Guide to the Soviet Navy'' by Norman Polmar and a new edition of
''The Art of Knotting and Splicing'' by Cyrus Day, revised by Ray O. Beard Jr.
and M. Lee Hoffman Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Stephen Coonts

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN DREAM DASHED FORMANY LAOS REFUGEES

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: PHANAT NIKHOM, Thailand


For six years as a political prisoner of the Communist Governent of Laos, the
former Laotian official said, he was sustained by memories of Cornell
University, where he studied in the 1970's.

''To sit in the library, to collect books on Laos, to do some research myself
-that was my dream,'' Viliam Phraxayavong said in an interview at a refugee
transit center here. ''It's lovely there, Ithaca.''

His dream was dashed in 1985 when, he says, the United States turned down his
request for refugee resettlement because of Communist associations.

His case, some officials say, is one of many in Southeast Asia that reflect an
ambivalence or inconsistency on the part of the Reagan Administration in dealing
with those seeking asylum from Communist countries. On Asylum in U.S.Some
refugee officials say that although circus performers from the Soviet Union get
asylum, technically or professionally skilled Laotians, Cambodians and
Vietnamese often do not. And while deserting Afghan soldiers are assisted by
Washington, Vietnamese Army deserters are told they have almost no chance for
resettlement.

''For the Afghans, the Administration pulls out the stops,'' one official said.
Meanwhile, more than 500 Vietnamese soldiers are in a Thai camp.

American immigration law clearly bars people who have been associated with
Communist organizations or governments. But exceptions can be made for refugees
who can demonstrate a fear or experience of persecution.

Interviewer's Responsibility

The burden of making the difficult judgment whether an applicant meets that
criterion falls on an interviewer of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Once the decision is made, there is no formal appeal process, a spokesman said
here.

An Immigration and Naturalization spokesman in the United States Embassy in
Bangkok said that he could not discuss individual cases, but that he doubted
that association with the Laotian Government alone could have led to a denial of
asylum. He said that as a general rule, all aspects of an applicant's case are
considered when a decision is made, and that a person who has been living more
or less comfortably in a job and home, by contrast to one fleeing for his life,
can often not prove persecution and is turned down.

Immigration officials do not put a reason for denial on the record, the
spokesman said, because it might prejudice resettlement elsewhere.

Refugee officials say many Southeast Asians with links to Americans in the
1960's and early 1970's are now suspect or subject to persecution under
Communist governments.

In another case in Thailand, a Cambodian defector from the Vietnamese-backed
Government in Phnom Penh recently told a reporter from Agence France-Presse that
he had been promised a visa to the United States by people he described as
Central Intelligence Agency operatives for whom he performed some tasks he
declined to describe since his flight in 1984.

Political Training Program

The defector, Sek Sen, 41 years old, said he had been involved in the political
training of Communist Party officials in Phnom Penh before fleeing. Sek Sen, who
is described as the highest-ranking Phnom Penh official to defect, told the
reporter he was fearful of going back to Cambodia. United States officials do
not comment on assertions of C.I.A. involvement along the Cambodian border or
elsewhere.

''I did all I could to help the Americans before 1975,'' Mr. Viliam said,
recalling a period when he was a liaison officer on international projects.
''And do you know what words they paint on me now? 'Security issue!' ''

Mr. Viliam, a 52-year-old graduate of University of Bordeaux, was an official in
the National Bank of Laos from 1962 to 1965, then Deputy Director General of the
Ministry of Economic and Social Planning until 1975, when the Communist faction
of the neutralist coalition pushed out its partners and assumed full control.

Period of 'Re-education'

Like many other non-Communist nationalists, he said, he was sent into
''re-education'' before the December 1975 Communist takeover.

In May 1975, students marched to his office, he said, carrying placards:
''Viliam, you are an agent of the C.I.A. Quit your ministry immediately!''

Soon after, he was sent to what was described as a prolonged ''conference'' or
''seminar.'' One day, without warning, armed policemen surrounded his study
group and he was led away.

On his release in 1981, he said he decided to return to government service to
educate himself on what the new Government was all about. He said he did not
want to make a hasty decision to leave the country, as many other former
prisoners did.

''As a Lao, I think this is one country worth living in,'' he said. He was given
a job negotiating irrigation projects for the Ministry of Agriculture.

'Not Safe for Me to Stay'

''Finally I realized after three years, it was not safe for me to stay,'' he
said. ''So many people were arrested.'' During a boat festival in September
1984, when there was a lot of activity in the Mekong River, Mr. Viliam, his wife
and his two daughters and a son rowed across the river to Thailand.

Mr. Viliam said that because he had worked closely as a Government official with
the United States Agency for International Development before 1975, he assumed
he would be allowed to return to Cornell and take up an academic life. In July
1985, he was told by immigration authorities here in Thailand that he did not
meet American criteria for refugee admission.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Giving Up Remains Of 3 More American G.I.'s

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 129 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 1


Vietnam said it would soon hand over to the United States authorities what
appeared to be the remains of three Americans missing since the Vietnam War, an
American official said today.

The Vietnamese also said they were investigating 19 new reports about the
discovery of other remains, according to Col. Joe Harvey, who had three days of
talks in Hanoi on accounting for some 1,790 Americans reported missing in
action.

Colonel Harvey, commander of the Honolulu-based United States Joint Casualty
Resolution Center, said no date was set for the turnover of the remains of what
the Vietnamese believe are the bodies of three Americans, but that it is
expected to take place soon.

In the last two years, Vietnam has substantially increased cooperation on this
issue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RECLUSIVE MRS. NHU IS FILLED WITH BITTERNESS TOWARD U.S.

BYLINE: By ROBERTO SURO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 535 words

DATELINE: ROME, Nov. 1


Mrs. Ngo Dinh Nhu is probably best remembered for her sleek silk dresses and the
fearsome way she wielded power in a city then called Saigon nearly a quarter of
a century ago.

Looking back on her life now, Mrs. Nhu blames the United States for abetting the
assassination of her husband and his brother, President Ngo Dinh Diem of South
Vietnam, in a coup in 1963. She says the United States is hounding her family
still, with the arrest of her younger brother in the strangling deaths of her
parents in their Washington home.

Not long after the killings a request for an interview initiated an exchange of
letters with Mrs. Nhu, who spends much of the year in a large, somewhat rundown
villa on the outskirts of Rome.

In her most recent message Mrs. Nhu, offered written answers to a series of
questions and said a face-to-face encounter could not be arranged.

Asked to describe her daily activities, Mrs. Nhu wrote, ''Outer life such as
writing and reading has never seemed interesting enough to others to be talked
about, while inner life, more than a secret, is a mystery that cannot be so
easily disclosed.'' She has never answered questions about her age, which is now
believed to be about 60.

Something, however, is disclosed in the letters. Like her nation, Mrs. Nhu's
correspondence is riddled with enigmas and a passionate sense of cause.

''We won the war without having fully used our army,'' is her assessment of the
regime's accomplishments.

Mrs. Nhu, a Roman Catholic, was in the public eye during the Diem crackdown on
Buddhist dissent in 1963. She was one of the most clamorous proponents of
ever-tougher measures. While the self-immolation of a Buddhist monk shocked the
world, Mrs. Nhu dismissed the event as ''a barbecue.''

The Buddhist protests, she argued, were a ''devilish fraud'' and the deaths of
saffron-robed monks were not suicides but ''the public murders of maniacs of
vain glory.''

Mrs. Nhu's bitterness toward the United States is rooted in the Kennedy
Administration's decision to support the anti-Diem coup. By ''inciting immature
people to betray and kill their legitimate power in order to be able to take its
place,'' she argued, ''the West and the U.S. have set in motion a most
threatening phase of man's destiny.''

The United States, she feels, has continued to strike out at her family with the
arrest of her brother, Khiem Tran Van, in the killing of her parents.

''Whatever the reasons'' for her brother's arrest, Mrs. Nhu wrote, ''I cannot
accept them, for the U.S. has already so much harmed my country and my people
that it should really not worsen its case.''

As part of the agreement under which she answered questions, Mrs. Nhu asked that
her views on the arrest of her brother be made known.

''Excoriating my brother does not revive my parents and is only unfair to their
memory,'' she wrote. ''Indeed, 'each tree is known by its own fruit' (Luke
6:44). Thus everybody should remember the Christian teaching: 'Do not judge by
appearances, but judge righteous judgment' (John 7:24), and therefore: 'Go and
learn what this means, I desire mercy, and not sacrifice' - words about the
sinner (Matthew 9:13) as well as the guiltless (Matthew 12:7).''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NATIONAL ROLE IS SEEN FOR ARIZONA NOMINEE

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 34, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1036 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, Oct. 27


After a run of horrendously bad luck, Representative John McCain has been
blessed with good fortune of an extraordinary kind, and he now seems poised to
emerge as a significant figure in national politics, as a member of the United
States Senate.

Mr. McCain was born to a Navy career; his grandfather commanded aircraft
carriers under Adm. William F. Halsey in World War II, and his father served as
Commander in Chief, Pacific, in the Vietnam war. Mr. McCain himself, a naval
aviator, seemed sure to become the family's third admiral. But even though he
survived a terrible fire aboard the U.S.S. Enterprise in the Gulf of Tonkin, it
was not to be.

On Oct. 27, 1967, his A-4 Skyhawk was hit by enemy fire over North Vietnam. He
ejected, breaking bones in both arms and one leg and falling into a lake in
central Hanoi. His captors called him ''the crown prince,'' smashed one of his
shoulders and kept him in solitary confinement for much of the next five and a
half years. When he was let out, according to fellow captives, he was the very
model of obstinacy.

After the war, Mr. McCain, his hair turned silver by his ordeal and his body
racked by arthritis, returned to active duty for a time, serving as a liaison
officer in the Senate, where he made friends with a cross-section of its
members, including William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine, and Gary Hart,
Democrat of Colorado. But his injuries ultimately forced his retirement. He and
his young wife, Cindy, the daughter of a prosperous Phoenix beer distributor,
decided to move to Arizona to start a new life. Mr. McCain had ''a general
interest in politics,'' he said the other day, ''but no specific plans.''

New Luck in New Life

Then the lucky breaks started. Representative John J. Rhodes, then the House
minority leader, decided to retire in 1982. After a close four-way primary, Mr.
McCain was elected to succeed him. He was also elected ''president'' of the
freshman class in the House, made friends across the aisle with such Democrats
as Morris K. Udall of Arizona and Paul Simon of Illinois, and was marked down as
a ''comer.''

Then, some months ago, Senator Barry Goldwater, a symbol of the new conservatism
since 1952, the Republican Presidential nominee in 1964, a much-beloved figure
here and in Washington even among those who hated his ideology, announced his
retirement, opening the way for Mr. McCain to win, the Republican senatorial
nomination almost by acclamation.

And then Gov. Bruce E. Babbitt, a popular conservative Democrat, decided that he
could better pursue his Presidential ambitions free of the burdens of office
than in the Senate. Suddenly, five years after arriving in the state, Mr. McCain
had a clear path to a seat in the Senate.

Despite a few stumbles - his hand-picked candidate for Governor was beaten in
the primary by the man Mr. McCain describes as ''the Harold Stassen of Arizona
politics,'' Evan Mecham - Mr. McCain has had little trouble with his Democratic
opponent, Richard Kimball. Mr. Kimball has repeatedly attacked Mr. McCain as the
captive of military contractors and as unfriendly to the elderly, but he has
made no headway. A trio of recent opinion polls show the Republican with a lead
ranging from 19 to 28 percentage points.

Reputation in the House

Mr. McCain, who is 50 years old, developed a reputation in his early days in the
House as a ''Tip-baiter'': that is, as a member of the group of pugnacious
Republicans, also including Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, who often
clashed with the House Speaker, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Democrat of
Massachusetts. They disagreed most sharply on aid to the Nicaraguan rebels,
which Mr. McCain backs, although equally vociferously, reflecting his Vietnam
experience, he opposes the idea of sending American troops to Central America.
He also opposed sending the Marines to Lebanon.

In recent years, however, he has taken a much more moderate stand, particularly
on social issues. He has worked hard on Indian affairs, he applauds
Representative Jack F. Kemp of upstate New York not so much for his economic
philosophy but because ''he's the one man in our party who consistently voices
concern for blacks and other people who are underprivileged.'' Mr. McCain has
backed sanctions against South Africa and he has voted with the
environmentalists on a number of issues affecting Arizona.

Mr. McCain says he admires Mr. Goldwater's ''integrity and honor,'' but he makes
it clear that he has no intention of becoming the new ''Mr. Conservative.''

At a campaign rally in nearby Mesa on Sunday night, for example, Mr. McCain told
of a recent conversation with the Senator.

''He assured me that if he had won in 1964,'' Mr. McCain said, ''I would never
have been in a Vietnamese prison camp.''

''I guess that's right,'' he said he answered, alluding to Mr. Goldwater's
reputation for foreign policy bellicosity, ''it would have been a Chinese prison
camp.''

On domestic matters, Mr. McCain said he tried to bear in mind the changes that
have transformed Arizona since Mr. Goldwater wrote ''The Conscience of a
Conservative'' 30 years ago. In 1950, Phoenix had 106,000 residents; now the
metropolitan area is approaching a population of two million.

''Many of those people came from California and the Midwest,'' he said, ''and
they don't care very deeply about school prayer and abortion. They're in favor
of one and opposed to the other, and so am I, but what they are really concerned
about is better education, clean air, ample water supplies and so on. They
aren't ideologues at all.''

If elected, Mr. McCain expects to devote much of his time to foreign policy. He
says he does not want to spend his energies ''just counting warheads'' but wants
to address larger strategic questions ''defining what our national interests are
much more carefully, so we can spend our national defense dollars more
intelligently.''

People in both parties here and in Washington expect him to make a big impact.
Robert E. B. Allen, Mr. Babbitt's closest political associate, said: ''Because
of his background, John will be able to take tough stands that others might be
penalized for. I think he's going to be an outstanding Senator.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John McCain (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: REQUIRED READING;
Beware the Short Term

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 62, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 138 words


Exerpts from the revised and expanded edition of ''The Dilemma of Reform in the
Soviet Union,'' by Timothy J. Colton, published by the Council on Foreign
Relations this year:

In the 1970's it was the Soviets who were more open than the United States to
the charge of seeking short-term competitive advantage at the expense of
long-term cooperation. It was Russian leaders who at times seemed to see
individual weapons systems as ends in themselves, who mistook America's post-
Vietnam malaise for evidence of an irreversible decline, and who applied
outmoded concepts to a changing world. Today it is the duty of the leadership of
the United States to see to it that their actions do not expose them to the same
indictment, with results that would be equally damaging to the interests of
their own country and every other.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A. HAS $100 MILLION, A POINT TO PROVE

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 893 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


OVER the next year, the Central Intelligence Agency will undergo one of the most
public tests in its largely secret history. With day-to-day responsibility for
directing $100 million of American aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, the agency will
have a chance to silence critics who say it is not up to running paramilitary
operations.

The issue is decades old, dating at least to the furor over the agency's role in
the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961. More recently, some military
officers at the Pentagon, who support the Reagan Administration policy of
assisting anti-Soviet insurgencies, have questioned the agency's ability to arm
and assist guerrilla movements involving thousands of people and many tons of
weapons. Administration opponents in Congress, meanwhile, have expressed concern
that the intelligence agency may lack adequate control over its operatives in
the field.

Neither concern is shared by William J. Casey, the Director of Central
Intelligence. Administration officials say he is among the Administration's most
vigorous advocates of covert activities. One official said Mr. Casey has spoken
privately of the military successes he believes the $100 million aid package
will bring the Nicaraguan rebels, or contras.

The C.I.A. has repeatedly denied, however, that it was responsible for the
private efforts to supply the contras after Congress ended the aid program in
1984. Administration officials insist that the agency's new covert program will
be far more efficient than the operation that provided the cargo plane shot down
over Nicaragua last month as it attempted to bring supplies to the contras.
Nicaragua has said that the downed plane carried incriminating documents. Last
week in Managua, the surviving crew member, Eugene Hasenfus, refused to make a
statement or identify the purported documents during his trial by a
revolutionary tribunal.

The C.I.A. was deeply involved in supporting paramilitary operations in the
1960's and 1970's, from the Bay of Pigs to Laos. But after the defeat of
American-backed forces in Vietnam in 1975, there was little enthusiasm for new
adventures. Congress cut off C.I.A. involvement in Angola, a ban that the
Administration succeeded in getting lifted last year.

Clandestine aid for the Nicaraguan rebels, starting in 1981, was one of the
Administration's first attempts to return to paramilitary operations. Criticism
mounted, however, after the disclosure that the C.I.A. had been involved in
mining a Nicaraguan harbor. Congress, concerned that the operations might lead
eventually to direct American military involvement, had cut off support for
clandestine aid. The agency's critics were bolstered when it was later learned
that an officer under contract to the C.I.A. had written a manual for the
guerrillas that endorsed political assasinations.

Mr. Casey, however, has characterized the 1980's ''as the decade of guerrillas
resisting Communist regimes.'' Stating that the Soviet Union uses a wide variety
of foreign proxies and agents, he contends that the ''C.I.A. is the one
organization in the free world most capable of dealing with this enormous Soviet
apparatus and frustrating its objectives.'' The agency is also assisting
insurgents in Cambodia, Angola, Ethiopia and Afghanistan, mainly by supplying
weapons, Administration officials have said, and has successfully resisted
attempts by some quarters in the Pentagon to assume a more prominent role.

Limited Ability

Now C.I.A. officers are expected to be more active in guiding the Nicaraguan
contras. They need all the help they can get, military analysts say, to counter
what Mr. Casey says is a major Soviet presence. With little military experience
and poor equipment, the contras are vastly outnumbered and outgunned by
Nicaragua's army and militia.

In dispensing the $100 million of contra aid, the State Department is to provide
policy guidance, while training is performed by the Army Special Forces, or
Green Berets, under C.I.A. supervision. Officials have expressed concern about
possible friction between the intelligence agency and the Army. Some military
officers argue that the agency's operatives are ill-prepared to deal with
military matters. Said one Congressional aide familiar with the issue: ''There
are a lot of people in the Pentagon who would be happy if the agency fell flat
on its face in Nicaragua.''

Viewing the problem from a different perspective, Representative Richard Cheney,
Republican of Wyoming, argues that the Government's ability to support
insurgencies is ''very limited.'' Mr. Cheney, a member of the intelligence
committee, believes American interests are likely to be increasingly tied to
support of anti-Soviet forces in the third world. Thus, he has said, the
Administration should re-examine the types of weapons it supplies for guerrilla
operations. Formerly, the covert programs provided Soviet-made or other foreign
arms to insurgents in Afghanistan and elsewhere, leaving the agency free to deny
American involvement. That approach was eroded this year when the Administration
decided to send American-made antiaircraft missiles to the Angolan rebels. ''It
may be that the kinds of equipment we develop for reasonably well-educated
American troops may be totally inappropriate for the jungle war in Angola or
Afghanistan.'' Mr. Cheney said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Eugene Hasenfus on trial (Agence France-Presse/Maria Morrison)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CENTRAL AMERICA ASKS HOW FAR U.S. WILL GO

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 860 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR


WHILE the Reagan Administration seems eager to climb back into the driver's seat
of the Nicaraguan guerrilla movement, Central American military and political
leaders appear to view the growing war against the Sandinistas with decidedly
mixed feelings.

Nicaragua's popularity with its neighbors seems to be at a low point. Honduran,
Guatemalan, Salvadoran and Costa Rican officials harshly criticize the
Sandinistas' narrowing revolution, their reliance on Cuba and the Soviet Union,
and their sharp military build-up. But there is also real debate about whether
the Sandinistas should be contained or destroyed.

And while the majority of regional officials are probably hawks on the issue,
they seem to doubt that the United States will make the commitment necessary to
give the rebels a chance of success.

Many analysts believe the United States would have to invade Nicaragua to finish
the job, which seems unlikely to them. ''There has been a lack of seriousness in
this from the start,'' an influential Honduran army officer said recently.
''Four years ago, we told American officials they had to make a commitment to
defeat the Sandinistas completely, or else it would be a failure. There still
isn't that kind of commitment.''

United States officials in the region concede that the Central Americans have
reason to worry. The memory of Vietnam and the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of
Cuba is as strong in Central America as in Washington.

Costa Rican Caution

''They know we've done this sort of thing before and then walked away,'' an
American official said. ''If you change the rules and walk away from the game
often enough, you get to the point where people don't want to play ball with you
any more.''

Caution appears to be on the minds of all Nicaragua's neighbors in some measure.

Costa Rica's new Government has taken the most reserved stance, closing
Nicaraguan rebel bases and airstrips while warning guerrilla leaders to spike
their muskets if they want to stay in the country.

In Guatemala, the army and businessmen have aided the guerrillas, rebel sources
say, but the Government has kept them at arm's length.

El Salavador and Honduras, each almost totally dependent on American aid and
worried about Sandinista military expansion, have become the main bases for
rebel operations. But even in these countries, there appears to be continual
debate in the Government and army over whether it is in their interest to back a
war that will hold enduring costs if Washington's commitment falters, as it
might in the hands of a new Congress or a new President.

The rebel campaign has already brought a measure of discomfort. As many as
300,000 Nicaraguan refugees have poured into Honduras and Costa Rica, and
business investment has plunged because of the war. And while the effort to
break the Sandinistas may be publicly debated in Washington, Central American
states must still cloak their role behind the protective shrouds of diplomatic
deniability - no easy task when so much is known about the unsecret war.

The political cost of being caught backing the guerrillas can be high. Nicaragua
is suing Honduras and Costa Rica in the International Court of Justice at The
Hague for allowing the rebels to maintain bases in their territory. When the
Sandinistas launched an all-out attack on guerrilla camps inside Honduras six
months ago, there was little the Honduran Government could do about it. El
Salvador, meanwhile, is ducking extensive evidence that rebel supply operations
have been run from the main Salvadoran air force base.

There is more than a touch of calculation in the Sandinistas' outraged protests
at their neighbors' meddling. Sandinista commanders ran their own military
supply lines through Costa Rica and Honduras in the years when they were
fighting the Somoza dictatorship. They also still provide planning and rest
facilities for the guerrilla movement that is waging a punishing war inside El
Salvador. But the Sandinistas' carefully measured resort to protests before the
United Nations and the World Court appears to have been effective. By
challenging their neighbors' participation in the war, the Sandinistas reinforce
their own claim to legitimacy and also reveal the rebels' lack of broad
international backing.

Protests alone, however, are unlikely to stop the guerrillas. Honduras and El
Salvador may not allow the Central Intelligence Agency to train rebel commanders
on their territory, as has been reported in Washington. Then again, some
officials hint, a bit of training may go on despite the public denials. Backed
by 1,000 American troops, stronger security guarantees and now a pledge of new
American or Israeli jet fighters, Honduras in particular seems unlikely to close
its door to the growing rebel army.

But the uncertainty about long-term United States aims and commitment may
continue to make regional support for the rebel war less than whole-hearted. One
of the first questions Central American officials ask a visitor from the north
is: ''What will the United States do in Nicaragua?'' Because they don't know the
answer they are likely to keep their options open.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Central America; Photo of Anti-Sandinista rebels in Honduras (J.
B. Pictures/Charles Bonnay)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COURTING THE CHINESE WITH MILITARY FLOWERS AND CANDY

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


QINGDAO, a city naval officers regard as China's best deep-water port but
perhaps better known to sailors for its popular beer, will be checked out by the
United States Navy on both counts this week. A cruiser, a frigate and a
destroyer will make the first port call to the People's Republic by American
military vessels since the Communists took over in 1949.

United States officers regard the visit of the cruiser group and its 894
servicemen as a remarkable indication that the opening up of China is spreading
to the People's Liberation Army, for 40 years a redoubt of nationalist
resistance and revolutionary communism.

The P.L.A., which encompasses China's army, navy and air force, is coming into
contact with the American military in settings that would have been unimaginable
just a few years ago.

Last month, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger visited China for the second
time. Recently, an American Army colonel taught for two weeks at the National
Defense University in Peking. The officer, Col. Al Wilhelm, gave three lectures
and several seminars on American political and military science, becoming the
first foreigner ever to teach such a course at the school, which has just been
reorganized along lines resembling those of similar American institutions.

The budding military relationship between China and the United States, which
also includes the supply of valuable hardware such as advanced avionics for
China's F-8 interceptor jets, is seen in strategic terms as a counterweight to
Soviet influence in Asia and the Pacific. Mr. Weinberger, addressing Chinese
military men in Peking, bluntly warned of what he views as the Soviet menace.

However, China insists it will never be an ally of either the United States or
the Soviet Union.

American military officials say they are not seeking an alliance, that they have
more subtle goals. The exposure of a new generation of leaders in the military,
the Americans believe, may provide the army - which has served as a pillar of
political inertia, a vehicle for personal advancement and source of the party's
power -with a stake in China's opening to the West.

There have been other little noted but important exchanges recently. The Chinese
officer in charge of logistics just completed a trip to the United States; a
group from the United States Army's Training and Doctrine Command was in China
at about the same time. Brig. Gen. Jon A. Reynolds, the United States Embassy's
senior military official in Peking, said the increasingly routine visits
involving majors and colonels were ''just as important'' as those by more senior
officers or Cabinet members because the visitors on both sides are likely to
rise higher in the military, and influence relations for the long term.

In a typical visit last summer, a Chinese air force group observed the training
of pilots, technicians and maintenance crews in the United States. Most
illuminating for the Chinese, General Reynolds said, were American simulators,
which augment flight training.

Chinese pilots are thought to get too little time in the air, and they lack
advanced simulation equipment.

''We weren't trying to show them how dazzling it was,'' General Reynolds said.
''We just wanted to show them how we do it.''

Along with training, logistics and doctrine are fundamental areas the military
is modernizing, shedding its old ways as fast as it lays off veterans. By
January, one million service people will have been returned to civilian life,
reducing manpower by one-fourth.

American analysts say the army is trying to build a more professional force, one
less guided by ideology, more familiar with modern warfare and weapons and more
efficient in its command structure.

While the new army would by no means mirror the high-tech American force with
its global responsibilities, it would be a far cry from the force of illiterate
peasants forged by Mao in the 1930's. He operated on the principle of ''people's
warfare,'' planning to encircle a foe and wear it down in guerrilla actions.

The changes, which began two years ago, have their roots in China's two-week war
with Vietnam in 1978.

''The results of the conflict were mixed,'' says a Defense Intelligence Agency
handbook on the People's Liberation Army. ''China sought to 'teach a lesson' to
Vietnam, but ended up learning lessons of its own.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Caspar Weinberger in the cockpit of a Chinese fighter plane
during visit to the Yangcun Air Base (Reuters/Bettmann Newsphotos)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Best Sellers: November 2, 1986

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1210 words


Fiction
            Weeks
This   Last    On
Week   Week  List
1         1     8 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.)
                  Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman who
                  grew up in a small Maine town.
2         2    14 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.)
                  Without using nuclear weapons, the West staves off
                  the Russians in World War III.
3         3     3 HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &
                  Schuster, $18.95.) A top New York model encounters
                  three of Los Angeles's most dynamic men.
4         4     5 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton
                  Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family relationships in
                  South Carolina's low country and New York City.
5         5    16 WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) A rich orphan comes of age while she
                  travels the world.
6         9     4 THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) Continuing the saga of a
                  turn-of-the-century New York family begun in
                  ''Evergreen.''
7        10     3 FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,
                  $16.95.) The hero of the ''Foundation'' series
                  searches for the lost planet Earth.
8               1 A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf,
                  $18.95.) Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a
                  brutal double murder.
9         6     9 THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random
                  House, $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and
                  greed mark a young woman's life in 18th-century
                  England and France.
10       12     2 FORTUNE OF FEAR, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge
                  Publications, $18.95.) Countess Krak of Voltar
                  arrives from outer space to save Earth from an
                  invasion.
11        7     7 ROGER'S VERSION, by John Updike. (Knopf,
                  $17.95.) A fiftyish professor wrestles with God,
                  sex, science, technology, mathematics and
                  computers.
12              1 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                  Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                  Vietnam.
13        8     6 THE BEET QUEEN, by Louise Erdrich. (Holt, $16.95.)
                  Forty years in a small North Dakota town near an
                  Indian reservation.
14              1 PERFUME, by Patrick Suskind. (Knopf, $16.95.)
                  An olfactory vampire kills people to steal their
                  scents.
15              2 THE WILD BLUE, by Walter J. Boyne and
                  Steven L. Thompson. (Crown, $19.95.) Six members of
                  the Air Force at work, at play and in love.

                  Nonfiction
1         1     4 IS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.)
                  From Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized
                  biography of Frank Sinatra.
2         2    26 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                  Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from
                  the television star and father of five.
3         5     4 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow,
                  $19.95.) The crisis in the American automobile
                  industry and Japan's role in it.
4         3     4 THE STORY OF ENGLISH, by Robert McCrum, William
                  Cran and Robert MacNeil. (Sifton/Viking, $24.95.)
                  Companion volume to the PBS series about the
                  world's most widely used language.
5         4     6 MCMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi.
                  (Warner, $16.95.) The autobiography of the
                  quarterback for the Chicago Bears.
6 *             1 ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Random House,
                  $18.95.) From impoverished childhood to television
                  star: the comedian's autobiography.
7         7    34 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House,
                  $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in
                  pictures and rhyme.
8               1 DREAMGIRL, by Mary Wilson with Patricia Romanowski
                  and Ahrgus Juilliard. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A
                  former member of the Supremes tells of her time
                  with the group.
9        10     6 SNAKE, by Ken Stabler and Berry Stainback.
                  (Doubleday, $15.95.) The experiences of the retired
                  Oakland Raiders quarterback.
10       11    28 NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst. (Simon &
                  Schuster, $17.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
                  author argues, and we must confront them to grow.
11        8     6 ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden with
                  Dave Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations on
                  football by the television commentator and former
                  Oakland Raiders coach.
12              1 DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland with Greg
                  Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The ballerina
                  recalls her checkered career.
13        6     7 MAYFLOWER MADAM, by Sydney Biddle Barrows with
                  William Novak. (Arbor House, $17.95.) A member of
                  one of America's oldest families tells of the
                  world's oldest profession.
14        9     5 I, TINA, by Tina Turner with Kurt Loder.
                  (Morrow, $16.95.) The autobiography of a Tennessee
                  sharecropper's daughter who became a rock-and-roll
                  star.
15 *     12     3 MY DADDY WAS A PISTOL AND I'M A SON OF A GUN, by
                  Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $14.95.) Memories of
                  growing up Southern with a very Southern father.
                  Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1         1     7 MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM,
                  by Susan Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.)
                  How to cope with overbearing men.
2         2    24 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton,
                  $15.95.) A regimen based on the Vanderbilt
                  University Weight Management Program.
3         3    63 FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn
                  Diamond. (Warner, $17.50.) A diet for weight loss
                  and physical fitness.
4         4     2 BE HAPPY YOU ARE LOVED, by Robert H. Schuller.
                  (Nelson, $15.95.) Inspiration from a California
                  clergyman.
5               1 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff Smith.
                  (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at
                  moderate cost.






And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
PARADISE, by Donald Barthelme. (Putnam, $16.95.) Three models move in with
Simon, an architect on sabbatical from his job and his wife; a very funny and
often brilliant novel.
THE LEAGUE: The Rise and Decline of the NFL, by David Harris. (Bantam, $21.95.)
Mr. Harris chooses to ignore the heroics of football players and focus on the
shenanigans of team owners. The gamble pays off, thanks to his diligent
reporting.
THE HARVEST OF SORROW: Soviet Collectivization and the Terror-Famine, by Robert
Conquest. (Oxford University, $19.95.) Chronicling one of the great modern
tragedies: Stalin's deliberate starvation of millions of peasants, most of them
Ukrainians.
A SUMMONS TO MEMPHIS, by Peter Taylor. (Knopf, $15.95.) The consequences of a
family betrayal that happened 40 years ago are the matter of this novel of
manners that incorporates tragedy without the slightest huff or puff of
pretension or magniloquence.
THE ENCHANTER, by Vladimir Nabokov. (Putnam, $16.95.) Written in Russian in
1939, this is the Ur-''Lolita,'' an unpleasant short novel about a child
molester and a nerdy girl; it prefigures the mature masterpiece only in plot and
humor.
A MISSING PLANE, by Susan Sheehan. (Putnam, $18.95.) From scattered bones, an
anthropologist identifies 22 men lost in a 1944 Army airplane crash; then the
author's reconstructive journalism recovers their lives from the memories of
family and friends.
TO SKIN A CAT, by Thomas McGuane. (Seymour Lawrence/ Dutton, $16.95.) The Wild
West lives in the hearts of Mr. McGuane's restless, skeptical modern Americans,
and at moments of stress in these stories it is apt to burst out in crazy
violence that seems just right - esthetically, at least.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SESTINAS AND WISECRACKS

BYLINE: BY CAROL HILL; Carol Hill's most recent novel is ''The Eleven Million
Mile High Dancer.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1155 words


ANAGRAMS By Lorrie Moore. 225 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.

IN Lorrie Moore's ''Anagrams,'' there's a fierce, hot eye that makes you wonder
whether you're going to be stranded in the familiar desert of the modern
imagination. But the book has a saving grace: Benna Carpenter - who is either a
poet, teacher, nightclub singer, aerobics instructor or all of these - is
appealing as the heroine of this extraordinary and often hilarious first novel.
She sees the irony of her situation, describing her meetings with her imaginary
friend, Eleanor, as ''The Great White Wine'' - ''whiney white people getting
together over white wine and whining.''

Benna's closest real friend is a musician, Gerard Maines. Their apartments share
a thin wall, and Gerard sits one night, dopey with love, fully dressed in his
dry bathtub, waiting for Benna to return, yearning only for the sound of her
toilet flushing. Gerard loves Benna, and she kind of likes him. This is their
first attempt to make love: ''We ended up in my bed together, sort of, spastic
and looped, doomed for failure, like two senile inventors in an upstairs room,
lonely as spoons. The whole business finally seemed less an expres-sion of
mutual attraction than a soft, noodly act of existentialism.''

Benna and Gerard eventually do become lovers, and she sits in a rinky-dink
cocktail lounge where he sings and plays piano and dreams of becoming an opera
star. Then Benna gets pregnant, the imaginary Eleanor sleeps with Gerard, and
Benna has an abortion. Miraculously, the relationship between Benna and Gerard
not only survives these events but becomes a deep, close friendship. Throughout
all of this we are treated to Benna's reflections, which often take the form of
quirky, fond musings on words: '' 'Have fun in Tunis,' I'd say as he disappeared
off to rehearsals. I liked to say Tunis. It sounded obscene, like a rarely
glimpsed body part.''

Words roll around in Benna's mind like Life Savers on a tongue. Beneath the
sweet pleasure of play, however, we sense her need for something else, some
deeper articulation that will exorcise distance, bring her love and keep her
from death. Watching a flock of birds, she muses: ''From four blocks away I
could see that the flock had a kind of group-life, a recognizable intelligence;
no doubt in its random flutters there were patterns, but alone any one of those
black birds would not have known what was up. Alone, as people live, they would
crash their heads against walls.''

To avoid hitting the wall, Benna falls in love with Darrel, a black Vietnam
veteran who is taking her poetry class. Race is something Benna tries to avoid
through her almost magical belief that whatever separates us can be overcome if
we find the right words. She assigns sestinas to her poetry class, writing on
the blackboard the end words ''race, white, erotic, lost, need, love, leave.''
Darrel raises his hand and says that's seven words, not six. Benna erases
''love,'' then changes her mind and erases ''white.''

It is a loss in the novel that this particular relationship is not developed
further. It's unfortunate too that the changes of place and point of view in the
beginning chapters interrupt and confuse us, so that we move away from the
story. Some of the early chapters read almost as if they were independent
entities, and it may be that Ms. Moore's talents as a short-story writer,
revealed in her collection, ''Self-Help,'' tempted her in that direction. These
opening chapters are like a magnificent engine alone on its track. We watch,
waiting for the hookup, which we get only in the last section of the book.

Here we meet a wondrous 6-year-old, Georgianne Michelle Carpenter, who is
Benna's imaginary daughter. And it is here that so much of the power and impact
of the novel begin to make themselves felt. George and Benna have a very good
time: a sweet happiness flows between them as they watch the news, take showers
together on Saturday mornings to the tunes of Broadway shows, dust the living
room and revel in the intimacy of sickroom caresses and goodnight kisses.

Benna loves Georgianne intensely, and in this love, which is sustained only by
words, we discover how much this novel is about language, about the power of
sounds to slice through the darkness, and through meaning to join us. It is a
tribute to Lorrie Moore's talent that the reader believes in Georgianne.
UNEXPECTEDLY, Gerard dies, a brutal blow to Benna, who makes one last, painful
effort to connect by visiting her lost, hapless brother, Louis. When she and
Louis wind up watching a sitcom about a dog on Christmas day in a dreary Queens
apartment, Benna's humor erupts in a swift, savage swipe: ''Her mind wandered.
She thought of pets growing tired and committing suicide, what notes they would
leave: 'Dear Benna: It's all a crazy game. Farewell, Max, Your Schnauzer.' ''

We think Benna may now have lost her real connections in the world. But we're
wrong. There are stronger ties still. There are Benna's gifts, imagination and
language - and there is the child, Georgianne. Benna's love for this child -
like ''Anagrams'' itself - is a powerful example of how imagination can save us
with temporary pleasures.

In a Constant State of Surprise

When Lorrie Moore's characters want to behave in unconventional ways, she gives
in to their whims. ''When you write a novel, you are supposed to keep characters
on a linear path. But in 'Anagrams' my characters wanted to do mutually
exclusive things and since it was my novel, I decided they could do anything
they wanted to do,'' said the 29-year-old author in a telephone interview from
her home in Madison, where she teaches fiction workshops at the University of
Wisconsin.

She insisted that her characters and situations are completely fictional. But
like her main character, Benna, she is intrigued by the power of imagination and
language. ''Overall, the novel is about the enterprise of making fictions,'' she
said. ''I was inspired by the idea of an anagram, which is the rearrangement of
characters to make a new word. What I did was rearrange characters to make new
worlds.'' While this may sound playful, she admitted that the novel has some
serious concerns. ''I think of it as a novel about solitude, imagination,
hysteria and childlessness. In each of the sections the characters confront
childlessness in different ways.''

Ms. Moore seemed detached from the praise for her first book, ''Self-Help,'' a
collection of short stories originally written as a master's thesis. Even so,
she confesses that the whole process of publishing is ''overwhelming.'' ''I was
surprised mostly when Knopf bought my first book - since then I've been in a
constant state of surprise. You're so alone when you write that you tend to be
unaffected by reviews. You only wonder whether you can write something again you
can believe in.''       - Barbara Lovenheim

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lorrie Moore (NYT/Tom Capp)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRESPONDENT'S CHOICE;
Making Tracks Around the Globe

BYLINE: By JAMES M. MARKHAM; James M. Markham is the Bonn bureau chief of The
New York Times.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 6, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1401 words


I jog. Not in quest of a spiritual high, not to win marathon trophies, not to
become a Senator from California, not to recapture the zest of my 20's (a myth
in any case) - but largely out of crass instincts of self-preservation. A decade
ago, I sped wildly through Madrid at the wheel of a Volkswagen station wagon
with one of my best friends stretched out in the back stricken with a heart
attack; colleagues, we had shared the stresses, and joys, of the reporter's
existence in Saigon and Beirut, the same type-A, roller-coaster life style. It
didn't take much analysis to realize that if I didn't do something about taking
care of the one body God gave me I would probably meet a similar fate. (My
friend recovered and is doing fine.) So I started to run. The first time around
the block in suburban Madrid - in tennis shoes - I thought I wouldn't make it.
But, as any jogger knows, the beginning is the most daunting part, and soon I
was making a 25-minute trot down my street in Aravaca, through the underpass of
the highway leading to Avila and Segovia (past a ferocious but mercifully
chained yapping watchdog), left past a cemetery (visited on the weekends by
black-creped families bearing bright flowers) and along a broad open space of
hayfields to the walls of the Zarzuela Palace, where King Juan Carlos and his
family resides. (Palace is a misnomer: It's really a mock-Tudor country house
enveloped in an oversize park inhabited by deer.) After a while, the guards at
the Zarzuela came to recognize me as I chugged along with my Walkman - in those
days I found Bob Marley and the Wailers the best antidote to the intrinsic
boredom of running - and the guards, being Spanish, would call out friendly
encouragement to the dotty Yanqui: ''Adelante! Mas fuerte! Muy bien!'' and
suchlike. Soon I stretched myself beyond the king's palace and into the hour run
that is pretty much what I do today.

The great virtue of running is that it requires so little equipment: shoes,
socks, shorts, a T-shirt, Walkman and tapes (latter two optional). All of this
can be easily stuffed into a suitcase by a reporter rushing for some airport at
midnight; it is probably the ideal sport for the foreign correspondent or the
jet-bound executive, since one can do it alone and just about anywhere. And,
modestly, I can say I have; not everywhere, certainly, but in quite a few
places. Perhaps it may be useful to fellow joggers to pass along some tips on
running abroad - and then to star a few of the top places.

There are two broad categories of sites. In the first, joggers are regarded as a
bit odd if not altogether crazy and are likely to cause a sensation, attracting
the attention of packs of squealing children or (potentially rabid) dogs. In the
second category, which covers most of Western Europe, joggers have become almost
as banal as they are in Central Park.

New Delhi, for example, falls clearly into the first category. But the
discriminating runner will seek out the tranquillity of the Lodi Gardens,
studded with faded pastel Mogul tombs. Firmly packed dirt and gravel paths loop
around the property, and the odd monkey scampers away at the sight of a huffing
and puffing sahib. At the time of the storming of the Golden Temple in Amritsar
by the Indian Army, I introduced a colleague to the pleasures of the Lodi
Gardens.

We also had a more problematic, but even more exotic, run from the towering
India Gate to Rashtrapati Bhavan, the vast pink sandstone government complex
built on Raisini Hill in the twilight of the Raj in 1929; in the night, this run
involved picking one's way carefully among holes in the grass, past entire
families picnicking, by balloon salesmen, soft-drink vendors and squatting
panwallahs. It was also a most corrupt run, since we had a taxi ferry us back,
dripping in sweat, to the Taj Mahal Hotel (with its namesake in Bombay the two
best hotels in India to my taste).

The Middle East poses almost as many problems for the runner as for the
peacemaker. A few years ago in Beirut, one could run along the corniche by the
sea which, with the snow-brushed mountains rising in the background, was surely
one of the most spectacular jogging sites anywhere - and flat, too. Yet the
influx of refugees into Beirut, and particularly the Shiite women, with their
heads wrapped, made one begin to feel positively immodest in shorts along the
once-chic corniche. Today the only running an American might do in Beirut is
away from someone else.

In Jerusalem, I found some nice patches in the French Hill section when staying
at the American Colony Hotel, but, as the name suggests, they were steep; there
is a proper cinder track, though, across from the King David Hotel at the
Y.M.C.A. I never found a good place to run in downtown Cairo, and was defeated
by the traffic and dust. Algiers, likewise, is simply too hilly. In Rabat, which
is a French town masquerading as an Arab one, a good run takes you from the
Hilton along the walls of King Hassan's palace. (It's a real palace, this one.)
But here, too, the mangy-dog factor is not negligible. If you ever get to a
whitewashed Beau Geste town called Dakhla in the Western Sahara there's a
marvelous flat of packed sand on a peninsula surrounded by sharks. Hot, though.

In Europe, the only place where people gaped at me running was in Warsaw at the
time of the Solidarity upheaval. My solitary run took me around the Opera a few
times and into the park behind the Monument to the Unknown Soldier. The Poles
have so many gloomy preoccupations that they haven't really thrown themselves
into physical fitness, something that may also be true for the other, somewhat
pessimistic nations of the Warsaw Pact. In Western Europe, by contrast, joggers
are fairly commonplace, more so perhaps in the northerly nations than in the
dolce-far-niente ones like Spain, Italy or Greece.

Now that we are in the second category, First World running - out of the Third
World category - it is probably worth mentioning the subcategory of jogging on
beaches. Here my list is short because to be run on a beach must be well-packed
and spacious, if not empty. In Europe, the two that I have found that meet this
test are the splendid, conch-shaped beach at San Sebastian in the Spanish Basque
country and the series of linked beaches on the southern coast of Holland called
Zeeland. For invigoration, it's hard to beat beach running stripped down to the
waist in the early-morning or late-afternoon sun. On a beach I even leave behind
my Walkman and my adrenalin music: Joan Armatrading, Bruce Springsteen's album,
''The River,'' the soundtrack from ''Flashdance,'' Jennifer Rush and a lot of
old Motown. (On this subject, if your body is really rebeling against running,
slip ''Chariots of Fire'' into your Sony - and zoom off into dream fantasies of
Olympic gold medaldom.) Yet my top choices I save for last. They are
disproportionately German, because Germany is where I live and run most. In the
non-German class, Hyde Park in London, with its wide paths and serene
watercourses, is one of the most alluring; it's easy to get there if your hotel
is in Knightsbridge or elsewhere on the fringes of this grand park. In Paris,
the Tuileries has a fine crunchy surface and, like Hyde Park, is convenient to a
number of hotels; the Bois de Boulogne would be nice but has too many
prostitutes and transvestites hanging about. In Vienna, the Stadtpark on the
Park Ring can be a little crowded with strollers but is very pleasant.

In West Germany, the English Garden in Munich, laced with interconnecting gravel
paths and small ponds, is perfect for jogging. So, too, is the esplanade along
the Rhine in Bonn, where you can pace yourself by cantering parallel to a Rhine
barge plowing upstream; the ambitious runner can theoretically stretch his
distances to Cologne or down to Koblenz. And, last but best of all: the sylvan
footpath around the Aussenalster in Hamburg. The Aussenalster is a small lake in
the midst of Hamburg, shaded with big trees and flanked by little boating clubs
and luxury apartments; on the water bob sculls, sailboats and miniature tourist
steamers. Twice clockwise around this body of water gives an extraordinary
feeling of accomplishment. The Aussenalster, moreover, has the thickest
concentration of joggers I have encountered anywhere in Europe. Boris Becker
runs there, so you'll be in good company.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of joggers in the Casa de Campo (Robert Royal)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION;
THE 60's ARE GONE, BUT VALUES ENDURE

BYLINE: By HOLLY PEPPE; Holly Peppe lives in Canaan.

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 40, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 867 words


WHAT continues to amaze me about yuppies is not that they can't ''find''
themselves: it's that they aren't looking. Dressed for every success imaginable
- money and social prestige heading the list - they are a trim and fast-moving
lot who clutch their daybooks for dear life as they buzz from work to exercise
class, then back to work, then out to eat with contacts or business associates
within their spiraling entrepreneurial networks.

In the old days we called such people ''co-workers'' or ''friends.'' But that
was the era before embossed calling cards with stickum on the back, before
Perrier water with a slice of lime, before slim-lined leather briefcases,
designer running shoes, and that oh-so-indispensable American Express card. The
good old days were the 60's.

In those days we lived at another extreme: too much ''we'' and not enough ''I.''
None of us moved or ate our brown rice or kneaded bread dough or sang a chorus
of ''We Shall Overcome'' except in unison; the surging entrepreneurial
independence championed today was simply unheard of. Capital ''I'' was reserved
for capitalist executives that the ''We'' considered immoral; a business suit
and tie were warning flags that we believed signaled the enemy, the betrayer of
the public good.

Collectively, we believed, we could do anything. To make money most of us kept
our consciences clean by building Appalachian folk dulcimers, selling
organically grown vegetables, sewing patchwork quilts to sell at local fairs,
and doing carpentry. Others, call them our relaxation entrepreneurs, cultivated
and sold marijuana in the name of just about anything: art, self-enlightenment,
fun or a clearer world vision. None of us doubted then that we were the world,
and that our mission was to make that world better.

In 1968 (much to my parents' dismay), I bunked down in a small town in Vermont
with an aspiring writer and took courses in World Hunger Solutions and Creative
Movement at a now-defunct progressive college staffed by conscientious objectors
and a handful of talented conceptual artists who called themselves The Prime
Movers. Class attendance was optional.

Every day the student body met on the college green and donned black armbands in
a show of solidarity against war. Then we each went our separate ways, wafting
through the spiritually uplifting mind trips of our daily lives, making a
collective peace with Earth and Universe, or so we wholeheartedly believed.

My writer-lover and I spent countless hours meditating, lettering pro-peace
posters, and talking about our future. The day we decided to stay together
forever, we sat facing each other, nestled in a large old-fashioned white
porcelain bathtub in the unheated bathroom of a third-floor apartment that
overlooked a ramshackle paper mill, the duomo of the small Vermont town.

Fully clothed in flannel shirts and jeans, our hair tied back in ponytails, we
pledged our lives to one another with lines from Matthew Arnold and ''The
Prophet.'' We planned our wedding, to be held on a mountain with sitar music
accompanying a ceremony we would write ourselves. Then we planned a family of
gypsy children, each one conceived in a different country, who would represent
our great commitment to the masses out there. Finally we wept together about
Vietnam, then dried our eyes to organize strategies for protest.

Needless to say, recalling that day now makes me feel embarrassed, even
squeamish. My proposed partner and I did indeed marry, but after a year or two
building dulcimers and teaching folk music to children in a one-room
schoolhouse, we moved to a city to attend a prestigious university, and split up
within a few months. Today he is a short-haired dentist practicing in Queens.

I now realize that while we bead-bedecked flower children often sidestepped
reality and consequently accomplished little lasting social change, what we did
accomplish remains to our credit. And most important, whether we were trying to
find ourselves or to save the world, our hearts were in the right place.

During the past few years I've watched my younger brothers and sisters bolt
fearlessly from law school to business school to six-figure corporate positions
- they're not looking for themselves or for anybody else, for that matter. All
of them work hard and drink Michelob, shamelessly wanting to ''have it all.''
Still, their big sister is a 60's holdout, and a happy one: I wouldn't trade my
snail-advancing teaching career for anything, least of all a stack of business
cards guaranteeing me three-Perrier lunches with people dressed for
you-know-what.

Instead I'm content to dedicate my life to the intellectual betterment of my
university students, who (in my humble opinion) need me now more than ever. For
some of them, in fact, my required literature course is a last glimpse of art
before they embark on the path to financial Nirvana. So I rest easily at night,
knowing I haven't compromised my 60's values, and knowing that - for better or
worse - my students care more about software and disk drives than about George
Eliot or Wordsworth or what keeps their English 101 prof (who, after all, isn't
that old) from wanting to ''have it all.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE SPY WHO GOT AWAY

BYLINE: BY DAVID WISE; David Wise is the author of several nonfiction books
about intelligence and of ''The Samarkand Dimension,'' a novel of espionage to
be published by Doubleday & Company in April

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7317 words


IN THE SILENCE JUST BEFORE TWI-light in the desert near Santa Fe, the sky
changes colors, shading to pinks and reds, and the sunset casts an orange glow
on the golden snakeweed, the prickly pear cactuses and the juniper trees. The
Sangre de Cristo mountains turn purple, then swiftly black.

Suddenly, the first stars appear and the night belongs to the coyotes, the
chirping toads and the owls.

On just such a night a little more than a year ago, with the clouds racing past
a quarter-moon, Edward Lee Howard, a 33-year-old former officer of the Central
Intelligence Agency, slipped away from agents of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and vanished.

On Aug. 7 of this year, he surfaced in Moscow, granted political asylum by the
Russians. According to intelligence officials, Howard betrayed the methods used
by the C.I.A. to contact its spies -''assets'' in intelligence jargon - in the
Soviet Union, leading directly to the arrest of one such C.I.A. asset, Soviet
defense researcher Adolf G. Tolkachev, whose execution was announced a week and
a half ago by Tass, the Soviet news agency. Howard's information also may have
led to the ex-pulsion from Moscow of several American intelli-gence agents and
the detention of other Soviet citizens who were working for the C.I.A.

Howard is the first known C.I.A. man to have defected to the Soviet Union in the
39-year history of the agency. His defection was, perhaps, the greatest
embarrassment ever suffered by the C.I.A. But a second former C.I.A. man, whose
identity and role have been a tightly guarded secret, is also a key figure in
the case. The second man is William G. Bosch.

F.B.I. agents tracked Bosch down on South Padre Island, at the southernmost tip
of Texas, near the Mexican border. For four days, they interrogated him, even as
other agents maintained a 24-hour surveillance on Howard in Santa Fe, N.M.
According to intelligence sources, Bosch finally told the F.B.I. that on a visit
to the island, Howard confided to him that he had sold secrets to the K.G.B. in
Europe and sought to enlist him in further espionage plans. The officials said
Bosch also told the F.B.I. that the two men discussed taking a trip to the
Soviet Embassy in Mexico.

But in a day of high drama, at the very moment that F.B.I. agents were
questioning Bosch, Howard was planning his successful escape from his home in
the New Mexico desert.

Edward Lee Howard has been charged with conspiring to violate the espionage laws
by his visit to South Padre Island. Bosch, who, like Howard, left the C.I.A.
under a cloud, has not been charged. But his statements provided the key
evidence that enabled the Department of Justice to file a criminal complaint
against Howard. Bosch, who lives in the Los Angeles area, has declined to
comment.

Former Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield Turner has said that United
States intelligence was ''very badly hurt'' by Howard, who had ''very critical
information about operations inside the Soviet Union.''

Another intelligence official put it more bluntly: ''He wiped out Moscow
station.'' To understand the Howard case, one must step through the looking
glass into the murky world of counterintelligence, where nothing is quite what
it seems and not every question has an answer.

One thing is clear, however. The Howard case vastly embarrassed the C.I.A. and
the F.B.I. Behind the scenes, there has been a good deal of finger-pointing
between the two agencies - each blaming the other.

The existence of a second man in the case is only one of many startling aspects
that surround the affair. While many facets of the case remain unclear, an
in-depth investigation, including dozens of interviews with Howard's family,
friends, associates, neighbors and Government officials, among them a number of
persons in the intelligence agencies, has revealed other surprising information,
much of which has not previously been disclosed:

Edward Howard and his wife, Mary, were both employed by the C.I.A.'s Directorate
of Operations, the agency's clandestine arm. They were trained by the agency to
operate in Moscow as a husband-and-wife spy team.

Only one F.B.I. agent was watching the Howards' house on Sept. 21, 1985, as Mary
Howard helped her husband escape by driving home with a dummy in the front seat,
a dummy made of clothes shaped in a human form and topped with a wig stand for
its head. In the darkness, the agent apparently mistook the dummy for Howard - a
ruse that gave the ex-spy a 24-hour head start. Mary Howard further aided her
husband's escape by playing a tape recording of his voice over their telephone
that fooled F.B.I. agents, who were wiretapping the phone, into believing he was
still at home. Mary Howard was with her husband at an Austrian ski resort near
the Swiss border on Sept. 20, 1984, during a trip when the F.B.I. believes he
met with K.G.B. agents. But she insists he was only gone from their hotel room
for a short time and maintains she never had any knowledge of his alleged spying
for the Russians. For a year after her husband vanished, Mary Howard declined to
talk to the press. She broke her silence and agreed to be interviewed for the
first time by this reporter.

Both the C.I.A. and the F.B.I. were sharply criticized by the President's
Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board for their handling of the Howard case, and
both agencies have officially reprimanded a number of employees involved.

The Howard case did more than compromise ongoing clandestine operations. To the
C.I.A., it remains a skein that, if unraveled, could expose flaws in both the
conduct of the agency's secret operations and its bureaucratic procedures.
Inevitably, the defection of Edward Howard has raised larger concerns about
C.I.A. security, recruitment and personnel policies, and about the overall
United States counterintelligence effort.

This case also brings up a number of intriguing and unanswered questions which,
presumably, officials of the C.I.A. and F.B.I. are asking themselves. Why did
Edward Howard feel secure in going to William Bosch to tell him he was betraying
his country? Why didn't Bosch come forward and inform the authorities when he
was first approached by Howard? And does this case indicate the existence of
larger cracks in the armor of American intelligence? ON THE MORNING OF AUG. 1,
1985, VITALY Yurchenko, deputy chief of the K.G.B.'s First Department, which is
responsible for operations in the United States and Canada, told colleagues at
the Soviet Embassy in Rome that he was going to take a walk and visit the
Vatican Museum. Yurchenko, then 49, had arrived in Rome a week earlier.

When he did not return by dinner time, embassy officials were frantic. Not until
the next day did they file a missing persons report with the Italian police. But
the K.G.B. resident in Rome must already have suspected the worst: Vitaly
Yurchenko, a trusted ''general-designate'' in the K.G.B. with 25 years of
service in the Soviet intelligence agency, had defected.

Yurchenko, a big catch for the C.I.A., was whisked to a safe house near
Fredericksburg, Va., for questioning. Before he escaped his C.I.A. handlers and
redefected to Moscow three months later, leaving a trail of recrimination and
confusion within the intelligence community, he provided vital information. The
first order of business when a defector is interrogated is to learn whether he
knows of any penetrations of United States intelligence. Yurchenko said he knew
of two. He provided details that led the F.B.I. to Ronald W. Pelton, a former
employee of the National Security Agency, who was convicted of espionage in June
1986.

Yurchenko said the other mole had worked for the C.I.A. and was known to him
only by the code name ''Robert.'' Yurchenko had never met Robert and could
provide no physical description. But he had two crucial clues to his identity:
Robert had met with senior K.G.B. agents in Austria in the fall of 1984 and sold
them C.I.A. secrets. Moreover, Robert had been prepared for posting to Moscow
and was familiar with the complex techniques used by the C.I.A. for contacting
its agents there, perhaps even their code names or identities.

The news horrified Yurchenko's C.I.A. interrogators. If true, it meant there had
been a mole in their inner sanctum, the most sensitive part of the agency, the
Soviet European division. There had already been disturbing intimations that
something was wrong in Moscow; at least one major operation had been blown, and
the C.I.A.'s Soviet contact, Adolf Tolkachev, arrested. If Robert had talked to
the K.G.B., the C.I.A.'s entire Soviet network might be in danger.

It did not take C.I.A. officials long to zero in on the man who fit Yurchenko's
profile. In the spring of 1983, he had been getting ready for assignment to the
C.I.A.'s Moscow station, his first overseas post, when at the last moment some
troubling polygraph results and a security investigation disclosed drug use and
petty theft, C.I.A. officials have said. Instead of sending the officer to
Moscow, the agency took the unusual step of firing him. His name was Edward Lee
Howard. E HAD APPLIED TO THE C.I.A. in 1980. At the time, he was 28, married and
working as manager of the Chicago regional office of a firm called Ecology and
Environment Inc. It occurred to Ed Howard that there might be something more
challenging in life than looking for toxic waste dumps. ''He just mentioned one
day that he had applied for a job in the agency,'' Mary Howard said. ''I think
that's what he wanted to do for a long time.''

Mary Cedarleaf Howard, a quiet, intelligent woman of 36, with brown hair and
blue eyes, now lives in seclusion with her young son and her parents near St.
Paul, Minn. In a series of conversations, Mary Howard said nothing critical
about Edward Howard, except to confirm that he had a drinking problem that was
the cause of arguments between them. At the same time, she appeared to be loyal
to her former employer, the C.I.A. She said she was still fond of her husband,
although she has refused his request that she and their son join him in Moscow.

To the C.I.A., Howard had apparently looked like an ideal recruit. He had a
graduate degree, work experience, and both he and his wife were accustomed to
living overseas. Howard was fluent in Spanish and German, a smooth, well-spoken
man who collected guns and knew how to use them. Although born in New Mexico, he
had grown up in Europe; his father, Kenneth Howard, had been an Air Force
electronics specialist who worked on guided missiles and had been stationed at
bases in Germany, Texas and England.

''He played Little League and everything,'' Kenneth Howard said of his son. ''He
was in the Boy Scouts, up to Explorer.'' Ed Howard graduated from high school in
Branden, England, then enrolled at the University of Texas, where he belonged to
the karate club and graduated cum laude in 1972, the same year his father
retired from the Air Force.

Ed Howard and Mary Cedarleaf met in the Peace Corps in 1973, both in their early
20's and fresh out of college. Mary had grown up in St. Paul, the daughter of an
insurance executive and a physician. In the Peace Corps, ''we started out in the
same town in Colombia, called Bucaramanga,'' she said. They were married three
years later, at a Lutheran church in St. Paul.

That same year, Ed Howard earned a master's degree in business administration
from the American University in Washington, and joined the Agency for
International Development. In February 1977, the Howards left for two years in
Lima, Peru, where he worked on loan projects for A.I.D. Although the C.I.A.
sometimes uses A.I.D. as diplomatic cover, there is no evidence to suggest that
Howard was anything but a loan officer. After Peru, the Howards returned to the
United States, and he landed the environmental job in Chicago.

In January 1981, the C.I.A. hired Edward Howard as a career trainee in the
Directorate of Operations, also known as the D.D.O. (in reference to the Deputy
Director for Operations) and as the Clandestine Services. Mary stayed at their
home in Barrington, a Chicago suburb, while Ed reported to C.I.A. headquarters
at Langley, Va. He was sent for several months to the Farm, a secret C.I.A.
installation at Camp Peary, Va., near Williamsburg. There, Howard learned the
''tradecraft'' of intelligence, practicing the recruitment of agents and the use
of ''dead drops'' to pass messages. He was given five aliases. He also learned
from F.B.I. agents at the Farm how to detect and evade surveillance.

In the spring, Mary came east to join him. They purchased a house on Scotch
Haven Drive in Country Creek, a development of single-family town houses in
suburban Vienna, Va.

When Robert Magee, the C.I.A.'s director of personnel, later reviewed the Howard
case, he discovered that there had been one blip on the security screen even at
the start. Every candidate for the C.I.A. who passes the two initial screenings
is given a polygraph test - ''fluttered'' in C.I.A. jargon. Patti Volz, a C.I.A.
spokesman, said Howard's initial polygraph indicated ''some drug use.'' But
C.I.A. applicants who admit to using drugs are not automatically disqualified,
if they agree to end the practice when hired. Patti Volz said nothing about
Howard's alcohol problem. The agency was apparently unaware of it.

In Country Creek, the young couple kept to themselves. Howard told the neighbors
that he worked for the State Department. He jogged regularly on the path behind
his house and was seen walking his dog, a German shepherd that he had bought as
a pup in Lima. Howard named the dog Whisky.

In the fall of 1981, Mary joined the C.I.A. as a regular, full-time employee
and, like her husband, was assigned to the agency's clandestine arm. ''I wasn't
a case officer like Ed,'' she said. ''I was more a secretary. I worked for the
D.D.O.'' The C.I.A. is a closed society, and it is not unusual to find married
couples working for the agency.

The agency's covert operators also tend to choose their friends among colleagues
in the D.D.O. It was there that Howard met William G. Bosch, a 6-foot, 3-inch,
blond, balding C.I.A. veteran who had served in the agency's administrative
side, then switched to the D.D.O. shortly before Howard joined the C.I.A. They
shared a common background. Howard had worked in Lima; Bill Bosch, who was three
years older, had served the agency in Bolivia, and, like Howard, spoke Spanish.
The two became good friends.  Howard's career was progressing well. He was
chosen for a singular honor, service in the Soviet European division (S.E.),
which covers the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. ''S.E. is the holiest of
holies,'' one veteran case officer explained. ''They're a closed, cliquish,
incestuous bunch of people. Nobody looks over their shoulder. S.E. screens their
own and thumbs their nose at anybody else.''

By late 1982, Howard had been selected for the most prestigious duty in the
D.D.O., assignment to the Moscow station for a two-year term. His cover:
diplomat in the American Embassy.

Why did the C.I.A. choose to send to its most sensitive post a newcomer with no
previous experience working as an intelligence officer overseas? William J.
Casey, Director of Central Intelligence, and other C.I.A. officials have
declined, for the most part, to comment publicly on the Howard case. But Casey
has defended privately the decision to send a rookie to Moscow as a common
agency practice.

The chief of the S.E. division, in a rare appearance before a secret session of
the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, gave the agency's standard
explanation of what has emerged as a major question in the Howard case. In order
to make it more difficult for the K.G.B. to identify C.I.A. officers assigned to
the Moscow station, the S.E. chief said, the agency chooses junior officers who
are not known. Howard, he added, was the first one who had gone bad.

Howard was given special training for his Moscow assignment. He received careful
instruction in the arcane techniques of maintaining the delicate and difficult
contact with the C.I.A.'s assets.

Mary Howard, too, received training from the C.I.A. to work with her husband in
Moscow as a spy. ''They like to give some training to wives, short courses,''
she said. Asked whether it might have included countersurveillance - such as
sitting in a car and acting as a lookout while her husband met with an agent -
she replied: ''It could have been something like that.''

Early in 1983, Ed Howard told neighbors he was studying Russian; the State
Department was sending him to the Soviet Union. The Howards bought a new car and
prepared to ship it to Moscow.

To build his cover, the C.I.A. gave Howard a certificate identifying him as a
Foreign Service officer and appointing him ''a Consular Officer and a
Secretary'' in the diplomatic service. It was dated March 11, 1983, and signed
by Ronald Reagan and George P. Shultz.

Eight days later, the Howards' son, Lee, was born. Spring was on the way, and
the future looked bright. Then the bottom fell out of Ed Howard's life. A second
lie-detector test suggested that some of Howard's answers were deceptive. The
second polygraph ''picked up drugs and petty theft,'' the C.I.A.'s Patti Volz
said. (Howard's family insists that, although he drank, he did not use drugs.)
An investigation was launched.

Two years later, when Howard fell under suspicion of spying for the Soviets, the
C.I.A. ordered an internal report by its then-Deputy Inspector General, Carroll
Hauver. Those who have read the secret report say that Howard, when confronted
after the polygraph test, admitted using drugs, stealing from vending machines
and taking money from a woman's purse aboard an airliner.

The C.I.A. decided it could not send Howard to Moscow. In fact, it decided it
did not want him in the agency at all. Howard was fired. By June 1983, he was
out of a job. He was now walking around with detailed knowledge of the agency's
most sensitive operations in Moscow in his head. He was also furious at the
C.I.A.

O CURTIS R. PORTER, STAFF director of the finance committee of the New Mexico
state legislature, the young professional who showed up in his office
unannounced to answer an advertisement in The Albuquerque Journal seemed an
ideal prospect. The Legislative Finance Committee was looking for an economic
analyst, and Edward Howard had the right credentials. Moreover, he was a native
of New Mexico. On his resume, he had put down ''U.S. Department of State January
1981-June 1983.'' He was hired.

By August, the Howards had sold their house in Virginia and bought a home in El
Dorado, a development 12 miles out in the desert southeast of Santa Fe. With
their new baby, they settled down to life in the Sun Belt.

Howard's job was to estimate state revenues. Late in October, he flew to
Washington for an economics conference. Apparently still seething at the agency,
he spent several hours near the Soviet Embassy, trying to decide whether to go
inside and reveal classified information.

Meanwhile, Howard's drinking was getting worse. On Feb. 26, 1984, a Sunday
night, he was in-volved in a shooting incident with three young men. According
to the police report, Howard said he had met the men ''at a bar and had followed
them home as they had promised him a girlfriend for the night and a good time.''

But Peter Hughes, then 24, said that he, a friend and their two female
companions were never inside the bar, but were in their Jeep, backing out of a
motel parking lot, when Howard stared at one of the women, then followed in his
own Jeep.

Hughes and his friend, joined by a third man, were waiting as Howard walked into
the courtyard of Hughes's apartment building. ''Suddenly from his back, he pulls
out this cannon,'' Hughes said. ''I mean a silver chrome .44 Magnum. An awesome
gun. He says to me, 'Get back in the Jeep.' ''

To Hughes, Howard seemed to have been drinking; his speech was slurred. ''I'm
inside the Jeep and he's pointing the gun at me. His eyes get this blazing look
and he starts walking toward me with the gun, pointing it at my head. I think,
He's about to pull the trigger. He's going to shoot. The barrel of the gun is
coming in the window. So I duck. I grabbed for the gun and it fired, putting a
hole in the roof.''

With Howard disarmed, the youths beat him up; one threw a rock, hitting him on
the head. They forced him back to his own Jeep, kicking the door several times
for good measure. Then they called the police, who found Howard, bloodied, a
block away. He was placed under arrest for aggravated assault with a deadly
weapon.

For Santa Fe District Attorney Eloy F. Martinez, the case was a problem. On the
one side was Peter Hughes, whose family was well known in the city - his father,
who had been a prisoner of war in Vietnam, had run, albeit unsuccessfully, for
the Republican nomination for Governor a decade earlier. On the other side was
Howard, who produced letters of support from powerful state legislators and
officials in Washington. Martinez said that he briefly considered prosecuting
Howard for attempted murder. But Howard hired Santa Fe attorney Morton S. Simon,
who, by working out a plea bargain, managed to keep the case almost entirely out
of the papers. On April 25, Howard pleaded guilty to charges of aggravated
assault before Judge Bruce E. Kaufman, who sentenced him to five years probation
and ordered that he pay $7,500 to Hughes. Both Martinez and Kaufman denied
published reports that the C.I.A. contacted them or tried to influence the case
on Howard's behalf.

Howard had voluntarily entered a counseling program for state employees, where
Neil Berman, a clinical social worker, treated him for alcoholism for the next
year and a half. Psychologist Elliot J. Rapoport conducted a court-ordered
psychological evaluation; his report found that Howard had been through a period
of unusual stress and ''problem drinking,'' but was ''not otherwise criminally
oriented.'' He recommended that Howard remain in the state counseling program.

On Sept. 18, the Howards left for a one-week trip to Europe. According to Vitaly
Yurchenko, it was in the fall of 1984 that ''Robert'' met the K.G.B. in Austria
and sold C.I.A. secrets. The F.B.I. established that the Howards were in St.
Anton, Austria, on Sept. 20, 1984, although the bureau has not said whether it
believes that was the date Howard met with the K.G.B.

Mary Howard said they first visited friends in Switzerland. ''We visited Zurich
and Lucerne and then decided to go to Austria and then Milan.'' But she insisted
that they chose St. Anton at random. ''We were just driving around, and it was
getting toward dusk and it looked like a pretty little town,'' she said. ''I'm
not aware of any goings-on in St. Anton.''

''We had a disagreement,'' she said. ''Our fights were usually over his
drinking. He took off in the car. I could see him drive away from the window. He
drove around in the car.'' Could Howard have met the Russians then? ''He was
only gone a short time,'' she replied, ''perhaps 10 or 15 minutes.'' She added
that they did not stay overnight anywhere else in Austria.

The Howards were back in the United States on Sept. 24, for on that date, Howard
met with two current C.I.A. employees - perhaps at C.I.A. headquarters - and
told them how he had lingered outside the Soviet Embassy almost a year earlier,
in October 1983, but did not enter.

Now Howard, a former C.I.A. officer with knowledge of top-secret data, had
admitted that he had contemplated betraying his country. The C.I.A. insists that
the two employees reported Howard's story to the proper agency officials. But
for almost a year, those officials sat on that explosive information and failed
to pass it on to the F.B.I. The C.I.A. will not say whether disciplinary action
was taken against the officials.

Howard may have confessed the embassy incident as part of a plea to the C.I.A.
to pay for psychiatric treatment. Howard did see a private psychiatrist in Santa
Fe for a period of time and the C.I.A. paid for his visits.

Howard was still acting like a man under a great deal of stress. On a business
trip to Boston the next month, Curtis Porter of the finance committee found
Howard in his hotel room with a bandaged head; he claimed he had walked into a
glass door and been given pain killers at the hospital. Later, Howard abruptly
left a banquet and Porter found him packing and on the phone trying to make
plane reservations to Austria. Recalled Porter: ''He said, 'Sorry, I got crazy
with the pain killers and booze. Don't worry, Mary knows every time I get drunk
I try to go to Vienna.' '' But Howard did not go; he realized he had no passport
with him.

Kate and Bob Gallegos worked in Howard's office and lived in El Dorado; the two
couples were friends. Bob Gallegos said that Howard once showed him a stack of
Krugerrands worth perhaps $2,400. Gallegos also claimed that Howard ''was having
several affairs'' with women in the office. Other friends say they were unaware
of Howard's alleged womanizing, although one said he knew of a single
''sporadic'' affair.

In the spring of 1985, friends say, the Howards visited Europe again. Dennis
Hazlett, a co-worker, said Howard came back with a Rolex watch and intimated he
had been to Vienna.

O N JUNE 14, 1985, Tass, the Soviet news agency, announced that Paul M.
Stombaugh, a ''second secretary'' at the United States Embassy in Moscow, was
being expelled as a spy. Three months later the Russians disclosed that they had
also arrested Tolkachev, the Soviet researcher, as he attempted to pass secret
documents to Stombaugh.

American intelligence officials later confirmed that Tolkachev was an expert on
''stealth'' technology to conceal aircraft and missiles from radar, and had been
one of the C.I.A.'s most valuable assets in Moscow. They also claimed that
Tolkachev had been betrayed by Edward Lee Howard.

In July, Howard went to South Padre Island, to visit Bill Bosch. Bosch, too, had
gotten into trouble with the C.I.A. after questions had been raised about
alleged currency transactions in South America, according to intelligence
officials. ''He was dismissed by the C.I.A., or left before they could fire
him,'' a senior intelligence source said.

It was on this visit, Bosch was later to tell the F.B.I., that Howard confessed
his spying for the Russians and discussed plans for future contacts with Soviet
officials. According to intelligence officials, the two ex-C.I.A. officers
discussed taking a trip to the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City, a trip that Bosch
said did not take place.

Bosch now lives in Laguna Beach, Calif., a resort about one-and-a-half hours
south of Los Angeles. Although an old and established town, Laguna Beach is also
known as a home to young singles and transients - a place where people can come
and go with relative ease and not attract attention.

Bosch rents a small, inexpensive room on the first floor of an old, two-story
brown-shingle house that has been converted into apartments and is set back from
the street, surrounded by trees, two blocks from the Pacific Ocean.

According to a neighbor, Bosch is ''a nice guy, a quiet guy,'' who drives a
Porsche and is ''here at night sometimes, but not here often.'' Other neighbors
in his building and adjacent houses said they did not know him. Attempts to
contact Bosch in person proved unavailing; reached by telephone, he declined to
be interviewed. ''I have no comment,'' he said, ''either on or off the record.''

O N JULY 27, 1985, the Gallegoses went to the Howards' home for dinner. Howard
and his son Lee modeled two fur hats, Bob Gallegos said. ''They were in a box
with Russian writing. He said he had asked a friend in the State Department to
send them to him.'' Gallegos said he has an indelible memory of Howard standing
inside the house ''wearing gym shorts and a fur hat, smoking a cigar and
drinking a St. Pauli Girl.''

Five days later, Vitaly Yur-chenko vanished in Rome. The C.I.A. called in the
F.B.I.

T HE CASE COULD not have come at a worse time for James H. Geer. On Aug. 5,
1985, his first day as assistant director of the F.B.I. in charge of the
intelligence division, the Howard case landed on his desk at bureau headquarters
in Washington. It was Geer's job to catch foreign agents. Geer, then 45 and a
21-year veteran of the F.B.I., was confronted with a major and potentially
explosive counterintelligence case.

Geer called in Phillip A. Parker, the division's deputy director for operations.
Parker, 49, had worked on foreign counterintelligence cases for most of his 20
years in the F.B.I., and he had been the No. 2 man in the division for three
years.

Parker notified William D. Branon, who had just taken over the F.B.I.'s
Albuquerque office. F.B.I. agents from several other cities were brought in to
assist him. Within a few days, a small army of F.B.I. agents was deployed in
Albuquerque and in Santa Fe, 60 miles to the north.

The F.B.I. began watching Howard, but there were problems. The Howards lived at
108 Verano Loop, a circular road of widely spaced, mock-adobe houses, where
strangers are quickly spotted. Ironically, Thomas (Bill) Gillespie, one of the
four resident F.B.I. agents in Santa Fe, lived two houses away from the Howards,
at 112 Verano Loop. It was a perfect location for surveillance. But Gillespie
had just sold his house, and the new owners had moved in on Aug. 4, the day
before the F.B.I. got the case. So the house was not available. The F.B.I. did
not, in fact, use any house as an observation post. Whether it employed
''special coverage'' - agents posing as a street repair crew, telephone linemen
or the like - is not known. What is known is that the Howard residence was
placed under surveillance.

The legal problem was even more formidable. ''We had no probable cause to arrest
Howard,'' Geer explained. Yurchenko's evidence was not enough. ''Yurchenko never
saw him,'' Geer said. ''He didn't know him by name. It was a circumstantial
case. You have to have much more than one man's word. Yurchenko did not even
have a physical description.'' Parker, now retired, was equally emphatic that
the F.B.I. had no immediate basis for arresting Howard.

The F.B.I. needed more evidence. The bureau applied for and got a wiretap
warrant from a special seven-member court established in 1978 by the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act.

By the beginning of September, wiretaps were in place on the Howards' home
telephone. The results were disappointing. Howard said nothing incriminating.

By Thursday, Sept. 19, the F.B.I. had made the decision to confront Howard
directly. Still lacking probable cause to arrest the ex-C.I.A. man, the bureau
hoped that Howard himself might provide the necessary evidence. The decision to
approach Howard was made by Parker. There was a risk, he knew, that Howard might
run, although it seemed minimal, given the round-the-clock surveillance then in
place. The interview technique had worked in the past, and was used to convict
Ronald Pelton, the other man named by Yurchenko.

That morning, an F.B.I. agent telephoned Howard at his office and asked to
interview him. Within the hour, Howard met with the agent at the Hilton Inn, but
he refused to say anything of substance.

The F.B.I. now switched to what it calls a ''nondiscreet'' surveillance. The
agents following Howard no longer tried to blend in with the crowd. On Friday,
Sept. 20, Howard walked up to one of the now-obvious agents on the street and
asked to see the agent who had tried to interview him the day before. Another
brief meeting took place, and Howard sounded more cooperative. He told the agent
that he wanted time to get a lawyer and would meet with the F.B.I. the following
week. Word was sent back to F.B.I. headquarters that Howard might be getting
ready to talk.

That Friday morning, Philip M. Baca was getting nervous. Baca, the new director
of the Legislative Finance Committee, had been visited the day before by two
F.B.I. agents, who asked for records on Howard. The 8:30 A.M. staff briefing of
the committee, to prepare the lawmakers for a 9 A.M. public hearing, was about
to begin and Ed Howard was uncharacteristically late. He finally arrived at the
office at 8:25 A.M. ''He did a beautiful briefing on the 18-month economic
outlook,'' Baca said. ''He had graphs. During the hearing, some questions came
up on the price of oil. He answered them and was completely calm.''

On the morning of Saturday, Sept. 21, Howard went into his office at the
capitol. F.B.I. agents followed him. What they did not yet know was that he
would write two letters in his office that day.

''We did a lot of talking that weekend,'' Mary Howard recalled. Howard had told
her of the approach by the F.B.I. It was, she said, the first she knew he was in
trouble. ''It was like a nightmare,'' she said. ''It's very traumatic still.''
But, she added, ''I don't have any knowledge he spied.''

At 3 P.M., Rosa Carlson got a telephone call from her neighbor, Mary Howard. As
they had the same baby sitter that afternoon, would it be all right if the
sitter walked over with Lee to the Carlsons and combined the job? Mrs. Carlson
said that would be fine.

At 4 P.M., 16-year-old Gina Jackson arrived at the Howards'. Mary Howard did not
stop to chat with her in her usual friendly manner. Instead, she led Gina and
Lee directly out back to the patio.

''As I went through the house,'' Gina Jackson said, ''I thought I heard two
people talking. Out of the corner of my eye I saw a completely bald-headed
person standing in the entranceway between the den and living room.''

Later, Gina said, ''the F.B.I. told me it wasn't two men talking, it was Ed
Howard with a tape recorder and a dummy.''

On the patio, Mary Howard seemed distracted. She did not provide the sitter with
a phone number but told her the name of a Spanish restaurant in Santa Fe where
they would be. In a few moments, the sitter heard the car pull out of the
garage.

What happened next is baffling, either a mix-up in communication, or human
error. Only one F.B.I. surveillance agent was on duty, several hundred feet from
the Howard house. Although it was about 4:30 P.M., and broad daylight, the
Howards drove away in their dark red 1979 Oldsmobile undetected.

Ed and Mary Howard left El Dorado and swung onto Interstate Highway 25, heading
northwest for Santa Fe. Other F.B.I. agents were spread out in cars a few miles
away, awaiting word by radio to move out and follow the Howards. The signal
never came.

Around 6 P.M., Gina Jackson walked a block to the Carlsons with Lee. She watched
while Lee and the two young Carlson boys, Zac and Jonathan, played with water in
the bathtub.

An hour later, around 7 P.M., the Howards drove from the restaurant where they
had dined. In the darkness, somewhere in the downtown area, Ed Howard jumped
from the slowly moving car into a ''blind spot,'' as he had been trained to do
at the Farm. It was the last time Mary saw him.

When Mary Howard arrived back home around 7:20 P.M., there was a dummy in the
passenger seat in place of her husband. It was made of clothes shaped into a
human form, topped with a faceless wig stand. Atop the wig stand was some sort
of headgear. (Mary Howard said published reports that she had used an inflatable
dummy were ''not true.'') The surveillance agent on duty was surprised to see
the Howards returning, since he had not seen them leave -surprised but relieved,
since they were together. Ed Howard seemed to be wearing a hat, but in the dark,
the F.B.I. man could not be sure.

The automatic garage door opened, and Mary Howard drove inside. She drove out a
few minutes later, alone. She arrived at the Carlsons' house at 7:30 P.M. to
pick up Lee, then drove back to their house and into the garage. The
surveillance agent dutifully logged them in.

That night, Mary Howard carried out another ruse that her husband had planned
with her. The ex-C.I.A. man had recorded his voice on the tape recorder.
Following his instructions, Mary dialed a business office where the Howards knew
she would reach an answering machine. At the beep, Mary held the tape recorder
next to the telephone and pressed the ''play'' button. F.B.I. agents listening
in ''live'' heard Howard confirm an upcoming appointment and were reassured;
their target was still at home and staying in town. BACK IN WASHINGTON that
Saturday evening, F.B.I. agents in the intelligence (Continued on Page 88)
division were excited; it appeared they might finally be getting the evidence
they needed to seek a warrant for Howard's arrest.

The F.B.I. had tracked down William Bosch on South Padre Island. The bureau had
discovered that Howard had been in touch with Bosch, located him with the help
of long-distance toll-call records, and learned of his background from the
C.I.A. F.B.I. agents had moved in and begun questioning him intensively in
midweek. Gradually, Bosch's story was unfolding.

According to intelligence officials, Bosch said that Howard had made more than
one trip to South Padre Island to see him; in July, Howard had come to the
island and told Bosch he had sold C.I.A. data to the Russians, and the two men
had had the discussion of Howard's plan to visit the Soviet Embassy in Mexico
City.

There was no secure phone line on South Padre Island, so the electrifying
reports of Bosch's interrogation had to be driven 300 miles to the F.B.I. office
in San Antonio, then teletyped to the intelligence division on the fourth floor
of F.B.I. headquarters. James Geer said it was midnight in Washington, two hours
later than in Santa Fe, before the F.B.I. decided it now had probable cause to
seek a warrant for the arrest of Edward Howard. It could not be obtained at that
hour, on a weekend, but there was no reason to worry. The lights had gone out at
108 Verano Loop. The surveillance was still in place in the desert, and the
Howards were safely tucked away for the night.

L ATE ON SUNDAY AF-ternoon, Phil Baca went into the office unexpectedly. On his
desk, he found an envelope, and, inside it, a letter of resignation from Ed
Howard, along with the keys to the office and a smaller envelope addressed to
Mary, which Baca did not open. He called the F.B.I. ''I told them Ed Howard had
resigned,'' Baca said. The F.B.I. was stunned.

Agents rang the doorbell at Howard's house and learned from Mary that Howard was
gone. Mary Howard turned her husband's letter over to the F.B.I. One cryptic
line in the letter, not previously known, said: ''National security is like
holding a royal (Continued on Page 93) flush in Santa Fe.'' The note also said,
in part: ''Well, I'm going and maybe I'll give them what they think I already
gave them,'' and instructed Mary to ''sell the house, Jeep, etc., and move with
one of our parents and be happy.'' Howard also told Mary to tell Lee that ''I
think of him and you each day until I die.''

By the time the F.B.I. realized that Howard had vanished, he had a 24-hour head
start. Bureau officials believe he flew from Albuquerque, to New York, to
Helsinki, and then crossed the border into the Soviet Union.

On Monday, Sept. 23, the F.B.I. finally got its arrest warrant from a United
States magistrate in Albuquerque.

Howard called Mary once, the following month, but did not say where he was. In
the spring, he sent her a letter, postmarked Vienna. On Aug. 7, 1986, Howard
surfaced in Moscow.

E DWARD HOWARD HAS been charged with espionage.

Intelligence officials say the damage he did to the C.I.A.'s Soviet operations
was enormous. Some sources have suggested that the damage continued beyond
Tolkachev, the C.I.A. agent executed by Moscow. On March 14 of this year, Tass
announced that Michael Sellers, Second Secretary of the United States Embassy in
Moscow, was being expelled for espionage. On May 7, the Russians said, Erik
Sites, listed as a civilian employee of the embassy's military attache office,
strolled along Malaya Priogovskaya street to contact a Soviet C.I.A. asset when
the K.G.B. closed in. Sites's wife, Ursula, was waiting nearby as a lookout, the
Russians said. Sites, too, was expelled.

Certainly, the Howard case exposed major flaws inside the C.I.A. The agency
hired a man who drank heavily and, according to the agency at least, used drugs.
It ignored early warnings on his first polygraph test. It selected him for its
most sensitive post, despite his lack of experience. Then, when it discovered he
had serious character defects and problems, it fired him instead of easing him
into another job where he might have posed less of a security risk. It paid for
his psychiatric counseling after it was too late. Most astonishing of all, when
Howard confessed to the agency that he had contemplated entering the Soviet
Embassy in Washington to sell secrets, the C.I.A. sat on that information for
almost a year before telling the F.B.I. Finally, after Howard was fired, the
C.I.A. neglected to recover both his diplomatic passport and a false-name
passport he had been issued by the Clandestine Services.

Within the intelligence community, some of the heat in the Howard case has been
taken by Clair E. George, the C.I.A.'s Deputy Director for Operations, and
certainly the affair suggests that the agency's clandestine arm performed
sloppily. But the case also appears to illustrate loopholes in the agency's
personnel and hiring policies and a lack of coordination between its medical and
security offices. It suggests that, in order to avoid embarrassment, the agency
attempted to suppress at any cost what eventually turned into a major spy
scandal.

For its part, the F.B.I. was vastly embarrassed that Howard got away, a fact
that F.B.I. director William H. Webster calls an ''aberration.'' James Geer, the
head of the F.B.I.'s intelligence division, while conceding a mistake ''at our
on-the-scene operations,'' sees ''no institutional weakness,'' and cites the
F.B.I.'s success in rounding up several other spies in the same year that Howard
escaped.

Howard's motive remains unclear. He was angry at the C.I.A., but had no apparent
ideological sympathy for the Soviet Union. Dennis Hazlett, his friend, said
Howard seemed, if anything, conservative, patriotic, ''a little Reaganite in his
views.''

''I love my country,'' Howard said on Soviet television on Sept. 14 of this
year. ''I have never done anything that might harm my country.''

If Howard was paid large amounts of money for his information, the F.B.I. has
been unable to trace it. ''We just don't know where the money is, if he got
it,'' one senior F.B.I. man said. Mary Howard said: ''I never saw unusual
amounts of money,'' nor any Krugerrands. They lived on her husband's
$33,012-a-year salary, she said.

''If he did anything,'' Kenneth Howard said, ''it was through revenge or anger
at what the agency did to him.'' Edward Howard's father has even wondered
whether the C.I.A. ''might be playing some strange games,'' whether perhaps his
son was still working for the agency. Others have also wondered if Howard was
allowed to escape and is a double agent. But F.B.I. officials scoff at that
idea.

Edward Howard is a man caught between the superpowers. He faces a bleak future
in an alien land, joining the dubious roll call of defectors who have taken
refuge behind the Iron Curtain: Kim Philby, Guy Burgess, Donald Maclean, George
Blake. None are ever fully trusted by the K.G.B. Or Howard can come home one
day, if the Russians will let him, to face a possible sentence of life
imprisonment.

The bottom line, however, is that he has escaped. The F.B.I. is bitter about
that, although it takes a certain perverse pride in Howard's skill at
countersurveillance, which he had learned at the Farm from the bureau's
instructors. ''After all,'' one F.B.I. agent said, ''we trained him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Ed and Mary Howard and their mock-adobe house that was under
surveillance in the fall of 1985 (Neil Jacobs; F.B.I.); Photos of K.G.B. agent
Vitaly Yurchenko and Ronald Pelton (Stephen Ferry/Gamma-Liaison); Photos of
Phillip A. Parker, James H. Geer and a Federal search warrant on the seat of
Howard's jeep (Bill Ballenberg; Neil Jacobs)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COHORT OF THE AMERICAN CENTURY

BYLINE: BY RONALD STEEL; Ronald Steel, a professor of international relations
and journalism at the University of Southern California, is the author of
''Walter Lippmann and the American Century.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3164 words


THE WISE MEN Six Friends and the World They Made: Acheson, Bohlen, Harriman,
Kennan, Lovett, McCloy. By Walter Isaacson and Evan Thomas. Illustrated. 853 pp.
New York: Simon & Schuster. $22.95.

THERE are two things America is not supposed to have: an empire and a ruling
class. ''The Wise Men'' takes the former for granted as a simple fact of
international life, and explains through the lives of six privileged and
powerful men how the latter works. The way these lives intertwined - through
private schools, corporate board rooms and social clubs - and the way the United
States became the inheritor of the postwar world provide the material of a
fascinating, informative and ultimately disquieting study.

The six men chosen by Walter Isaacson and Evan Thomas, two young editors of Time
and Newsweek respectively, were never elected to high national office, nor do
any famous statues commemorate them. For the most part they operated just behind
the scenes, advising Presidents, setting agendas and carrying out policy. But
the decisions they made shaped the postwar world. They were the architects of
that exhilarating, and now receding, era known as the American Century. At a
unique moment in history they had the power to shape the world, the energies to
do so and the moral certitude to inspire their actions. Theirs is the story of
the Marshall Plan and the H-Bomb, the Truman Doctrine and NATO, the Prague coup
and the Berlin blockade, Korea and the Bay of Pigs, and ultimately of Vietnam.

The six form a cohesive unit. Dean Acheson, Secretary of State from 1949 to 1953
during the Korean War, the forging of NATO and the decision to rearm West
Germany, had also been Under Secretary of State from 1945 to 1947 when the
wartime alliance with Russia turned to cold war enmity. It was Acheson who
worked out the stillborn plan to share the atom with the Russians, then later
sold the Truman Doctrine for the global containment of Communism to a skeptical
Congress.

W. Averell Harriman, the inheritor of a great railway fortune, began his career
as Presidential ''special envoy'' with Franklin D. Roosevelt. Tough but
pragmatic toward the Russians, with whom he had had business dealings dating
back to the 1920's, he was Ambassador to Moscow during World War II, and
ultimately was chief United States negotiator at the ill-fated Paris peace talks
on Vietnam in 1968.

George F. Kennan, Harriman's wartime counselor in Moscow, galvanized the
Washington bureaucracy in 1946 with a long and alarmist analysis of Russia's
expansionist ambitions. Later he turned against the ''containment'' doctrine he
helped formulate and declared it had become excessively militaristic.

Charles Bohlen, Mr. Kennan's fellow Soviet expert in the Foreign Service, was
with F.D.R. at Yalta and later, like Mr. Kennan, served as Ambassador to Moscow.
Less creative than his scholarly colleague, he was a better team player and
exerted a subtle role in moderating apocalyptic views of Soviet intentions.

Robert A. Lovett, a deputy to Secretary of War Henry A. Stimson during World War
II, was a masterly administrator who helped build American wartime air power.
Later, as Under Secretary of State after Acheson, he presided over the early
stages of the cold war and then became Secretary of Defense. John J. McCloy
worked with Lovett and Stimson during the war and was later criticized for the
part he played in the decisions to intern Japanese-Americans in detention camps
and not to bomb the Nazi death camps. An adroit tactician who won the confidence
of men in high places, he later became President of the World Bank and High
Commissioner for Germany.

They all went to prep schools, even the impoverished McCloy, and two to
prestigious Groton (Acheson and Harriman) and one to St. Paul's (Bohlen). They
also attended the best colleges: Harriman, Acheson and Lovett were at Yale
University, Bohlen at Harvard University, Mr. Kennan at Princeton University,
and Mr. McCloy at Amherst College. They were even linked by the best
undergraduate clubs: Lovett and Harriman were Skull and Bones, Acheson was
Scroll and Key, and Bohlen was Porcellian.

While one could make too much of these social connections, the tendency in our
avowedly egalitarian society is to make too little of them. They are important
not only in forming how an individual looks at the world, but even more so in
determining his loyalties. These men, even when they disagreed, treated each
other with a respect that is certainly admirable, but they also smothered
serious differences of policy that was the nation's business and not just their
own. THE positive part of their upbringing was that it emphasized public
service, though it did not criticize private gain. The members of this informal
fraternity were taught to believe in honor, service and loyalty by the worthy
rectors who emphasized success on the playing field as a metaphor for life. They
were also, it is worth remembering, all intellectual children of Woodrow Wilson,
men who believed in their special ability to guide (and thus serve) society, and
who, in the authors' words, ''came of age at a time when it was possible to
believe sincerely that America had a duty to serve the world.'' The
Establishment they represented was not a closed one. It needed new recruits and
always sought out bright poor boys of promise, such as John McCloy, whose mother
was a hairdresser, but whose ambitions for her son sent him to Harvard Law
School.

If the Establishment was not closed, neither was it born to rule, or in many
cases even capable of ruling, for many of its members were, and are, louts,
hucksters or layabouts with no more sense of public service than of private
virtue. But these particular men were special, as were other important figures
with which this book deals only peripherally, such as Paul Nitze, James
Forrestal, George Ball and John Foster Dulles. The way in which they shaped
events when they and America had the power to do so is the great theme of this
book. In that chronicle, focusing on the period from roughly 1943 to 1967, three
episodes stand out as particularly significant. The first symbolizes their
triumph, the second a disastrous stumble and the third their failure.

Episode one took place in the spring of 1947. These men, deeply concerned about
American markets and jobs, and fearful that the Russians might try to take
advantage of Europe's weakness, were moved to action. They believed the United
States had not only the right but the duty to rescue Europe from chaos and
Commu-Continued on page 40 nism. They put together, then sold to Congress and
the American people, the most ambitious and successful aid program in history:
the Marshall Plan.

The second episode took place in the fall of 1950. By then the lines of the cold
war were firmly drawn in Europe - NATO had been organized and the rearmament of
West Germany declared - and the spotlight shifted to Asia. There the war in
Korea had turned from near defeat to seeming victory when Gen. Douglas MacArthur
launched a daring behind-the-lines landing at Inchon and drove the North Korean
Army across the border at the 38th parallel.

President Truman, who had sent the United States Army to South Korea to repel
the aggression, was now presented with the unexpected opportunity to destroy the
regime in the north. The new Communist Government of China, which shared a
border with North Korea, declared that it would not allow that nation to be
conquered. But Truman was tempted by the prospect of silencing right-wing
Republicans who had accused him of ''losing'' China to the Communists. Moreover,
General MacArthur promised that he could wipe up the North Korean Army and
''bring the boys home'' by Christmas. Truman and Acheson, his Secretary of
State, advised MacArthur to proceed across the 38th parallel into North Korea.

MacArthur pushed ahead and soon his army was near the Chinese border. Suddenly,
just as victory seemed at hand, Mao Zedong sent his army across the Yalu River,
inflicting terrible losses on the American and United Nations forces, and drove
them back to the 38th parallel. MacArthur, desperate to recoup the situation,
demanded authority to bomb China. At this point Truman, unwilling to trigger a
wider war, dismissed MacArthur and unleashed a political furor among the
general's supporters at home. The war dragged on inconclusively for two more
years. Acheson's effectiveness was destroyed, and in 1952 the voters drove the
Democrats from office. IN retrospect what is remarkable about this story is that
no one was willing to stop MacArthur once warnings of Chinese intervention began
rolling in. Secretary of Defense George C. Marshall, operating under the hoary
rules that officials in Washington should not second-guess commanders in the
field, had instructed the general: ''We want you to feel unhampered tactically
and strategically to proceed north of the 38th parallel.'' Truman, with his eyes
on public opinion polls instead of on Peking, had simply hoped for the best and
refused to face the possibility of the worst.

If the European recovery plan was an example of friends working togther to
conceive and implement an innovative policy, the decision to reunify Korea by
force was an example of the dangers of government by friends. These people
failed because they were too awed by their superiors, or too polite to disagree
with one another, or too fearful of losing influence by appearing insufficiently
bold. Korea was, the authors conclude, the ''failure of government among
friends.''

That failure was in part a result of their training. The emphasis on loyalty
that served them well when policies were successful made it difficult for them
to be effective when decisions went awry. They had been taught to respect
institutions, and of these the Presidency was the highest. This was not a
problem when leaders, like Roosevelt, were able to adjust quickly to shifting
circumstances. But with those like Lyndon Johnson, who stubbornly dug themselves
into ever-deeper disasters, they were curiously ineffectual. Their testing
point, and their greatest failure, came in Vietnam.

Episode three took place in the spring of 1968. Most of the Wise Men had
withdrawn to their law firms or libraries. Bohlen was rewarded for his service
by being made ambassador to France. Mr. Kennan had retired to the Institute for
Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., to become a distinguished historian and an
internationally respected critic of the containment doctrine he had fathered.
The reins of power had been turned over to a younger generation that pridefully
modeled itself on the Wise Men: men like William P. Bundy, Acheson's son-in-law
and the State Department's key man on Vietnam, and his brother McGeorge Bundy,
President Kennedy's national security adviser.

The Vietnamese Communists had shocked Americans by the intensity of their Tet
offensive. President Johnson, under assault from the antiwar movement and the
growing cost of an ever-more-elusive victory, once again assembled some of the
Wise Men for support. He pointedly did not invite George Kennan and Charles
Bohlen, both critical of the war. John McCloy and Robert Lovett, now unwilling
to support the conflict but feeling it would be disloyal to refuse openly,
declined to accept the summons. Harriman decided the time had come to take a
stand. The war, he told Acheson, whom he had long ago instructed at Yale in the
intricacies of rowing a shell, could not be won. Summoned by Johnson again after
Tet, the last of the remaining faithful Wise Men decided that the game was over.
''We must take steps to disengage,'' Acheson said. It was the end of an era.
Acheson in effect declared that the global containment of Communism - the policy
he had launched so forcefully 21 years earlier with the ringing peroration of
the Truman Doctrine - had reached a dead end. American power, however great, was
limited. For Acheson and the other Wise Men this moment ''was as significant for
their role in America as it was for America's in the world,'' write Mr. Isaacson
and Mr. Thomas. ''By dismantling their own creation, they were as well
diminishing their own raison d'etre.''

The foreign policy elite, represented by Henry Stimson and carried on by the
Wise Men and their colleagues, frowned on zeal or emotionalism, though their own
self-assured vigor was almost emotional in its thrust. The elite also was deeply
suspicious of ideology. So suspicious, in fact, that it did not recognize it had
its own ideology of individualism, free trade and international capitalism. It
watered its intellectual and cultural roots in Europe, and thus was staunchly
internationalist, and particularly Atlanticist. It was vividly conscious of
America's ability to shape the world, and it viewed, in the authors' words,
''America's leadership role, and their own, as part of a moral destiny.''

When things went well - when America's coffers were full of gold, the Russians
weaker, and the third world meek - they performed their task with distinction.
They were as capable a ruling class as could be found in the Western world. But
when the going got rough, and America could not exert its will by showering
dollars or sending gunships, they became strangely paralyzed. Trained to
command, or to issue threats, they did not know how to react when the commands
were disobeyed and the threats ignored. Though they thought of themselves as
supreme realists, they could see no other role for America except as leader of
mankind and last best hope. When the nation entered an era of limits and
receding horizons, they did not know how to respond. They were ineffectual at
the time of Vietnam not because they were getting old, but because the war
defied both their notions of vital interest and of Wilsonian idealism. They had
for years supported the war in Vietnam for the same reason they had the
intervention in Korea: because they thought this would demonstrate United States
resolve in Europe. What they could not accept was that this was neither true nor
relevant.

Mr. Isaacson and Mr. Thomas have written a richly textured account of a class,
and of a historical period, that is now in eclipse. Their research is thorough
and their narrative smooth-flowing. They see the flaws of the men they write
about, but make us aware of their virtues as well. This book contains little new
information for scholars of the period, other than some good anecdotes, and the
footnotes are lumped together in such a way as to be virtually useless. But it
is a story from which the average reader can learn a great deal in an
entertaining manner. The quarrel that has agitated historians for decades over
who started the cold war goes on quite over the authors' heads. They are
postrevisionists par excellence, taking it as axiomatic that both sides were to
blame, though the Russians more so. Their concern is with how these six men
played the game. ONE of the hallmarks of the Wise Men, as the authors observe,
is that in order to win congressional support for such sweeping initiatives as
the Marshall Plan and NATO, they ''consistently oversimplified and overstated
the truth, and in so doing made anti-Communism dangerously rigid and U.S.
commitments overly sweeping.'' Acheson and his cohorts put a higher premium on
acting than on reflection, and the group's one visionary, George Kennan, was
dismissed early in the game because he wanted to temper containment with
negotiation. While these men rightly understood that Stalin's ambitions had to
be countered by American firmness, they oversold their cause and left a legacy
of hubris and intransigence that rigidified American diplomacy, failed to take
advantage of opportunities such as the death of Stalin and the Sino-Soviet
split, sought security in nuclear arms and ultimately led to the self-inflicted
defeat of Vietnam.

For all the Establishment's failings, however, it would be too easy to wrap
oneself in the flag of American populism and blame the Wise Men for all the
failings of American diplomacy. This, after all, would be to invite comparison
with their successors, whose record has not been so noteworthy and whose sense
of values and loyalty is considerably less inspiring. The ''best and the
brightest'' made their share of mistakes. They suffered from the general
national hubris that Americans have a mandate to reorder the world, and from a
smugness about their own assumptions. But their sins were not those of greed,
ambition and venality - unlike so many today who flit anxiously from government
offices to think tanks, to influence-peddling consultancy firms. They were men
who could have had, and often did have, prosperous careers outside of
government. They held public office because, to be sure, they found it
fulfilling, but also because they were spurred by more than self-aggrandizement.

History will probably not judge them harshly; certainly not if this book is any
guide. For those who followed in their footsteps have made us appreciate their
accomplishments. They were among the last of a vanishing breed: the
gentleman-public servant. They were men who knew where they stood, and their
strength came from being rooted in an order that did not begin yesterday and
will not end tomorrow.

'They Shared a Bond'

As young Time magazine staffers in 1980, Walter Isaacson and Evan Thomas found
that one key element in the Presidential campaign was not a candidate or party,
but an image of power and privilege: the American Establishment. ''The notion of
the Establishment kept coming up, both in the Reagan campaign and the Carter
campaign, not just from the candidates, but from the groups that hand you
pamphlets with exclamation points and arrows,'' said Walter Isaacson in a
telephone interview from his parents' home in New Orleans.

The two friends set out to discover what, and who, stood at the heart of that
notion. And their findings became ''The Wise Men,'' the story of six men whose
values and outlook came to define American power in the postwar period. ''We
found that the Establishment was a very nebulous idea, and that the best way to
get at it was a biographical treatment of a group of men who were at the core of
that idea,'' said Mr. Isaacson, now a senior editor at Time.

''The one thing about this group that is important is that they were a group,''
observed Evan Thomas, interviewed by phone from Washington, where he is now
Newsweek bureau chief. ''They were friends, they reacted against each other,
they shared a common bond of service. The group was greater than the sum of its
parts.''

''It's certainly not good to have an elite that is dictating what America's role
in the world should be,'' Mr. Isaacson said. But the subjects of the book, Mr.
Thomas points out, also brought with them an enviable sense of principle and
bipartisanship. ''Today's foreign policy making,'' he said, ''makes you
nostalgic for this group.''     - Mark A. Uhlig

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Walter Isaacson and Evan Thomas (Ted Thai)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ILLEGAL ALIENS HOPING TO CLAIM THEIR DREAMS

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2335 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Nov. 1


When the dreaded ''migras,'' the immigration police, picked up Marcelino Castro
a few years ago in suburban Conroe, he thought the game was finally over.

So when the immigration police went after another Mexican, Mr. Castro escaped.
Now he is preparing to emerge from the legal twilight zone in which he has lived
since floating across the Rio Grande on an inner tube eight Octobers ago.

Mr. Castro, born of Mexican peasants 28 years ago in the impoverished town of
Zacatepec, is one of the uncounted millions of illegal aliens who believe they
are eligible for amnesty because of the new immigration bill.

'My Dreams Coming True'

Under the legislation, those who can prove they have lived in the United States
since before Jan. 1, 1982, may claim permanent legal residency and ultimately
American citizenship.

''At first they said the bill would not pass, but then they said the President
would sign it and I felt all my dreams were coming true,'' Mr. Castro said. And
so it is for the others.  Their stories are as diverse as America. Some entered
this country swimming naked through the Rio Grande, others with tickets aboard
jet liners. They are laborers, classical pianists, secretaries, dishwashers,
restaurant owners, high school students.

Shadow Economy and Culture

They come from almost every conceivable country - Mexico, El Salvador, Japan,
Vietnam, Korea, Haiti, Ethiopia, Iran, Poland, New Zealand. For all their
cultural differences, they have shared a semi-secret life in their chosen land,
forming a kind of shadow economy and culture in which any day could end in
arrest and deportation.

The ''illegals,'' elated but wary, are now emerging, thinking perhaps of the day
they may become citizens. Here are some of their stories.

For One, No More Dishes

Laurence Barrera went to New York illegally in 1978 as a 19-year-old to escape,
he says, the horrors of civil war in his native El Salvador. He started as a
dishwasher in a Manhattan restaurant, and today, along with his wife, parents,
brothers and sisters who have joined him since, owns a restaurant and a
baby-furniture store. They all live in Washington Heights.

The Barreras are among the 100,000 undocumented Central Americans, mostly
Salvadorans, who the Inter-Religious Task Force on Central America estimates
live in the New York City area.

Mr. Barrera's entry into the United States was as bumpy as any illegal alien's.
He was immediately arrested when he alighted at Kennedy Airport with a
companion. The pair agreed to depart by way of Mexico, where they escaped
Mexican authorities and worked their way up to the American border, slipping in
unnoticed at Laredo, Tex. Then, back to New York.

He was arrested again two years later when he went to Kennedy Airport to greet
his father, two brothers and other relatives who had slipped in through
California with the help of a ''coyote'' - a person who guides aliens into the
United States for money.

''I went to pick them up, and didn't see that they had already been
handcuffed,'' he recalled. ''I yelled 'padre' and they took me too.'' But the
family managed to get permission to remain temporarily in the United States
while a lawyer filed a claim for political asylum, which has not been granted.
But now most of the family members believe they are eligible for amnesty.

Like many of the illegal aliens, they are industrious. In eight years, Mr.
Barrera alone has saved $60,000, and he says he paid taxes on all his earnings,
including interest on savings.

His elation over amnesty is tinged with regret for those who fail to qualify.
''Let's be honest,'' he said. ''It's going to be good for me because I came
before 1982. But what happens to the people who have to go? We have a guy
working with us. He came last year. How am I going to say to him, 'I don't need
you any more.' It's not fair.'' Two From Vietnam 'Want to Belong Here' Lan Thiet
Lu came to California in 1977 on a three-month tourist visa, never intending to
leave when it expired. She lives with her 18-year-old son, Michael Joseph Lee,
in a $300-a-month one-bedroom apartment in a rundown section of Hollywood
inhabited mainly by Mexican and Armenian immigrants.

Miss Lu, divorced from her husband, who also lives illegally with a daughter in
the Los Angeles area, was born in North Vietnam. She migrated south during the
war, going with her family to Saigon, where she worked for the American military
forces as a secretary, and later wound up in Hong Kong.

Now 43 years old, she remains confident about her decision to migrate to the
United States illegally. ''I feel I belong here,'' she said. ''I want to belong
here, especially because I don't have my country any more.''

She has supported herself with secretarial jobs and for a time sold Mary Kay
cosmetics door to door. She conceded that she avoided applying for better-paying
work out of fear her illegal status would be detected.

For her Vietnamese-born son, Michael, growing up in legal limbo has been
painful. He looks the part of southern California teen-ager in his punk-style
crewcut and Reebok-style sneakers, admires the filmmakers Steven Spielberg and
George Lucas and has an interest in special-effects cinematography.

''I just have never felt as free as the other students,'' said Michael, a senior
at Hollywood High School. ''I've always had something to hide. When my friends
ask me where I was born I have to debate in my head whether I should tell them
Vietnam or Honolulu. I've worried that they might tell immigration and I would
be deported. I've told them the truth - I just didn't say that I was here
illegally. Now I'm free. I don't have to hide.'' Japanese Pianist Hopes To Be
Himself Again Shunsuke Kurakata, who is 39, stopped in San Francisco on a
tourist visa in 1974 on his way home to Japan from musical studies in Europe.

He has lived in San Francisco ever since, teaching piano privately, playing with
a symphony orchestra, even getting reviewed favorably in the local newspapers
for his interpretations of Beethoven, Messiaen, Takemitsu and Frank Zappa. Few
have known that the wiry, bearded musician is an illegal alien who has not seen
his elderly parents in Tokyo for 15 years because he would not be allowed back
in the United States.

''I could never appear as myself,'' he said of the mask he has hidden behind.
''I've always been careful to drive carefully. I don't do anything to break the
law. In a subconscious way, I think about it a lot. It never leaves you alone.''

Like many illegal aliens, he made futile efforts to legalize his status over the
years. The American girlfriend of a roommate offered to marry him if he paid the
man's rent for six months.

''We even went through the blood tests, but then I got an offer from the
symphony,'' he said. ''Getting a job seemed like a better opportunity to get a
green card.'' That document permits immigrants to work legally.

Then he paid $2,000 to a lawyer to apply for the green card, but the lawyer
cheated him, he said: ''I never saw the money again. I couldn't do anything
about it because I was illegal.'' Now he looks forward to the freedom that legal
status will give him. ''I can go anywhere to play. I can join the union whether
I'd like to or not and I can be more open in my personal relationships.''

He has not decided if he will seek American citizenship. ''I just don't know
yet,'' he said. ''It's not all real yet.'' Salvadoran Couple Find Lower Jobs,
Better Life Pedro Carlos Melendez and his wife, Clara, were comparatively middle
class in El Salvador, he teaching middle school, she operating her own grain
distribution business. Even so, they find life better in Houston doing menial
labor, cleaning buildings at the Texas Medical Center.

''Our jobs are on a lower level,'' Mrs. Melendez said in Spanish. ''But we have
a higher standard of living. We think we can give our children a better
education and upbringing than we could there.''

The Melendezes came in 1978, across the porous border at Laredo, Tex. They live
in a very modest but immaculate apartment near the medical center. Their three
children, Mercedes, 12, Pedro Carlos, 9, and Carla, 7, all go to public school.
Like many of the illegals, their family is part American; little Carla, born in
this country, is an American citizen.

Mrs. Melendez studies English three times a week and hopes, with amnesty, to get
a better job. She fears, however, that a deception will complicate her claim to
amnesty. She has been working under an assumed name since she came to Houston.
It was probably unnecessary, she feels now, because employers never cared
whether she was legal.

''You gave them your application and they wrote down a Social Security number,''
she said. ''You didn't know what it was. They all do that.'' The new immigration
legislation would for the first time bar employers from hiring illegal aliens.

In any case, she is optimistic that her problem can be ironed out and soon the
family will be ''totally free, able to live without thinking about being taken
away at any moment.'' 'Bot Peson' and Family Count Their Blessings The thousands
of impoverished Haitians who have made their way to Miami seem less secretive
than most illegals.

Aidieu Daniel, an amiable, slightly paunchy man of 40 is no exception. He says
he left his village of St. Louis in northwestern Haiti in 1981, arriving in
Florida after eight scorching days in a tiny makeshift boat, undetected by
immigration officers. His wife, Marie, who is 37, joined him two years ago, also
by boat, followed by their sons Adien, 13, and Patrick, 7.

Mr. Daniel proudly calls himself a ''bot peson,'' Creole for boat person. In
five years, he has learned only a little English.

The Daniels live in a two-bedroom apartment that rents for $400 a month in
''Little Haiti,'' a 300-block area near Miami's inner city. On Mr. Daniel's
salary of $177 a week in a box factory, they do fairly well for Miami Haitians:
color television, 1974 Chevrolet. On a recent evening as the Daniels sat at the
kitchen table of their steamy apartment, two Bibles - one in Creole, the other
in French - lay nearby. ''God has been very kind to me,'' Mr. Daniel said.
''When I left I never knew when my family would be together again.''

Though his wife and children came after the Jan. 1, 1982, cutoff date, Mr.
Daniel believes they also will be allowed to stay. Mrs. Daniel, who was briefly
detained by the immigration authorities last year, has requested political
asylum; there has been no response yet. She hopes to get work as a seamstress
when her status is legal. Amnesty means they will be able to visit family in
Haiti again and return without sneaking back to Miami in a leaky boat.

''I am a fortunate man,'' Mr. Daniel said. For Polish Baby Sitter, A Return to
Studies Sophie Siedlezka, now 27 years old, came to Chicago from Warsaw in 1981,
ostensibly to do research for her master's degree for two months. She is glad
that she has not left the United States. Her first days in America were tense;
she watched as immigration officers round up Poles at a delicatessen in a Polish
neighborhood on Chicago's northwest side.

But three months after she arrived, Poland declared martial law, and the Reagan
Administration pledged not to deport Poles. She relaxed then. ''Martial law was
a good thing for me,'' said Miss Siedlezka, who had been studying statistics and
planning. But her reasons for emigrating were entirely economic. ''I was a
student with no future,'' she said, with little prospect of finding work in her
field of public administration.

Thus far, there has been scant work in Chicago. She said she survives by
baby-sitting and waiting tables in a bar and restaurant. After amnesty, she
hopes to return to school, improve her English, and get better work. ''If I can
get papers from amnesty, I want to go to school,'' she said.

''And I'm not going to work as a baby sitter or bartender anymore.'' A Mexican
Wants To Own a Business Marcelino Castro can remember the date, Oct. 2, 1978, he
left his home town deep in southern Mexico. At the age of 20, he saw little
future in picking cotton and harvesting rice.

So with nothing but a small bag and 5,000 pesos, then worth about $225, he
boarded a bus for Mexico City, 250 miles to the northwest. From there he took
another bus to Reynosa, on the Texas border. He made a $100 down payment to the
''coyotes'' who would guide him across the river and drive him to the northern
suburbs of Houston, where he had a friend. The very next day, he had a job at a
subminimum wage of $2 an hour loading mulch and soil at a nursery in Conroe,
Tex.

Marcelino Castro's eight-year journey from Mexican ''wetback'' to American had
begun.

Like most in his position, he lived on the edge, somehow working without a
proper Social Security card, driving without a license, getting by with a
''universal identification'' card he bought for $2 at a local supermarket.

Ultimately, he got a job with David Heintz, an electrical contractor, for whom
he still works, servicing vehicles and assisting electricians. Mr. Castro
impressed his employers. He could fix anything, Mr. Heintz said, and unlike many
Americans, he was eager and uncomplaining: ''He was willing to do everything.''

So impressed was Mr. Heintz that some months ago he approached Charles Foster, a
leading Houston immigration lawyer, to see about gaining legal status for Mr.
Castro. The lawyer said there was no chance, but then came the promise of
amnesty.

Mr. Castro lives alone in half a small house he rents for $280 a month and
drives a 1976 Chevrolet Impala. He hopes to get a driver's license soon. He has
learned a passable version of English and exhibits a certain fatalism about his
life. ''Ni modo,'' he says, roughly ''what could I do?'' when describing his
troubles.

Now he wants to start his own business and become an American citizen. He
already owns two color television sets and a cordless telephone and is a fervent
Dallas Cowboys fan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of illegal aliens (NYT/Keith Meyers; Terrence McCarthy; F.
Carter Smith and Susan Greenwood)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TUPAMAROS OF URUGRAY: THE MYSTIQUE SURVIVES

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1162 words

DATELINE: MONTEVIDEO, Uruguay


The first among them are on the far side of middle age now, quiet men who recall
the years in jail and the guerrilla underground in near monotones, their
mystique enveloping them like comfortable old sweaters.

They are the survivors of the Tupamaros, the urban guerrilla organization that
President Julio Maria Sanguinetti has said was an ''accident'' in Uruguayan
life, born of the ''radicalization of a typical bourgeois sector -
pseudo-intellectual - that one day said let's have a revolution here.''

In response to that, the President contends, came the years of repression by
military forces unprepared for political warfare.

The Tupamaros challenge that assertion. Today, from their well-marked
headquarters near downtown Montevideo, they seek to justify their role in the
violence of the past and to find a political space for themselves in the
democracy that returned to Uruguay with the inauguration of Mr. Sanguinetti in
March 1985.

''Our violence was a reply to fascism,'' said Jose Mujica Cordano, the secretary
general of the Tupamaros, contending that ''fascism in Uruguay did not begin
just with the military coup of 1973, but years before, even when there was still
a government with a constitution and parliament.''

Freed Under Amnesty

Mr. Mujica, a rumpled man with an expanding waistline, a thick mustache and
bushy hair streaked with gray, is 52 years old. He spent 15 years in prison
during four periods, escaping twice. His last stretch in prison, 13 years, ended
with the amnesty that was declared soon after Mr. Sanguinetti took office.

He had been one of nine top Tupamaros who, after their capture, were constantly
rotated among military barracks in the interior of the country, their
whereabouts a secret. Among other things, this limited their ability to organize
jailbreaks. Tupamaros and their sympathizers referred to the nine as
''hostages.''

The Tupamaros say that about 3,000 of their adherents served time in prison over
more than two decades and that some 300 died, in battles or in prison, or
disappeared. About 50 members of the security forces died in the war with the
Tupamaros.

It is generally accepted that the Tupamaros were subjected to harsh treatment in
prison, with the use of torture routine. Mr. Mujica said that out of that
emerged ''a very big mystique'' that is helping the Tupamaros rejuvenate an
organization whose roots go back more than 25 years.

Most Are Under 25

Another source of the Tupamaros' mystique is the Costa-Gavras film ''State of
Siege,'' based on the guerrilla group's kidnapping and murder of an American
police adviser, Dan Mitrione, in 1970, an action they have not discussed since
coming into the light of legality.

Luis Rosadilla, the 32-year-old information secretary for the Tupamaros, himself
a veteran of eight years in prison, said that despite the graying image of the
leadership, more than half of the current Tupamaro militants are less than 25
years old.

An open convention called by the Tupamaros last December attracted about 1,000
people, thought to constitute the total number of members and serious
sympathizers.

The Tupamaros concede that their efforts to become part of the political scene
are going slowly. Their request to join the Broad Front, the leftist political
coalition, which holds 20 percent of the seats in Parliament, was rejected
because of opposition from the small Christian Democratic Party, the least
leftist group in the Broad Front.

Mr. Rosadilla said the Tupamaros had encountered no police or military
repression in their efforts to operate openly but had encountered ''the type of
repression that comes from economic power.'' He complained, for instance, that
the main newspapers in Uruguay would not accept paid political advertisements
from the Tupamaros.

Group Denies Bombings

Some Uruguayans, in and out of government, express doubts that the Tupamaros
have completely abandoned the idea of armed insurrection. Scattered bombings
have occurred in recent months, contributing to those doubts, but the Tupamaros
have denied any part in such actions.

''We are politicians first, not people who favor violence or terrorism,'' Mr.
Mujica said. ''We are not giving up our final goal, which is socialism,'' he
added. ''But we are not going to complicate life in a way that makes democratic
liberty unsustainable.''

Mr. Mujica also acknowledged that the Tupamaros are going through an ''internal
reorganization'' that reflects the varied experiences of the members during the
past dozen years as well as what he termed ''the crisis all over the world in
the traditional thinking of the left.''

Some Tupamaros, he said, have retured from exile in Western Europe, where they
were influenced by social democratic thinking. Others are marked by the long
years of prison isolation. Still others, he said, are returning to Uruguay from
Central America, where they were influenced by the Sandinistas and the
Salvadoran guerrillas, both of whom believe in leadership by an all-powerful
revolutionary vanguard.

Guerara Arouses Interest

One of the ideas being debated, he said, is whether to ''go back to Che,'' a
reference to the Argentine-born Che Guevara, who helped Fidel Castro come to
power in Cuba, then died trying to organize a peasant-based revolution in
Bolivia.

This kind of comment is another of the elements that make some Uruguayans
nervous about Tupamaro intentions, but Mr. Mujica said the Tupamaros' current
interest in Mr. Guevara had more to do with his ''humanism and permanent
values'' than with his views of guerrilla warfare.

The best known of the Tupamaros, Raul Sendic, was quoted in a recent interview
from Switzerland with the Buenos Aires magazine El Porteno as having said that
the Tupamaros did not consider themselves definitively defeated.

He equated their losses to the setback that Mr. Castro suffered in his attempt
to take over the Moncada Barracks in Havana in 1953 and the many battles the
Vietcong lost in South Vietnam. In neither case, he said, did the losses turn
out to be strategic ones.

Expected to Return

Mr. Sendic, who was freed from prison at the same time as Mr. Mujica, has spent
most of the past year abroad, but is expected back in Uruguay at the end of
November, after a visit to Nicaragua.

Recent photographs of Mr. Sendic, who is thought to be 61, show a wiry man with
white hair, a wrinkled brow and chin whiskers. The whiskers cover the scars left
by a bullet that passed through both cheeks and took out part of his tongue the
night Mr. Sendic was captured. A journalist who reached the downtown Montevideo
apartment minutes after the shootout on Aug. 31, 1972, recalls seeing a small
piece of Mr. Sendic's tongue sticking to the door frame.

Surgery was done last year in Cuba in an attempt to reconstruct the tongue, but
Mr. Mujica said Mr. Sendic continues to have difficulty speaking.

Despite that, Mr. Mujica said the Tupamaro leader was ''still strong.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Luis Rosadila; Photo of Jose Mujica; Photo of Tupamaros
headquarters (NYT/Milton Cea)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Team Inspects A Site in Vietnam

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 172 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 2


United States officials investigating American servicemen listed as missing in
action in the Vietnam War have inspected a site in northern Vietnam where an
American warplane might have crashed, officials said today.

Lieut. Col. Joe Harvey, head of the Hawaii-based Joint Casualty Resolution
Center and leader of a delegation that met with Vietnamese officials last week,
said the possible crash site is a few miles outside of Haiphong.

''We did not see much, just a crater,'' Colonel Harvey said. ''The Vietnamese
had correlated the site with one of the M.I.A. case files that we presented
earlier and we will have to see if the correlation is correct.''

United States officials have proposed the excavation of several crash sites in
the Hanoi-Haiphong corridor but have failed to reach an agreement on the issue
in meetings this year with Vietnamese officials.

During last week's session, Vietnamese authorities said they will turn over the
possible remains of three American servicemen in coming weeks, Colonel Harvey
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

YANKS RETAKE GUADALCANAL, WITH TOOLS OF PEACE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1102 words

DATELINE: HONIARA, Solomon Islands


The grassy hills and the cool coconut groves are quiet now. There are few
reminders that here, in 1942, Americans fought one of the fiercest battles of
the Pacific war. The battle took its name from the island: Guadalcanal.

To the United States, it was a showdown over an airstrip. Seizing the strip
meant stopping the southward advance of the Japanese.

But to the Solomon Islanders, the victory was more than a historical marker. The
Americans, they say, saved their world.

''Before my father died,'' said Fred Kona, who was 9 years old when the war
ended, ''he said to me: Remember the Americans. They came to die for us.''

This fall, for the first time in more than 40 years, the Yanks came back to
Guadalcanal. They were Navy Seabees sent to help a poor country rebuild after a
cyclone.

'People Began to Crowd Around'

The Seabees, most of whom grew up in the Vietnam years and were unsure about how
an American in uniform would be received in a small nation far from home, were
overwhelmed by their reception.

''As our ship pulled into port, people began to crowd around,'' said Lieut.
Vincent Racanelli, 26 years old, of West Babylon, L.I., the officer in charge.

''It took us 10 hours to offload,'' he said, ''and all of that time the people
were watching, clapping, as we brought out pieces of equipment.''

Russel Robison, who comes from Oregon, said, ''It was weird, getting off that
ship and seeing the people run into the streets cheering.''

''They think it's great we're here,'' said Lance Voels, who is from South
Dakota. ''They'll do anything for us.''

Honorary Members of Golf Club

In the first month that the Seabee detail, part of the California-based Naval
Mobile Construction Battalion Three, was on Guadalcanal and the nearby island of
Malaita, they were made honorary members of a golf club and were sought after
for basketball, volleyball and soccer matches. There have been invitations to
dinner, and petitions from people with personal projects to suggest.

On work sites - under the same searing sun other Seabees fell four decades ago
as they raced to complete roads and bridges and airfields in the midst of war -
village children come out to offer fresh coconuts.

In return, they get (what else?) chocolate bars.

Cleve Williams, from Rahway, N.J., said the enthusiasm never let up.

''When you go down the street in uniform, waving to the kids, it's like a
parade,'' he said. ''I feel like I'm running for mayor.''

Part of Solomons' History

The Seabees are a big part of Solomon Islands history, just as the islands are
part of theirs.

Honiara, the capital of the eight-year-old nation, was originally a largely
Seabee-built American headquarters. Before the war, the administrative center of
the British colony had been on Tulagi, across what became known as Iron Bottom
Sound because of the many ships and planes that had gone down there.

Henderson Field, the airstrip that Americans fought for, is now the country's
international airport. The first Seabee-built control tower is still standing,
though no longer used.

Seabees built most of the island's roads, its major bridges and its largest
hospital (still known unofficially as No. 9, its wartime designation).

''It's exciting to go to a place where our history started,'' Lieutenant
Racanelli said as he took a visitor to a work site. Along the road, children
waved and shouted: ''Army! Army!''

''It's our green uniforms,'' the lieutenant explained.

Cyclone Struck in May

The Seabee detail on Guadalcanal is officially on a routine training exercise.
But the exercise is taking place here, Navy spokesmen say, because the Solomon
Islands badly needed help.

In May, Cyclone Namu struck here, bringing torrential rains that tore out
sections of partly deforested mountains, sending tons of earth, water and
gigantic hardwood tree trunks racing into the river valleys that open to the
sea.

Bridges snapped, houses were swept away, water systems became contaminated.
Local officials say they believe the country's development may have been set
back 10 years.

The Seabees under Lieutenant Racanelli and Senior Chief Petty Officer Vicente
Aspuria, a career Navy man born in the Philippines, are involved not only in
reconstructing but also in re-engineering, where better water or road systems
are needed.

The Seabee engineers have studied water flows and adjusted both stream beds and
the height of bridges to better withstand emergencies. Technology appropriate to
the maintenance capacities of the country, one of the poorest in the Pacific, is
being used.

More Malaria Is Expected

The Americans brought along their own heavy equipment. The Solomon Islands
Government is supplying additional labor and the materials needed to rebuild.
Many of these are low-cost local materials such as rocks or coral gravel.

The Seabees' physician, Dr. James Powers, has been making the rounds of island
clinics and hospitals, where thousands of new malaria cases are expected to
follow the effects of the cyclone.

American diplomats in the region and Solomon Islands Government officials say
they have been pleased with the success of the experiment.

The United States has been concerned with what officials see as increasing
Soviet diplomatic and economic activity in the South and Western Pacific.
American aid to the region is low. Japan is a larger donor.

''We should be doing more of this,'' an American diplomat said.

'A Great Event'

In the Solomon Islands, friendship for the United States had been eroded
recently by incidents involving American tuna vessels, which officials say have
been depleting one of the country's few resources while refusing to pay fees to
fish in its water.

''When the Seabees came, it was a great event,'' Deputy Prime Minister Ezekiel
Alebua said in an interview. ''People are now seeing Americans helping us.

''I would like to see the Seabees come back again, perhaps at a later date, and
set up camps in the villages,'' he said, adding that the Peace Corps was already
engaged in much-needed community development work. ''I would like to see more
Americans and Solomon Islanders working side by side.''

Samuel Saki, who at 59 is one of the few Guadalcanal war veterans still alive -
life expectancy here is in the mid-50's - took a reporter to the scenes of
battle around Henderson Field and recalled how he had escaped from a Japanese
forced-labor gang and had gone to work as a scout for the American Marines at
the age of 15.

''I am happy to see the Americans here again,'' he said, adding, ''Why didn't
they come back before?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of children helping Navy Seabees strengthen bridge (NYT/Barbara
Crossette)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 5, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FILM DEATHS WITNESS TESTIFIES SAFETY WAS IGNORED

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 4


A camera operator testified today that John Landis, director of ''Twilight Zone:
The Movie,'' was a tyrannical film maker who felt no responsibility for the
people he used in a ''very dangerous'' war scene that killed the actor Vic
Morrow and two children.

''While I was there, I had no sense whatsoever that the people who were running
the operation had any sense of care or sense of responsibility for anyone
involved, whether it be actors, crew, bystanders,'' the cameraman, Michael
Scott, testified.

Mr. Scott was one of six camera operators who filmed a Vietnam War scene in
which a helicopter, crippled by a special effects explosion, fell on top of Mr.
Morrow, 53 years old, Renee Chen, 6, and Myca Dinh Lee, 7, on July 23, 1982 in a
rural area of Los Angeles County. #5 Face Manslaughter Charges Mr. Landis and
four associates were later indicted on charges of involuntary manslaughter in
the three deaths and are on trial in Superior Court.

Mr. Scott, who did not testify in a county grand jury investigation of the
accident or at the defendants' preliminary hearing, said Mr. Landis was a
''yeller and screamer'' on the ''Twilight Zone'' movie set.

On more than 50 occasions, Mr. Landis gave orders to his crew over a
walkie-talkie in such a loud voice that his words became distorted, Mr. Scott
said.

''He was giving orders - things like 'No, no! This is going too slow' or 'That's
not the right place!' - nuts-and-bolts type orders,'' Mr. Scott testified.

Mr. Scott, who filmed the fatal scene from on top of a cliff, said he thought it
would be ''very dangerous'' because it had explosions.

''Whenever you have explosions there is danger involved,'' the cameraman
testified. ''This one had lots of explosions, therefore the danger was
increased. Whenever you work around a helicopter, there is danger involved.''

''In this case,'' he continued, ''you had explosions and a helicopter, plus the
fact that you had actors working very close to the helicopter and to the
explosions,'' he said. ''All of that increases, in my opinion, the danger.''

'A Very Dangerous Scene'

''Because of all this, I felt it was a very dangerous scene with all those
variables, all those potential hazards there,'' Mr. Scott said.

Mr. Scott testified outside the presence of the jury because defense lawyers
were trying to keep parts of his testimony from being introduced as evidence at
the trial. Judge Roger Boren later ruled that Mr. Scott could testify before the
jury, but with some undisclosed restrictions.

In another key ruling, the judge said the prosecution could introduce evidence
that Mr. Landis allowed the use of live ammunition on the set in filming another
scene. The prosecution contends that the evidence ''shows a continuing pattern
of reckless conduct'' on the part of the director.

Mr. Scott said he believed Mr. Landis had acted ''in an irresponsible'' manner
for purportedly rushing the fatal scene, and the cameraman said that he had also
feared for his own safety.

The cameraman testified that he had expressed his concerns to an unidentified
special-effects expert that a fireball from an explosion could reach his
position on top of the cliff.

''You're going to be up there?'' he quoted the special-effects employee as
saying. ''Well, I hope your insurance is paid up.'' Then, Mr. Scott said, ''He
assured me the fireball would indeed reach that height and it did.''

Outside court, Mr. Scott said he was still regularly employed in the
motion-picture industry and that he had felt no industry pressure resulting from
his testimony against the defendants.

The prosecutor, Lea Purwin D'Agostino, has said she believes that many of the
witnesses for the prosecution are being ''blackballed'' by Hollywood in
retaliation for their testimony against the defendants.

On trial in addition to Mr. Landis are George Folsey Jr., the associate
producer; Dan Allingham, the unit production manager; Paul Stewart, the special
effects coordinator, and Dorcey Wingo, the helicopter pilot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 6, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LEGAL ADVISER FOR HASENFUS HINTS TRIAL OBSERVER MAY WIN RELEASE

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 408 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Nov. 5


Griffin Bell, a legal adviser to the family of Eugene Hasenfus, the captured air
freight handler, hinted today that the Rev. Joseph Lowery of the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference might be able to play a role in gaining Mr.
Hasenfus's release.

Mr. Lowery is here to observe the Hasenfus trial at the invitation of the
Nicaraguan Government. In an interview today, he said he planned to meet with
''all the principals in the case,'' including Minister of Justice Rodrigo Reyes,
who is the chief prosecutor.

'I will not ask for a pardon,'' Mr. Lowery said. ''I will only ask that justice
be tempered with mercy.''

''I want to use this tragedy to say to the American people that our policy
toward Central America is disastrous,'' Mr. Lowery said. ''We are seeing a
replay of Vietnam.''

Two Met in Atlanta

Mr. Bell told reporters that he met with Mr. Lowery last week in Atlanta, where
they both live, and that he had breakfast with one of Mr. Lowery's aides in
Managua today.

Mr. Hasenfus was the sole survivor when the plane in which he was traveling was
shot down over southern Nicaragua Oct. 5. In testimony Tuesday, he admitted that
he had been helping to smuggle weapons to rebels backed by the United States.
But he said he had no knowledge that the shipments were overseen by or connected
to the United States Government.

Mr. Bell, who was Attorney General during the Carter Administration, said Mr.
Lowery had sponsored a reception for President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of
Nicaragua in Atlanta and described him as ''a friend of this Government.''

Mr. Bell said he had not directly asked Mr. Lowery to seek a pardon for Mr.
Hasenfus, who is expected to be found guilty and sentenced soon.

''I don't want to contaminate him and have him be accused of being an agent of,
say, Reagan,'' Mr. Bell said of Mr. Lowery. President Ortega has charged that
Mr. Bell is being paid by the United States Government, which he has denied.

Mr. Bell said he had no serious complaints about the conduct of the trial, with
one exception. ''The Government was wrong in not letting Mr. Hasenfus talk to an
American lawyer of his choice,'' he said.

Mr. Bell praised the judge for refusing to admit as evidence a video tape of a
television interview that Mr. Hasenfus gave soon after his capture. He said the
television correspondent, Mike Wallace of CBS News, had asked ''leading
questions trying to connect the defendant to the C.I.A.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 6, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LAST MARATHONER: FIRST-CLASS SPIRIT

BYLINE: By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 23, Column 5; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


Three days after 19,412 runners started and finished the New York City Marathon,
one of the earliest starters was discovered to be still on the course yesterday,
making laborious but inexorable progress toward the finish line he expects to
reach this morning.

Bob Wieland, a 40-year-old who lost his legs in Vietnam and has been making his
way on his hands, started the race at 8:30 A.M. Sunday as part of a special
contingent of 49 handicapped marathoners sponsored by the Achilles Track Club.

He plans to finish this morning at a ceremony arranged by the race director,
Fred Lebow, who persuaded Wieland to interrupt his day's progress at 5 P.M.
yesterday just a couple of miles from the finish line in Central Park and to
spend the night at a hotel.

''Technically I could have finished but it would have been late,'' Wieland said,
explaining that Lebow wanted him to delay his finish until this morning so he
could arrange publicity for the completion of his remarkable achievement.

Until he learned that Wieland was still on the course yesterday, Lebow had
assumed that the last of the Achilles marathoners had finished the race at 11:26
P.M. Sunday, when Aaron Shorr, a freelance writer, finally made it to the line.
''I thought he gave up,'' Lebow said.  Wieland, it turns out, does not give up.

''It would be a waste of energy,'' he explained last night.

Wieland, a former lacrosse player for the University of Wisconsin who lost his
legs when he stepped on a live shell while serving as a combat medic in Vietnam
in 1969, says he has logged more than 4,000 miles by walking with his hands but
had never attempted a formal marathon.

Wearing thick, padded gloves that protect his hands and add a few inches to the
length of his arms, Wieland makes his way by swinging his torso, which is
protected by a pair of heavy leather chaps, through his arms. The makeshift gait
allows him to cover a mile in an hour or so.

Wieland describes himself as a former record-holder in the bench press. Because
of the heavy strain on his arms, he finds he must rest for from 5 to 20 minutes
every hour. He removes the gloves and chaps and reclines on a small trampoline
that is carried in an accompanying car. Because he races in what is essentially
a sitting position, during the rest breaks he jounces on the trampoline and
stands on his head to get the blood flowing.

In addition to his hourly rests, Wieland says he took a few long ''cat naps'' in
the car during the first two days and slept for a few hours in a hotel room late
Monday night after making it to within a couple of blocks of the Queensboro
Bridge.

''I just had to get some sleep,'' he said, ''I was falling asleep on the road.''

Wieland, who resumed his race at the bridge Tuesday morning, made it to just
beyond the Willis Avenue Bridge in the Bronx before breaking off again early
yesterday to sleep in the car. Returning to the course a few hours later, he was
well into Central Park when Lebow persuaded him to postpone his final assault
last evening.

In addition to his slow gait and the rest periods, Wieland's progress has been
further impeded by pedestrians struck by the sight of a double amputee wearing
an official marathon number, C783, making his way on the sidewalks parallel to
the race course.

''People come up and talk to me and wish me well,'' he said, explaining that he
always stops to chat. ''I don't want to be rude,'' he said.

One such interruption took a bit longer than usual yesterday afternoon when two
buses carrying handicapped children passed Wieland in Central Park and pulled to
a stop. When the group's leaders realized who Wieland was and what he was doing,
they asked him to speak to the children. Wieland, hoisted onto the buses on the
special wheelchair lifts, gave what he describes as his usual ''strive for
success'' talks, stressing the need to set goals and objectives in overcoming
obstacles and emphasizing the value of his own faith as ''a born-again
Christian.''

Lebow, who overheard the talks, said he had never seen such ''emotional uplift''
as he had seen in the eyes of the handicapped youngsters.

Wieland, who works in the physical education department at California State
University-Los Angeles, is used to that sort of thing.

And even though it is his first, for Wieland, who says he plans to enter the Los
Angeles Marathon next year, the 26 miles 385 yards of the New York City Marathon
is a piece of cake.

Last year he completed a 2,784-mile ''Walk for Hunger'' across the United
States. It took him three and a half years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bob Wieland (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 6, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 905 words


RECKLESS DISREGARD. Westmoreland v. CBS et al.; Sharon v. Time. By Renata Adler.
243 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.

''RECKLESS DISREGARD'' is, of course, Renata Adler's polemical analysis of two
extraordinary libel suits that were tried almost concurrently in the same
Manhattan courthouse in the winter of 1984: the one brought by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland against CBS et al. for portraying him in a television documentary
as the leader of a ''conspiracy at the highest level'' to underestimate enemy
troop strength in Vietnam; the other brought against Time magazine by the
Israeli general, Ariel Sharon, for accusing him of having discussed with
Lebanese Christian leaders the need to take revenge for the assassination of
President Bashir Gemayel just before the Phalangist massacre of Palestinians in
the refugee camps of Sabra and Shatila in Lebanon.

According to Ms. Adler: ''The lore'' has had it ''that the Sharon case ended in
a kind of moral victory for Sharon'' but that Time's position ''had been
vindicated, in some way.'' The ''lore'' also has ''had it that the Westmoreland
case ended in an absolute rout of Westmoreland, in that he was so daunted by the
testimony of two witnesses, General Joseph McChristian and Colonel Gains
Hawkins, that he abandoned what he had come to realize was a hopeless case.''

In reality, Ms. Adler suggests, Mr. Sharon won more than a moral victory because
despite the jury's verdict that Time was not guilty of malice but only ''acted
negligently and carelessly in reporting and verifying the information which
ultimately found its way into the published paragraph of interest in this
case,'' there actually was no basis for Time's story.

In reality, she asserts, General Westmoreland should have been way ahead when he
decided to accept a settlement. It was General McChristian and Colonel Hawkins
who should have been put to rout. What distorted both cases in the public mind
was a combination of aggression amounting to overkill brought to the two cases
by the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine & Moore, and a solidarity on the
part of the media in what the author portrays as a defense of their brethren on
misguided First Amendment principles.

Between the lore and the reality as Ms. Adler sees it is the substance of
''Reckless Disregard,'' most of which ran in a two-part New Yorker series last
June and is supplemented here only by a brief ''Coda'' responding to long
documents submitted to Ms. Adler and her various publishers by Cravath and CBS
in reaction to the original New Yorker pieces. (Time magazine also issued a
memorandum, but, as Ms. Adler writes, ''though it was no more impressive,'' its
''evident relative sincerity,'' among other things, persuaded her not to take
the trouble to rebut it.) As readers of the widely discussed New Yorker pieces
must know, the case Ms. Adler makes is exhaustively (and exhaustingly) detailed,
particularly in its examination of deposition transcripts made during pretrial
discovery proceedings. It is acutely reasoned to the point of wittiness, and
occasionally outright funny in its demolition of key witnesses for Time and CBS.

It is also sometimes numbing in the density of its arguments. A wholly atypical
sentence reads this way: ''With this answer, Halevy's presence (and his apparent
readiness to say anything at all, as if factual matters were a thing of barter,
or of haggling in a souk) were not so disorienting, Time's whole position fell,
perhaps not for the first time, to smithereens.'' The amount of time one spends
trying to make sense of this garbled (I think) sentence is a testimony to both
the difficulty of her prose and the respect it commands.

Is her case finally persuasive? So much depends on detail, nuance and context
that only a fool would pronounce her entirely right or wrong. True, Cravath and
CBS have pronounced her hugely wrong, and she has flicked aside their attack by
using it as further evidence of what she regards as their techniques of
underthink and overkill. But to any serious student of trial testimony, a
bottomless pit of details yawns here.

As for certain bigger issues raised by her book: in pronouncing CBS's case
''preposterous'' on the face of it because why would any general play down the
strength of his enemy, she seems to have missed the motive of bureaucratic
inertia - the one that might argue that the weaker the enemy's forces, the more
reason there is to stay in the field. Despite her valid point that ''these cases
also brought together, in an almost astrological configuration, four immense and
powerful constellations within the American system: the courts; the military;
the lawyers; and the press,'' one is left uneasy by her implicit and unexamined
equation of American involvement in Vietnam to Israel's invasion of Lebanon.
Finally, some readers will be concerned, as the author herself becomes in her
''Coda,'' about her criticism of press freedom at a time when, with the
composition of the new Supreme Court, the likelihood is that any changes in
media libel law ''would be only, and radically, for the worse.''

Still, whatever the merits of the case it presents, what ''Reckless Disregard''
most visibly dramatizes is the contest of a single reasonable mind against the
brute forces of institutional behavior. Even if Ms. Adler were only half-fair in
this depiction, one would still be strongly disposed to root for the mind to
win.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 13, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A book review on Nov. 6 of Renata Adler's ''Reckless Disregard'' misattributed
garbling in a sentence from page 208. The book's publisher, Alfred A. Knopf
Inc., reports that the density of the passage resulted from two typographical
errors in the published version. The sentence should have read: ''With this
answer, if Halevy's presence (and his apparent readiness to say anything at all,
as if factual matters were a thing of barter, or of haggling in a souk) were not
already so disorienting, Time's whole position fell, perhaps not for the first
time, to smithereens.''

GRAPHIC: photo of Renata Adler (Richard Avedon)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Step Back From Folly

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 780 words

DATELINE: TOLEDO, Spain


Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez will visit Cuba during his Latin American trip
starting this weekend, making him the first head of an allied government to go
to Havana.

The U.S. attempt to isolate Cuba is breaking down, although at the same time the
Castro regime has lost its allure for the European left. As one participant said
in a meeting here on Cuba, Western Europe and the U.S., if Cuba is still
anyone's model, it is of how not to run an economy.

Nonetheless, Reagan Administration policy in Central America continues to worry
America's friends. A major result of the new Senate majority, they hope, will be
to add restraints on the Washington-sponsored guerrilla war to bring down the
Sandinista Government in Nicaragua and possibly to revive attempts for a
negotiated settlement in Central America as a whole.

Experts agree there is virtually no chance of any move toward more normal
relations between Cuba and the U.S. in the foreseeable future, not only because
of Washington's stand but also because of Fidel Castro's anti-U.S. attitude. But
high-ranking Cubans show a serious interest in an accord on Central America.
Moscow has made clear that it is not going to subsidize Nicaragua as it does
Cuba, and the Cubans have told the Sandinistas that Havana cannot protect them.

There is room here for an escape from the dangerous slope the U.S. is sliding
down in the region. It is a commonplace to say that Nicaragua is not Vietnam,
but there are mounting parallels. Not the least important are the subterfuges
and downright lies the Administration has felt compelled to use to press its
campaign against the Sandinistas, undermining the most vital of all national
interests - the credibility of the U.S. Government in America's own eyes.

In Barbara Tuchman's book ''The March of Folly,'' four historical examples are
given of strong powers that brought disaster on themselves by dint of stubborn
refusal to face reality. She defines this folly as cases where there was ample
warning that policy was wrongheaded, where the facts were available, and where
an alternative, conciliatory policy was easily possible.

Mrs. Tuchman cites the fall of Troy; the behavior of the Renaissance Popes,
which brought on the Reformation and Europe's wars of religion; Britain's
intransigence and mismanagement of the American Colonies, and the U.S. war in
Vietnam.

U.S. policy on Nicaragua fits the case histories of stubborn folly to an uncanny
degree, including the failure to assess what really matters and what the dangers
are.

From time to time in its shifting, fuzzy statements on Central America and the
Caribbean, Washington has pointed out that the overriding U.S. concern in the
area must be the fate of Mexico. This is certainly correct, but the vast and
painful problems of Mexico are only exacerbated by troubles in Central America.
Overturning the Sandinistas is a diversion, not a palliative.

There are hopeful developments in the spread of democracy in Latin America,
which faces excruciating odds of debt and the social impact of trying to
overcome the economic crisis. The U.S. has a stake in the success and
stabilization of these democracies. They could have an impact on the sorry
Nicaraguan experiment in the longer term, but escalation of the war and
increased U.S. involvement would make things harder for them.

European allies are just as opposed to what the U.S. is doing. They don't speak
up much because they don't feel directly concerned, and they don't see the
Sandinistas or for that matter the Cubans as heroic any longer.

But like most Latin Americans, they see the best way to deal with these pockets
of Communism as letting them stew in their own juice until their inefficiencies
and internal pressures force them to change. Democratic Spain is particularly
interested in strengthening its influence in the Latin countries, and it has
capabilities that can be most helpful to the U.S. provided Washington is seen as
acting constructively, not aggressively.

Most Communist countries are moving now toward reforms in one way or another,
not because the U.S. has pushed them but because they are falling behind
economically. Cuba is an exception, stuck in its rut, and sooner or later it too
will have to move.

An activist U.S. policy is needed to reinforce the democracies. An activist
destabilizing policy in Nicaragua is counterproductive. President Reagan is
going to have to reconsider priorities and make some compromises to get along
with the strongly Democratic Congress in the next two years. A good place to
start is to back away from a Nicaraguan adventure before it becomes another
march of folly. The possibility is there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FATHER AND SON GET SPYING TERMS

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 819 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, Nov. 6


John A. Walker Jr., who confessed he ran one of the most damaging spy rings in
American history, was sentenced today to life in prison, with a Federal judge
recommending that he never be paroled.

The judge, Alexander Harvey 2d, said in Federal District Court that he felt
''contempt and disgust'' for Mr. Walker, who recruited his brother, son and best
friend into a spy ring that allowed the Soviet Union to decode more than one
million secret Navy messages.

Under a plea agreement worked out last year, Judge Harvey sentenced Mr. Walker's
son, Michael L. Walker, to 25 years in prison. Judge Harvey said he would
recommend that Michael Walker also serve his sentence without parole.

A judge's recommendations to the United States Parole Commission are influential
but not binding.

'Everything in My Power'

''You do not seem to appreciate the enormity of these crimes,'' said Judge
Harvey, speaking of the possibility of parole. ''I shall do everything in my
power to see this does not occur.''

Addressing the elder Mr. Walker, 49 years old, a retired Navy warrant officer,
Judge Harvey noted that other spies in history were motivated by ideology.

''Your motive was pure greed, and you were paid handsomely for your traitorous
acts,'' said Judge Harvey. ''I look in vain for some redeeming aspect of your
character.''

Mr. Walker did not speak to the court, as convicted defendants are permitted to
do before sentencing, and he showed no emotion as the judge said he would try to
block any parole.

Ex-Wife and Daughters in Court

Barbara Walker, John Walker's former wife, whose tip to Federal agents led to
the investigation that uncovered the spying ring, rushed to the front of the
courtroom after the proceeding with tears in her eyes.

Mr. Walker and his son had already been lead away. In the audience, Mrs. Walker
had sat with two of her daughters, Laura Walker Snyder and Cynthia Walker. A
third daughter, Margaret Walker, sat on the other side of the room, looking
straight ahead.

Mr. Walker will be eligible for parole in 10 years and Michael, 23, will be
eligible in eight and a third years. The son was a seaman aboard the aircraft
carrier Nimitz.

The Government has said that the espionage ring allowed the Soviet Union to read
secret communications from the time of the Vietnam War until the early 1980's.
This caused a wide variety of potential damage, revealing Navy tactics,
Government covert operations and command procedures for using and deploying
nuclear weapons, according to an affadavit filed in the case by Adm. William O.
Studeman, director of naval intelligence.

The Government said John Walker received about $1 million from the Soviet Union
for his spying activities.

Under an agreement worked out last year, Mr. Walker pleaded guilty to two counts
of espionage in exchange for the 25-year sentence for his son, who could have
been sentenced to life.

Mr. Walker also agreed to cooperate with the authorities fully in helping with
the assessment of damage caused by the spy ring and in testifying against his
friend, Jerry A. Whitworth, 47, a retired Navy petty officer who had been
arrested in California.

Whitworth Got 365 Years

Mr. Walker's testimony against Mr. Whitworth helped lead to his conviction on
espionage charges. He was sentenced to 365 years in prison and fined $410,000
for his role in the spy ring.

Mr. Walker has failed parts of several polygraph, or lie-detector, tests, about
key aspects of his spying activities, according to a presentencing memorandum
filed by the prosecutors. Among the questions on which the memorandum said there
was deception was the starting date for Mr. Walker's spying and the extent of
involvement by his brother, Arthur J. Walker, 51, a retired Navy lieutenant
commander who was convicted of espionage. He was sentenced to life in prison.

Robert McDonald, an assistant United States Attorney, acknowledged that the
Government had some reservations about Mr. Walker but said he was deemed to be
''truthful'' on the key issues under investigation.

Remorse Reported Lacking

Mr. Walker's attorney, Fred Warren Bennett, said his client had asked him to
express remorse to the court for his crimes. Mr. Bennett said in an interview
that Mr. Walker drafted a statement before concluding that nothing he could say
would have any credibility.

Robert Hunter, the agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from Norfolk,
Va., who spent dozens of hours pursuing and then interviewing Mr. Walker, said
he had seen no evidence of regret.

''I never got any indication of remorse whatsoever,'' said Mr. Hunter. ''I asked
if he had any remorse. He basically said he's not the type of person who would
tell me if he had remorse and he glibly asked me if I had asked that question so
I could go home and tell my wife I had finally gotten John Walker to admit
remorse. That doesn't sound like remorse to me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Michael L. Walker (AP); Photo of John A. Walker Jr. (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MARATHONER'S 99TH IS HIS FINEST HOUR

BYLINE: By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr.

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 541 words


Swinging himself along on his hands, Bob Wieland, the legless Vietnam veteran
who had continued to run the New York City Marathon long after officials had
thought the race was over, finally made it to a hastily re-erected finish line
in Central Park yesterday, 98 hours 48 minutes 17 seconds after he started on
Staten Island Sunday morning.

His time, proclaimed by Fred Lebow, the race director, ''a world record for the
slowest marathon ever run,'' may have been more than four days slower than those
of the first finishers, but Wieland, who raised his arms in triumph as he
completed the race as the last of 19,413 finishers, said he had approached the
race with the same attitude as Gianni Poli and Greta Waitz. ''We wanted to give
it our best shot,'' he said.

Encouraging Words

It was a shot that was apparently heard all over New York after the city became
aware on Wednesday that Wieland was still on the course. As the 40-year-old
marathoner began the last two and a half miles yesterday morning after spending
Wednesday night in a hotel, his progress was punctuated by shouts of
encouragement from pedestrians, passing motorists and well-wishers calling from
windows of high-rise apartment buildings on Central Park South.

''Hey, good going, man, good going,'' one van driver shouted as Wieland made his
way up the Park's West Drive toward the finish line.

After learning that Wieland was still on the course, Lebow had persuaded him to
delay his final assault until yesterday so arrangements could be made to block
off part of the Park roadway and to re-erect the finish line, complete with the
overhead marathon banner and an official clock, which was augmented by a
makeshift sign reading ''Day 5.''

Entourage Grows

Wieland, who had run much of the race in the company of a single companion,
acquired a growing entourage as he approached the finish line. In addition to
race officials and a swarm of reporters and camera operators, he was accompanied
by several handicapped runners who had completed the race Sunday, including two
who had covered the course in wheelchairs.

Wieland, who occasionally uses a wheelchair, allowed himself no such luxury
during the race. ''Look, no wheels,'' he said, displaying the heavy leather
chaps he wore over his lower torso to provide a pivot as he swung his body
between his arms in a rhythmic motion that took him about an hour to cover a
mile.

Despite the rigors of his ordeal, Wieland, who plans to compete in the Los
Angeles Marathon next March, was in a jovial mood.

Recalling that at one point during the race several admirers had shouted, ''Man,
they should give you the Mercedes,'' a reference to the cars that were awarded
to the race winners, Wieland turned to Lebow and said, ''Where are the keys,
Fred?''

No Appearance Money

Another exchange of finish-line quips could turn out to be even more costly for
marathon officials.

In inviting Wieland to enter the race next year, as he says he plans to, Parks
Commissioner Henry J. Stern sought assurance that he would not seek appearance
money. Wieland first indicated that he would not (''You're our kind of runner,''
Stern said) and then thought it over.

''How much do the other runners get?'' he asked.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bob Wieland (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WOMEN RANK HIGH IN PHOTO JOURNALISM

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS C. McGILL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 76, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 912 words


THE photographs are tough pictures of torn lives: Brazilian Indians driven from
their homes by a new highway; Salvadoran mothers at the graves of children they
say were slain by death squads; beggars at a hospital for the dying in India;
Vietnam veterans suffering illness and deformity they say was caused by exposure
to the defoliant Agent Orange.

The work, by five leading contemporary photographers, is on exhibit at the Fine
Arts Center of the University of Massachusetts in Amherst. The show,
''Photojournalism in the 80's,'' continues through Dec. 14.

In its concern for both esthetics and social problems, the photographic essays
are squarely in the tradition of earlier photography that documented dust-bowl
farmers in the Depression, Appalachian miners and the battlefields of World War
II.

Another photographic tradition is evident in the list of five people chosen to
represent the best photojournalism today: four of them are women. Claudia
Andujar's work is from the Brazilian jungle, Mary Ellen Mark's is from Calcutta,
Wendy Watriss shows the human side of the Agent Orange controversy, and Susan
Meiselas's war pictures from El Salvador quite often literally stare down the
barrels of loaded guns.

'These People Were at the Top'

''It was totally accidental,'' said Arthur Leipzig, a professor of art at Long
Island Univerity who organized the show with a colleague, Joan Harrison. ''We
didn't set out to do a woman's show. We looked at the work of a lot of good
photographers and we simply felt these people were at the top.'' The fifth
photographer is Eugene Richards, whose pictures document American milieux
ranging from Cuban refugees in Florida to a Veterans of Foreign Wars post in
Massachusetts.

The preponderance of women in the show may have been accidental, but both of the
exhibition's curators agree that many of today's best photojournalists -
including some of the best war photographers - are women.

Although this reflects the increasing role played by women in all parts of
society, they say, it is also true that women have played a key role in
photography from its earliest days.

''Historically, there was prejudice against women in painting and sculpture,''
Ms. Harrison said. ''Because photography is a newer art form, it was more open
and accepting of women. They got more of a chance, and there have always been as
many good women as men photographers.''

Continuity Demonstrated

The turn-of-the-century photographer Frances Benjamin Johnson and 20th-century
photographers like Imogen Cunningham, Margaret Bourke-White and Dorothea Lange
demonstrate the continuity of great female photographers throughout the camera's
history, Ms. Harrison said.

Which is not to say that female photographers have had it easy. Up until a
decade or so ago, according to people in the field, women were rarely able to
find jobs in commercial photography and photojournalism, and were thus often
forced to work alone.

''I think they were kept out by macho attitudes,'' said Cornell Capa, the
director of the International Center of Photography in New York. ''But somewhere
along the line, the dam broke. Women have enthusiasm and drive and achievement
goals, and they are all realizable and they have discovered that. You have the
guts of Meiselas, the incredible tenacity of Andujar. They are in the forefront
anywhere.''

A Key Question

For many enthusiasts of photography, womens' long track record of success in the
field - especially in photography that documents contemporary social problems -
has raised a key question.

Is there such a thing as a woman's vision? Or is there, at least, some aspect of
female character that allows them to explore humans under duress more
searchingly than men?

In interviews, two of the women in the present exhibition, Ms. Watriss and Ms.
Mark, both said they doubted that there was such a thing as a woman's vision.
But both said that being a woman could sometimes be an advantage in the field.

Ms. Watriss, for instance, whose pictures of Vietnam War veterans often catch
her subjects crying and in what appear to be moments of utter helplessness, said
that being a woman might have helped her get the pictures.

''In no way would they have seen me as a competitor,'' she said. ''I could not
have had the same war experience, I could never talk to them man to man. They
might have felt different if a healthy man had been taking the pictures. They
might have felt they couldn't allow themselves to look as vulnerable.''

'People Are Less Afraid'

Ms. Mark, who is known for her photographic essays about a brothel in Bombay,
teen-age motherhood in the Fort Green section of Brooklyn and elderly people
living in Miami Beach, also said that being a woman was sometimes an advantage
to a photographer.

''People are less afraid of women, and maybe that's a great advantage,'' she
said. But that reflects a societal attitude among those being photographed, she
stressed, and not a female photographer's way of seeing. I don't think women are
better than men, or men better than women. I think great photographers are great
photographers.''

Alice Rose George, a former photography editor of Fortune Magazine, said that,
on the basis of many years of looking at photographs taken by both men and
women, she agreed.

''A woman knows how to flirt,'' she said. ''But some men are pretty charming
too, I might add. And if you have a woman general that could be an advantage.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos by Mary Ellen Mark and Wendy Watriss

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Bishop A.P. Stokes Jr. Of Boston Is ead at 81

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 44, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 193 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Nov. 8


Anson Phelps Stokes Jr., the retired Episcopal Bishop of Massachusetts, died
Friday after a long illness. He was 81 years old.

Bishop Stokes was an early opponent of the Vietnam War and a leader in civil
rights activities and the ecumenical movement in the state.

In 1965, he declined an award from the American Legion because it had canceled a
similiar award to Rabbi Roland Gittelshon, a sponsor of a Washington
demonstration protesting American policy in Vietnam.

He retired in 1970 after 14 years as head of the diocese of 200 churches.

Bishop Stokes liked to describe his role as ''relator-bishop,'' declaring, ''The
bishop must, through the diocesan life, be a relator of men to each other.''

He served as chairman of the Massachusetts Council of Churches' Commission on
Church and Race, formed in 1960 to help bring about ''the reconciliation of all
races.''

Surviving are his wife, the former Hope Procter; two daughters, Carol
Fremont-Smith, of Auburn, Me., and Mary Stokes of Stockbridge, Mass.; a brother,
Isaac Stokes of Underhill, Vt.; and two grandchildren.

Services will be at 2:30 P.M. Monday at St. Paul's Episcopal Cathedral here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 FACES RUNOFF VOTE FOR GOVERNOR IN VIRGIN ISLANDS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 658 words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTE AMALIE, St. Thomas, V.I., Nov. 8


The Nov. 18 runoff election for Governor of the United States Virgin Islands is
pitting a wealthy former judge and legislator against a populist legislator who
seeks to loosen American ties to this Caribbean territory of 110,000 people.

The former judge, Alexander Farrelly, a 62-year-old Democrat who lost
gubernatorial bids in 1970 and 1974, won 46.9 percent of the vote on Tuesday in
the islands of St. Thomas, St. Croix and St. John in his effort to succeed
Governor Juan Luis, who cannot succeed himself after two four-year terms.

The runner-up in the election, Adelbert Bryan, 43, won 30.2 percent of the vote
on Tuesday. Mr. Bryan, candidate of the Independent Citizens Movement, asserts
that Mr. Farrelly is ''just a front for big business'' in the 133-square-mile
territory, which the United States bought from Denmark for $25 million in 1917.

Since no one won a majority for Governor in the general election, the two top
candidates are competing in the runoff two weeks later.

Two other main contenders in Tuesday's election were former Health Commissioner
Roy Schneider, an independent, who got 14.1 percent of the vote, and Lieut. Gov.
Julio Brady, a Republican, who got 8.8 percent.

Turnout Is 78 Percent

The turnout was 78 percent of the territory's 34,405 registered voters, up a
percentage point from 1982.

Mr. Farrelly, a Yale Law School graduate who has represented the Amerada Hess
oil refinery on St. Croix, says his first task as Governor would be to solve the
territory's budget deficit. It now runs close to $50 million yearly and is often
attributed to the fact that the government employs almost a third of the
40,000-member work force.

Mr. Farrelly says he would shake up government management, moderize the schools
and diversify the economy from its tourism base. He also promises to ''put up
5,000 homes that would cost less than $50,000 each,'' relieving pressure on the
territory's dilapidated public housing, where a quarter of the islanders live.

Mr. Bryan, a former policeman known for a quick temper in the territory's
15-member Legislature, calls himself ''the candidate of the people'' and favors
closer ties to other Caribbean islands. He criticizes the real estate business
as being white-dominated in a territory where 85 percent of the residents are
black.

He says he wants to follow the Puerto Rican model of economic development,
although Virgin Island unemployment is 5.5 percent as against 18 percent in
nearby Puerto Rico.

Tourism Leads Private Sector

Per capita income in the Virgin Islands is about $7,000 yearly, highest in the
Caribbean and nearly twice that of Puerto Rico. Tourism is by far the biggest
sector of the private economy.

Mr. Farrelly, who had stayed out of elective politics for 12 years, appealed to
business interests in St. Thomas for support but also showed surprising election
strength in his native Frederiksted, the town that is also Mr. Bryan's home.

Mr. Bryan has been criticized for refusing to pledge allegiance to the American
flag and for associating with advocates of Virgin Island independence and with
the Black Muslim leader Louis Farrakhan.

In response to such criticism, he says: ''I served in the Vietnam war. I've been
a policeman 18 years in St. Croix.''

After Tuesday's vote, Mr. Bryan attributed Mr. Farrelly's plurality to biased
news reporting involving ''petty issues.''

Mr. Bryan's claim of press bias refers to articles on his conviction for
assaulting a female police officer in 1972, his punching a fellow lawmaker in
the Legislature in 1984 and similar displays of anger up through last month in
the Legislature.

Mr. Farrelly has also got some unfavorable news coverage. The week before the
election, The Virgin Islands Daily News disclosed that tax liens had been placed
on his property 7 of the last 11 years. He says he is paying the taxes on a
schedule worked out with the territorial Bureau of Internal Revenue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

143 VEITNAM MEMORIALS, VAST AND SMALL, RISING AROUND NATION

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1130 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


Veterans Day, whose observance has been blurred by the country's deep
ambivalence about the Vietnam War, is being given a new ration of pride,
patriotism and energy by veterans of the nation's longest war, which was its
only major military defeat.

At a news conference here, compilers of a survey reported that 143 privately
financed Vietnam veterans' memorials had been completed or were under way in 45
states, Puerto Rico and American Samoa.

The work is being done with a total investment of $20 million, most of it
privately raised.

A Vietnam veterans' leader, Jan C. Scruggs, said the projects were symbols of
''separating the war from the warrior,'' in terms of reconciliation.

'One Great Outcome'

The monuments, most numerous in the South, range from modest structures by
volunteers and amateur sculptors at town halls and county seats to ambitious,
wall-like replicas of the national Vietnam Veterans Memorial on The Mall here.

A participant at the news conference here Thursday was William L. Henson, who
was a Marine Corps rifleman in Vietnam and is the founder of the New South
Vietnam Memorial Committee, which is planning to erect an interracial monument
on the banks of the Mississippi at Memphis.

He said it was ''one great outcome of the war that white and black men, in
combat, became blood brothers.''

The moss-covered ''local rock'' at the Allgood, Ala., town hall, bearing in
bronze the names of the two local men killed in action in the war, was sponsored
by Mayor Nell Payne, who is also the postmaster of the community of 400 people
27 miles from Birmingham.

Proof of a Reconciliation Seen

In a telephone interview, Mrs. Payne, who is a Republican, said she had formed a
committee to create the monument ''because I was ashamed of the terrible
injustice we showed to the Vietnam veterans when they came home.''

The project was supported by the Veterans of Foreign Wars chapter there and the
Republican Party of Blount County, she said.

At the news conference, those who compiled the survey said the projects were
proof of a reconciliation between many of the three million veterans of two
decades of military involvement in Vietnam and Americans who stayed home, many
of them bitterly critical of the war.

They said the themes of many of the privately backed memorials were the
fraternal relationships, born in the sacrifice of combat, between blacks and
whites and men and women. The survey was conducted by members of the Project on
the Vietnam Generation, based in the Smithsonion Institution. The center is also
conducting studies of all aspects of the Vietnam era, abroad and at home. It
reports that it is finding a pattern of leadership by young veterans. Hostility
Toward V.A.  But among Vietnam veterans' groups there is mounting tension and
militancy, and hostility toward the Veterans Administration and such older
organizations as the American Legion, the Disabled American Veterans, the
Veterans of Foreign Wars and Amvets.

In events marking Veterans Day Tuesday, a holiday proclaimed as Armistice Day in
1919, a trend will be apparent, a departure from ceremonies that focus on older
wars, patriotic respect for the Government and the armed forces and military
preparedness.

And the dissatisfaction of many Vietnam veterans with the Veterans
Administration will be nationally exposed on television Monday night.

''Unnatural Causes,'' a filmed two-hour ''docudrama,'' will be broadcast on NBC
at 9 P.M. Eastern time. Leaders of the new militancy toward the Vietnam era said
after attending a preview of the program that it would ''open the eyes'' of
millions of Americans to a dichotomy in veterans' affairs between the old and
the new, or the older and the younger.

The average serviceman in World War II was 26 years old and is in his 60's
today. The average enlisted man in Vietnam was 19 and is now in his 30's. In the
film this generational difference is between disabled Vietnam War veterans and
aged officials of the V.A.

A 'Now-Sympathetic America'

At a screening of the film Thursday Robert O. Muller, president of the
outspokenly dissident Vietnam Veterans of America, said, ''We are very confident
that a now-sympathetic America, when they see this film, can understand what is
happening and that we will finally compel Congress to do what should have been
done a long time ago.''

He was referring to compensating veterans who became victims of combat
technologies that were unknown in World War II.

The film is described by NBC as the ''fact-based drama'' of Maude DeVictor, a
black woman dismissed as a counselor at the Veterans Administration in 1983 for
her persistent efforts to gain Government compensation for disabled veterans who
are victims of ailments caused by dioxin, a carcinogencic chemical in the
Vietnam War herbicide Agent Orange.

In the war the herbicide was sprayed on jungles by American aircraft to clear
combat areas of natural cover for the enemy. Backing Lawsuits Against V.A.  The
Vietnam Veterans of America and smaller veterans' groups are also backing
lawsuits against the V.A. to force the agency to adopt ''veterans' due process''
reforms. The older veterans' organizations have intervened in the courts to
defend the V.A. and preserve its procedures, which the dissidents are
challenging.

The movement around the country toward a Veterans Day of more than ceremonial
speeches and parades by gray-haired men in dated unforms began in 1982, with the
opening in Washington of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

The next of kin of those whose names are inscribed on the monument's polished
slabs of black stone run caressing fingers over the chiseled names. For them,
''the wall'' has proved a powerful emotional cathartic. ''Healing'' and
''purifying'' are the words often heard. More than four million people visit the
monument every year.

Cataloguing the Tributes

Visitors have left so many flowers, letters, photographs and personal and
religious articles propped against the wall that the nonperishable items among
them are now catalogued in a formal collection by the Park Service. At first
these items were merely picked up and stored.

According to the service, the Vietnam memorial, the most popular tourist
attraction here after the Smithsonian's Air and Space Museum, has had more than
17 million visitors since 1982, and has had 4.6 million from Jan. 1 of this year
through the end of September.

The wall of sunken black granite slabs bears the names of all the 58,130 young
people of the 1960's and 1970's who died in the first American war from which
returning soldiers were not received as heroes.

This Veterans Day, the monument is to be the site of a display of 58,130 roses
and carnations in the shape of a 15-by-25-foot American flag.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Francis Hearon holding an maerican flag near name of her
nephew Ed Sossanon on monument in Columbia S.C. (UPI); Photo of a statue being
installed in San Antonio in honor of Veterans and the Vietnam Memorial outside
the Capitol in Augusta, Me.

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'GUNG HO' OLIVER NORTH: REAGAN'S MAN OF ACTION

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 862 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


As a major in the Marine Corps in April 1980, Oliver L. North covertly led a
detachment of marines to the remote mountains of eastern Turkey near the border
with Iran. Their task: to assist in freeing the American hostages held in
Teheran.

A Government official who knows about the previously undisclosed mission says
the marines in the hideout were ready to fly into the Iranian capital if they
were needed to cover the escape of the hostages who were to be rescued by the
Army Delta Force.

As it turned out, the rescue mission was aborted after helicopters broke down
and one collided with a transport plane on the ground in Iran, and Major North
withdrew from Turkey as quitely as he had entered.

A little more than a year later, Major North reported to the White House for
duty on the staff of the National Security Council. Since then he has earned a
reputation for involvement in risky, secret operations, including the unfolding
Iranian venture intended to obtain the release of American hostages in Lebanon.

Over the last five years, the Marine Corps officer, now a lieutenant colonel,
has become a key official whose role, Government officials say, has been to draw
up plans, to have them approved by Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, President
Reagan's national security adviser, and to see that they are carried out.

Among his tasks, officials say, was to help equip the the National Security
Council to take part directly in covert operations. He was also assigned to draw
up Presidential directives intended to provide for continuity in the Government
during a nuclear conflict.

The officials say Colonel North was also deeply involved in planning the
invasion of Grenada in 1983, has been the White House's point man in supporting
Nicaraguan rebel forces and helped plan the capture of Arab terrorists after the
hijacking of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro last year.

In his work, the officials say, Colonel North has often relied on a network of
military officers and civilian operatives he met in the Vietnam War. They
include Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub, a retired Army officer, and Maj. Gen.
Richard V. Secord, a retired Air Force officer. Both are experienced in
unconventional operations.

For Colonel North, 43 years old, it has been a heady experience, say officers
and officials who know him, as he has far more authority than any military
officer of his grade. The associates say he has also offended many senior
officers, either because they are jealous or because they resent taking orders
from a lieutenant colonel acting in the name of the President.

Colonel North's work has been so secret that the National Security Council has
directed the Marine Corps not to release his service record, a document usually
available for the asking. But a portrait of the marine and his career has been
pieced together from military officers and civilian officials.

Colonel North graduated from the Naval Academy in 1968 and chose the Marine
Corps. He fought in Vietnam, won the Silver Star and was wounded. ''Ollie still
carries metal around,'' a friend said.

In Vietnam, he was assigned to counterinsurgency operations in which he met
General Singlaub and General Secord, then lieutenant colonels. He later served
as a planner in the Marine Corps headquarters in Washington, Among several
military officers sent to the National Security Council in mid-1981, Major North
was the most junior. He was described as a bright, articulate officer with a
''gung ho'' spirit who saw the world in sharply etched blacks and whites.

Over time, those who know him say, Colonel North became ''a true believer'' in
Mr. Reagan's policies. One associate described him as an action officer ''who
reads the President's mind.'' Another said, ''Ollie is one who pushes ideology
very hard into practicality.''

As the staff officer in charge of crisis management, Colonel North took part in
what an official called ''the education of Ronald Reagan,'' who had come to the
White House with little military experience. Colonel North organized a nuclear
war game intended to expose the President to the realities of nuclear conflict.

Planning for Grenada Invasion

Newly promoted to lieutenant colonel in 1983, Colonel North did most of the
White House staff work for the invasion of Grenada in his cramped, austere
office on an upper floor of the Old Executive Office Building.

Because the operation was to be mounted in four days, an official said, ''Ollie
didn't have time to be diplomatic - he had to be direct, and he bruised some
generals and admirals.''

About this time, Colonel North also became the key action officer for Central
America. He planned and supervised the mining of Nicaraguan harbors by C.I.A.
agents in late 1983.

After Congress cut off aid to the Nicaraguan rebels in 1984, Colonel North
activated a private network that included Generals Singlaub and Secord to raise
funds and to arrange for deliveries of arms and supplies, officials say.

Officials who know about Colonel North's operations say that all have had the
approval of Admiral Poindexter and, indirectly, President Reagan, and that at no
time was he ''freelancing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1986

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 770 words


THE WORLD

U.S. credibility is damaged with key countries around the world as a result of
revelations about Washington's secret involvement in arms shipments to Iran,
Reagan Administration officials said. Page 1

Shipments of American arms to Iran last spring far exceeded the normal amounts
from arms dealers and smugglers, according to a Danish Seamen's Union executive.
He said it was likely that the U.S. knew of the increase. #12

Reaction to U.S.-Iran contacts 11

Congress will investigate whether the Reagan Administration used the White House
staff to circumvent Congressional restrictions on covert operations, members of
Congress said. #1

Nuclear weapons are spreading to new countries, and the arsenals of smaller
powers are expanding. Weapons analysts say that even if the superpowers agreed
on arms reductions, nuclear weapons would still be a problem. #1

Israel's nuclear abilities are unclear, but that is intentional. Israel's
military experts seem to believe that it gains most by maintaining a deliberate
ambiguity. #23

Approval for Japan's leader wanes as he enters his fifth consecutive year in
office. Political analysts question whether the Prime Minister, Yasuhiro
Nakasone, can survive another full year. #3

Nicaragua staged a military parade to show off its troops and weapons.
Government officials said the parade was meant to show that Nicaragua is
equipped to face an expected widening of warfare. #6

Mexico seeks closer Soviet ties, but it fears its diplomatic initiatives are
misunderstood and is seeking to reassure Washington. #7

Montrealers will elect a new mayor. Jean Drapeau, who has been Mayor for 26 of
his 70 years, is retiring, and an era of Canadian politics is coming to an end.
#4

Moscow sought trade partners in an advertisement published in The International
Herald Tribune. The four-page section appeared to be aimed primarily at American
and European businesses. #15

Aquino aide to avert coup 3
Troubles stir in Haiti 8
U.S. students on Soviet trip 14
Mozambique to get aid on crash 17
Hazards for African writers 18
Plan offends India and Pakistan 24

THE NATION

Senator Kennedy gave his reasons for changing committee posts. He said he will
become the chairman of the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee ''to
advance the causes that I care deeply about in public life,'' including health
care and education. #30

Pay equity in San Francisco city jobs deemed to be of comparable worth has won
the voters' approval. They amended the city charter to ease pay gaps considered
discriminatory against women and members of minorities. #29

More than 140 memorials to veterans of Vietnam are completed or under way in 45
states, Puerto Rico and American Samoa. The 143 projects, most of them privately
financed, cost a total of $20 million. #26

A Missouri shopping mall is unique. The Bannister Mall in Kansas City is home to
the only U.S. Government Bookstore in a suburban shopping mall. #37

Seattle's cocaine users are the target of a campaign by the United States
Attorney there to dry up demand for the drug. Customers are identified by
electronic surveillance and prosecuted. #28

Fossils show dinosaurs died out later than had been thought, according to new
evidence. The discoveries in China apparently refute the theory that the
dinosaurs' extinction was sudden. #41

Taiwan flu virus was isolated in five patients in the United States, the first
such cases this influenza season. The Centers for Disease Control had warned
about the new influenza strain in August. #38

Fight for state's power urged 1
Doctors disciplined is a record 1
Cosmos may be sponge-like 1
Tax law and charities 27
Profiles of Senate leaders 30
Reagan urges budget change 33
Liberal arts revival 34
Wickes to buy Collins and Aikman 36

WASHINGTON TALK 64

''Bad cop'' on U.S. trade policy

THE REGION

New police policies reflect concern that drugs and drug money pose an increasing
threat to the force's integrity, according to the Police Commissioner, who has
introduced sweeping anticorruption measures. #42

Four sewage plants may be delayed because the President vetoed amendments to the
Clean Water Act, according to city officials. The treatment plants are being
constructed or renovated in Brooklyn and Staten Island. #47

A Jersey official was ''sandbagged'' in his re-election bid by his own
hand-picked party leadership, he said. Peter Shapiro, the Essex County Executive
who also ran unsuccessfully for governor, is bitter after his defeat. #43

Wedtech admits to forgeries 1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RECORDINGS;
Springsteen's Live/1975-1985' Is Loaded With History

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1859 words


'Bruce Springsteen & the E Street Band Live/1975-85'' (Columbia 40559; LP,
cassette, compact disk), a massive five-record retrospective album that arrives
in stores tomorrow, represents an unprecedented event in popular recording. A
three-and-a-half-hour, 40-song career summary, recorded over a 10-year period in
clubs, concert halls and stadiums across the United States, it is the sort of
anthology one expects to be released late in a performer's career, or
posthumously.

Instead, this monumental album, which comes with a 31-page booklet of lyrics and
photographs, arrives just when the 37-year-old singer and composer is at the
peak of his popularity and creative powers. Mr. Springsteen's last album, ''Born
in the U.S.A.,'' has sold more than 11 million copies in this country. And
''Live/1975-85,'' which costs about $25 ($39 for the set of three compact
disks), with the price differing from store to store, has received advance
orders of more than 1.5 million copies. No other record album has done such a
large dollar volume of business before its release.

It has long been said of Mr. Springsteen that he must be seen in concert for his
music to be fully appreciated. And while ''Live/1975-85'' doesn't let us
literally ''see'' Mr. Springsteen perform, it offers by far the broadest
perspective yet of an artist whose music connects many of the major strands of
American rock tradition, most notably Chuck Berry's twangy country-blues, Bob
Dylan's oracular folk-rock poetry, Otis Redding's southern soul and the producer
Phil Spector's surging teen anthems.

''Live/1975-85'' is loaded with history. At the very least, it is a record of
how one singer and his band have helped to sustain and put their personal stamp
on a rock tradition that electronic keyboard technology has steadily eroded over
the last decade. More important, the album is the pop-record equivalent of an
epic American novel, its story told in the ungrammatical, rough-hewn vocabulary
of rock.

Because Mr. Springsteen is so popular he is almost worshipped by some, and
because his songs are profoundly concerned with American ideals of community -
family, hometown, and nation - the album has a historical resonance that goes
beyond pop culture. The driving spirit behind most rock-and-roll has
traditionally involved fantasies of personal transcendence and escape from
everyday responsibilities. Mr. Springsteen, like no other rock and roller before
him, has given this romantic vision a tragic dimension by putting it in a
starkly realistic context. Mr. Springsteen's mature songs are set against a
bleak backdrop of dingy factories, shabby wood frame houses and deserted
railroad tracks.

Instead of being presented chronologically, the songs are arranged in thematic
sequences structured to draw conclusions about the past and speculate about the
future. As an autobiographical portrait of Mr. Springsteen, ''Live/1975-85''
overflows with antic humor, romantic drama and, above all, restless,
peripatetic, motor-driven action. The vivid small-town settings of his early
songs are framed against a mysterious, inviting American landscape that the
singer, borrowing from Chuck Berry, names ''the promised land.''

''Live/1975-85'' describes Mr. Springsteen's search for salvation as he grows up
and away from suburban small-town life and sets out to explore that territory.
But instead of leading to a blissfully happy ending, his odyssey takes him to
hell and back. Although he achieves a kind of redemption, it is a bitter
knowledge of life's essential unfairness, leavened with compassion and a
determined self-reliance. The core of the album is an extraordinary sequence of
songs in which Mr. Springsteen confronts the irrational social and economic
forces that shape - and sometimes violently destroy - American life. Although
barely mentioned, the cataclysm at the center of the album is the Vietnam War,
an event that in Mr. Springsteen's view casts an ominous shadow into the future.

For the first two records, ''Live/ 1975-85'' offers a colorful rock-and-roll
phantasmagoria of youthful passion in songs that are alternately thrillingly
energetic, poignant and funny. ''Ohoh come take my hand/ We're riding out
tonight to case the promised land,'' Mr. Springsteen pleads to a sweetheart in
the opening cut, a beautiful acoustic version of ''Thunder Road,'' recorded 11
years ago at the Roxy in Los Angeles. The songs go on to describe the
rambunctious, wildly romantic teen-age life that is ultimately left behind.
Father-son strife (''Adam Raised a Cain''), adolescent hanging out (''Spirit in
the Night''), the tawdry glamour of the Jersey shore (''4th of July, Asbury
Park''), Romeo and Juliet love games (''Fire,'' ''Rosalita''), Marlon Brando
stud-rebel fantasies (''Growin' Up'' and ''It's Hard to Be a Saint in the
City''), and acute small-town claustrophobia (''Backstreets'') are remembered in
the vivid, gawky rock-and-roll street poetry of Mr. Springsteen's early and
mid-70's voice, and in music by the E Street Band that suggests a restless tear
around the American highway.

The swinging, loose-jointed bar-band rock of the band - its centerpiece the
majestically gregarious honk of the saxophonist Clarence Clemons - musically
epitomizes the joyous, freewheeling sense of camaraderie that runs to the heart
much of Mr. Springsteen's music. ''Hungry Heart'' (an arena audience singalong),
''Two Hearts,'' a roaringly exuberant ''Cadillac Ranch'' and a playfully sexy
''You Can Look (But You Better Not Touch)'' show off Mr. Springsteen and the
band at their most raucously playful.

But beginning with ''Independence Day,'' a brooding song about a young man
leaving home, the mood of the album begins to shift. With just a slight
alteration in tone, Mr. Springsteen's charging anthems can turn desperate. And
''Badlands'' reeks with cold sweat as it contemplates a deep animal fear not
often admitted to in mainstream rock songs. This fear, which Mr. Springsteen
perceives as an ominous, growing undercurrent of American working-class life,
haunts much of the rest of the album. The other side of the coin is a fierce,
nagging desire: ''Poor man wanna be rich/ Rich man wanna be king/ And a king
ain't satisfied/ Til he rules everything.''

In an urbanized upwardly mobile society, Mr. Springsteen asks, is it possible
for ordinary working people to build and sustain a stable, responsible sense of
community? For the next one and a half records, the songs address the economic
plight of America's working class with increasing despair and rage. ''Darkness
on the Edge of Town'' and ''Racing In the Street'' look sorrowfully at the
energy and dreams squandered on small-town drag racing Later, Mr. Springsteen
introduces a slow, measured rendition of Woody Guthrie's ''This Land Is Your
Land'' with a monologue about how the song was written as an angry response to
Irving Berlin's ''God Bless America.''

It is followed by three songs from ''Nebraska,'' the 1982 acoustic album of
cowboy-folk songs in which Mr. Springsteen began writing first-person monologues
in the voices of characters totally outside himself. Sung in a sullen twang,
this trilogy about senseless murder, injustice and betrayals so harsh they
render life meaningless casts an even deeper chill. It hurts to hear Mr.
Springsteen mumble in a tone of ornery deadpan despair: ''Struck me kinda funny,
seem kinda funny sir to me/ At the end of every hard earned day/ people find
some reason to believe.''

Mr. Springsteen makes the ''Nebraska'' songs pay dividends by placing them in
the album just before the concert version of ''Born in the U.S.A.'' Simply
because its title is so catchy, some have mistaken the song for an aggressively
jingoistic anthem. In fact, the song is an unemployed Vietnam veteran's scream
of anguish when he finds himself unwanted and uncared for in the homeland he
defended.

In the next number, ''Seeds,'' America all but disappears into a black hole.
This previously unrecorded song, the relentless cry of an out-of-work, homeless
oil worker in Houston, weaves together images of blind industrial power and
brutal social indifference with visions of suicide and social disintegration.
''You ain't gonna find nothin' down here friend/ Except the seeds blowin' up the
highway in the south wind,'' the narrator warns, howling a tune that is
essentially one repeated note stretched along an unresolved blues chord.

The album turns poignantly reflective for a moment with a spoken monologue in
which Mr. Springsteen recalls battling with his father in the late 60's. The
tale, which has the understatement of a Raymond Carver story, segues into ''The
River,'' the bleak folk ballad about a shotgun marriage and prematurely withered
lives set in an ugly industrial town. Then, in another spoken monologue, Mr.
Springsteen remembers watching the Vietnam War on television and tells his
audience: ''If you're in your teens in 1985, blind faith in your leaders or in
anything will get you killed.'' The singer and band immediately launch into a
jackhammer-charged rendition of Barrett Strong and Norman Whitfield's 1970
anti-war chant, ''War.''

With their relentless power-drilling rhythms and steely chainsaw textures,
''Born in the U.S.A.,'' ''Seeds,'' ''War,'' and two other songs, ''Darlington
County'' and ''Working on the Highway,'' all compare hard labor with warmaking.
Without actually preaching, Mr. Springsteen repeatedly makes the point that the
same will and energy that drives productive physical labor can just as easily
power destructive violence. All it takes for one to be perverted into the other
is an absence of meaningful work.

After contemplating the void so intently, ''Live/1975-85'' gradually lifts its
gaze upward in a final sequence of songs that tentatively affirm love and
community. The optimistic spirit of these songs comes more from the solidity of
the music and from Mr. Springsteen's rugged singing than from what the songs
actually say. The love demanded in ''Cover Me'' is more protective than
romantic, as the narrator pleads, ''The whole world out there/ Just trying to
score/ I've seen enough/ I don't want any more.'' ''Bobby Jean,'' ''No
Surrender, and ''My Hometown'' all say goodbye to youth and to a vanishing
small-town way of life.

Musically, the high point of the album is a roaring, three-dimensionally rich
concert version of Mr. Springteen's most famous mid-70's anthem, ''Born to
Run,'' that builds to such an exalted peak the music seems to take off into the
air. But even here, the most memorable lines offer a painful observation on the
futility of fuel-injected dreams: ''The highway's jammed with broken heroes/ On
a last chance power drive/ Everybody's out on the run tonight/ But there's no
place left to hide.''

''Live/1975-85'' brings to a magnificent synthesis just about all the impulses
that have fuelled rock music since it surfaced in the mid-50's as a mass
cultural movement. You can get get caught up in the visceral charge of its
engines, sing along with its chunky tunes and dream its romantic dreams and
still feel the cold wind of the history blowing through its pages.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Bruce Springsteen performing (Laura Levine)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHISTLE BLOWERS' MORNING AFTER

BYLINE: By N.R. KLEINFIELD

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3416 words


CHARLES and Jeanne Atchison live near the Cowboy City dance bar on a gravel
street in a peeling white and gold mobile home. Weeds sway in the breeze out
front. It's a street with a melancholy down-on-one's-luck feel about it. The
town is Azle, Tex., a tiny speck on the periphery of Fort Worth.

A few years ago, the picture was a far prettier one. Charles (Chuck) Atchison
was all set. He made good money - more than $1,000 a week - enough to pay for a
cozy house, new cars, fanciful trips. But all that is gone. He's six months
behind on rent for his land, and don't even ask about the legal bills.

''It's sort of like I was barreling along and I suddenly shifted into reverse,''
Mr. Atchison said with a rueful smile. ''Well, welcome to whistle blower
country.''

Chuck Atchison is 44, with a stony face and a sparse mustache. Four years ago,
he stood up before regulators and exposed numerous safety infractions at the
Comanche Peak nuclear plant in Glen Rose, Tex. He was a quality control
inspector for Brown & Root, the construction company building the plant for the
Texas Utilities Electric Company, but he says he couldn't get anyone to fix the
problems. His dissidence, as well as those of others, delayed the utility from
obtaining a license and prompted still ongoing repair work.

Mr. Atchison wound up out of a job and spinning in debt. He's working again, in
another industry, slowly trying to patch the leaks in his life. Though proud of
his stance, he often feels psychic scars. ''The whistle blower today is probably
the most discriminated against individual in the country,'' he said. ''By
individuals and industry and the United States Government that is supposedly
protecting him. He gets a brand put on him and it just seems like you can't get
it off with anything.''

Payoffs, inflated bills, fudged safety reports, drugs that kill the laboratory
mice - such are the shady doings that bestir whistle blowers. They are the
people who when faced with questions of conscience posed in clear and dramatic
form choose truth, knowing full well that their honesty may extract a harsh
price.

Whistle blowers have been much in the news of late. Bill Bush, a retired NASA
worker who had been demoted, he says, for complaining that the agency needlessly
channeled out work, keeps a computer file on whistle blowers that has swollen to
8,500 entries. ''In the last 10 years,'' he says, ''my sense is there's been a
dramatic increase in whistle blowing.''

Plenty has been written about the courage of the likes of A. Ernest Fitzgerald,
the jaunty Air Force cost analyst who testified in 1969 about huge cost overruns
on a Lockheed cargo plane. And, of course, everyone knows of Karen Silkwood, the
late nuclear plant worker whose case charging flawed safety procedures at the
Kerr-McGee plant became a heralded movie and resulted in Kerr-McGee paying her
estate $1.38 million to settle charges that Miss Silkwood and her home were
contaminated by company negligence.

Rarely, though, has anyone looked at what comes of whistle blowers long after
the events that rocked their lives. Whistle blowers almost inevitably pay a
heavy price. With few exceptions, they are driven out of not just their jobs,
but their professions, too. But that doesn't mean they always are reduced to
dire poverty and icy isolation. Often, they are reincarnated in some new
position.

That's among the conclusions of Myron Peretz Glazer, a sociology professor at
Smith College, and his wife, Penina Migdal Glazer, a professor of history at
Hampshire College, who talked with some 55 whistle blowers for a book they are
preparing.

''Of the people we interviewed,'' Mr. Glazer said recently, ''I would say that
if you follow them over a period of time, most of them do recreate both their
careers and their emotional lives. But mostly you find they had to move into
other kinds of work that normally hasn't paid them as much as their former life.
So while we can say blowing the whistle doesn't have to mean the end to your
career, it will mean major adjustments.''

Despite the proliferation of whistle blowers and public applause for them,
industry and government remain intolerant of them. When Allan McDonald and Roger
Boisjoly, engineers at Morton Thiokol, testified about serious problems with the
space shuttle Challenger, company management transferred the two men to menial
jobs. In the face of a storm of adverse publicity, they hastily reinstated them.
Mr. Boisjoly, however, took a sick leave last month due to an unspecified
illness he said was linked to the Challenger episode and plans to quit the
company.

After Mr. Fitzgerald, the country's best-known living whistle blower, was ousted
by the Air Force, he spent 13 years in courts before he won full reinstatement
in 1982. If he were able to do it over, he says now, he wouldn't have fought the
grueling court battle.

''I would have recognized that my career was over and become a tap dancer or
something,'' he says. His lawyer at the time, in fact, suggested he buy a gas
station.

Mr. Fitzgerald has become a folk hero to other whistle blowers, and gets as many
as 10 calls a week from employees privy to wrongdoing. He cautions them to think
hard before picking up the whistle, for he likens whistle blowing to ''setting
your hair on fire publicly.'' His sense is that while whistle blowing incidents
appear to be rising in corporations, there is growing reticence in Washington,
except for anonymous leaks,because of the ''deadly climate.'' As he puts it,
''You just can't get away with throwing your body in the face of the
juggernaut.'' Some court actions, especially in California, have ruled in favor
of unjustly dismissed corporate whistle blowers. Mr. Fitzgerald and others would
like to see legislation that makes Government officials personally liable for
illegal acts. There is interest among certain legislators in a ''bounty hunter''
measure that would pay anyone who is able to prove that a contractor is bilking
the Government.

At bottom, though, the prognosis for whistle blowing seems ominous.

''They break the unwritten law of social relationships,'' Mr. Glazer said.

''They break a norm - the norm of loyalty.''

Mr. Bush, the whistle blower archivist, is equally dubious about a safer future.
When individuals phone him with dark secrets he exhorts them to keep quiet
unless they're independently wealthy. ''I want to emphasize this one thing,'' he
says.

''Whistle blowing is dangerous. I've seen people bloodied. And it's not going to
get easier to do. Nobody wants a snitch.''

CHUCK ATCHISON didn't want to believe that. So, when he lost his job, he
doggedly shopped his resume around and, luckily, found comparable work as an
inspector at a plant in New Orleans. After a week in Louisiana, he was
subpoenaed to testify at further hearings on Comanche Peak. ''When I got back,''
he said, ''my boss called me in and fired me. He said I was a troublemaker.''
Diligence turned up a similar job at a powerplant in Clinton, Ill. ''Two days
before I was to leave,'' he said, ''they called and said they wouldn't take me,
because I was a troublemaker. I tried other plants and I found that I was
blacklisted.''

Brown & Root, after all, always maintained that he was dismissed for dismal
performance and has denied his allegations. Texas Utilities eventually admitted
that some of his charges proved correct, but that many didn't.

Around this time, Mr. Atchison began getting anonymous, taunting phone calls,
urging him to clam up.

His fear index soared. Several times, he was certain he was being tailed.

Several times, he had his phone swept for bugs. (There were none.) He kept a
revolver at his bedside and he took karate lessons along with his wife and
teen-age daughter. ''When I was driving,'' he said, ''I kept a close watch on my
rear-view mirror. If someone was going to try to run me off the road, I was
prepared to run them off first.''

His daughter, Jennifer, who was 13 then, took the events the hardest.

''Initially, she pretended it hadn't happened,'' said his wife, Jeanne.

''There was a lot of negative publicity from the plant. And we didn't have the
money anymore. If there was a fluorescent green blouse that was the fad, we
couldn't duplicate it.''

Mr. Atchison went through a cycle of scraping by. He drove a wrecker for a
while. During one dispiriting period, he cruised up and down the highways
picking up beer cans strewn along the shoulders and then sold them for scrap
aluminum.

Two and a half years ago, he found work doing quality control once again at LTV
in its aerospace division. The pay still isn't up to the good days, running
about $10 an hour, but it's improving.

Many of his possessions are long gone. In 1983, he lost his house. He sold most
of the family's furniture, as well as his four beloved underwater cameras.
Several unresolved lawsuits against the powerplants that dismissed him have left
him owing additional thousands of dollars.

'We're breaking even now,'' he said. ''We've still got a bunch of stuff we can't
keep up. The land we're on for the trailer, we're about six or eight months
behind. Fortunately, they're understanding about that.''

''We've learned to run on a tight budget,'' Mrs. Atchison added. ''I was lucky
that I'm the same size as my Mom. I took clothes from her.'' Mr. Atchison
doesn't feel popular. He lost a number of friends. ''The whistle blower has
about the same image as the snitch does,'' he said. ''Everyone thinks you're
slime.'' Nevertheless, Mr. Atchison has no misgivings. He did what he had to do,
he said, and if he had it to do over he'd blow the whistle again.

He glanced at his right hand. ''I've got absolutely nothing in my hand to show
as a physical effect of what I've done, except the losses I've had. But I know I
was the cutting edge of the knife that prevented them from getting their license
and sent them back to do repairs. I know I did right. And I know I'll always
sleep right. I'll sleep just like a baby.''

''N

O, you're not interrupting a thing,'' Kermit Vandivier said, this being late
into a weekday evening. ''We're just sitting here working the puzzle.''

Previous nights, they had finished several versions of cats, and now they were
intent on a farm scene. It was how they liked to pass their evenings, working
jigsaw puzzles.

Life in Troy, Ohio, a sleepy town of some 20,000 near Dayton, has slipped into a
certain predictable tranquillity for Kermit Vandivier and his wife, Esther.
There were almost no reminders - just an occasional call from a college student
doing a paper - of the stand he took 18 years ago.

Back then, he was a data analyst and technical writer at the B.F. Goodrich plant
in Troy, a facility that made aircraft wheels and brakes. In the summer of 1967,
he says he was confronted with certifying a defective brake for a plane the LTV
Corporation was building for the Air Force.

Scared of losing his job - he was 42, without a college degree, supporting, just
barely, a wife and seven children - he says he went along and helped write a
false qualification report.

When a test pilot nearly crashed because of the bad brake, Mr. Vandivier
resigned in October 1968 and took the matter to the F.B.I. and later to
Congress. ''I couldn't live with it anymore,'' he said. ''I see a sign, 'Don't
spit on the sidewalk' and I don't spit. I obey the law.''

Goodrich ultimately redesigned the brake, and the Defense Department revamped
its inspection and testing procedures in the wake of the episode.

Goodrich, however, was never officially found culpable. A Goodrich spokesman
said recently that old records show that the company ''demonstrated to customers
that Mr. Vandivier's allegations didn't hold water. Unfortunately, we didn't
take that public and the case has carried on and found its way into several
books and business school papers.''

Mr. Vandivier, for his part, was much luckier than most whistle blowers. While
at Goodrich, he had been writing a column on wide-ranging subjects for The Troy
Daily News, which had been impressed by several letters he had written. He had
discussed the Goodrich dilemma with the paper, and was assured that he could
join full-time.

So he began a new career as a reporter. He was paid the same $135 a week he got
at Goodrich. He started off covering the police beat and the town of Tipp. He
had some enthralling times. The paper shipped him to Vietnam to write about the
war, and he covered two Republican Presidential conventions.

A few years ago, he switched to a copy editor slot, which he still holds.

He also continues to write a column once a week and undertakes periodic
features. Over a desultory dinner at the local Holiday Inn, Mr. Vandivier talked
about his rebirth. He's a pleasant, fresh-faced man of 60, who wears a bushy
mustache. He had on his knockaround clothes.

''The transition worked out great,'' he said. ''A man doesn't often get a chance
at age 43 to change to a more exciting career without having to pay a penalty
along the way. This thing gave me the push to take the plunge I probably never
would have taken otherwise.''

Oddly enough, even though he blew the whistle in a small town, and on that
town's third-largest employer, he has not found a chilly reception among his
neighbors. Part of the reason, he suspects, is that there were no consequences
to anyone's job. ''If I'd closed down the plant,'' he said, ''I'd probably have
been run out of town.''

Mrs. Vandivier passed through a heavily stressful period during which she
worried all the time, but the after-effects have been mild for her, as well.
''It might have mattered if I was one of these women who run about,'' she said.
''I went out of the house once a week to get my hair done, period.''

For the most part, now that the children are gone, the couple pass time with
each other. ''We're ordinary, dull people,'' she says.

Mr. Vandivier these days thinks well of Goodrich. He has always felt that the
brake incident was not symptomatic of Goodrich's corporate morality.

''This was such a stupid thing,'' he said. ''It was so unnecessary. It was like
a comedy of errors. You're looking at people who were bullheaded.

They're not criminals. They were incredibly dumb.'' The next day, at his desk at
The Troy Daily News, he said, ''There were some emotional penalties. For
instance, my immediate supervisor, who's now dead, couldn't afford to
financially walk away from the job, even though he was with me all the way. I
feared that the implication was that why didn't he speak out, too. People
wouldn't understand that he wasn't dishonest.''

What did he think of the climate for whistle blowers today?

''I think the atmosphere is great on things like space shuttle toilets and Navy
screwdrivers,'' he said. ''Those are great for editorial writers, but I'm not
sure if those things are worth blowing the whistle on. For the real whistle
blower, it's getting worse.

People have become callous to scandal. It's like all the things that people eat
that can cause cancer. I think Ralph Nader is less effective. I hate to say it,
but whistle blowing has maybe become too popular.''

JAMES POPE braked in front of the mailbox and reached in for the fistful of
letters. ''Let's see how much money I won today,'' he said. As it turned out, he
owed. The mail was mostly bills.

He wheeled his mustard-colored

Volkswagen into the driveway, framed with old Studebaker bumpers. Nodding at
them, he explained that he has two hobbies. ''One is restoring Studebakers,'' he
said. ''The other's fighting the Government.''

The Federal Aviation Administration had never seen anyone quite like Jim Pope.
Almost from the moment he arrived there in 1966, he was speaking out, tweaking
the bureaucracy. As he likes to explain it, ''I aggravated a whole lot of
people.''

The big showdown, though, came in the late 1970's, when he was division chief of
the Department of General Aviation. Mr. Pope contended that the F.A.A. had found
an effective device in 1975, known as an airborne collision avoidance system,
that would prevent mid-air crashes. However, he argued that the agency had
chosen to instead waste money pursuing an inferior device that the F.A.A. had a
hand in developing. When Mr. Pope found no allies within the agency, in late
1978 he complained to Congress. That is when, according to Mr. Pope, the F.A.A
started trying to get rid of him.

First, they transferred him to Seattle, to become the ''chief special projects
officer.'' When he got there, he was told that no such position existed. He was
shown to an office and began a battle against boredom. His scant duties, he
says, consisted of answering phones for the secretaries when they were on break.
At times, he'd serve as a notetaker for a meeting. He set records for the amount
of reading he completed.

On his desk stood ''in'' and ''out'' boxes that collected only cobwebs.

His appointment calendar expressed weeks of blankness. He had his own little
joke - a number taped to the front of his desk that he changed each morning.
''It was the number of days I was kept captive in Seattle by the F.A.A.,'' he
says.

Since he was unable to sell his house in McLean, Va., his wife stayed there
alone and worked as a nurse. Her isolation spread by the day. Many friends and
neighbors didn't understand Mr. Pope's crusade and began to look at her askance.
''Our good friends who we used to do a lot with turned on us,'' she says. ''Some
of them have come back, but they'll never be the same with us.''

Mr. Pope was lonely, too, and feels he probably wouldn't have stuck with it
without his wife's unstinting faith.

He calls her the ''perfect'' wife, except that she complains that every haircut
he gets is too short.

Frustrated and irate, Mr. Pope finally took his story of non-work to The Seattle
Times. When a front-page piece appeared, the F.A.A. quickly made him an airport
inspector.

Mr. Pope's health, however, began to deteriorate. He had several kidney stone
attacks. He took a sick leave and returned to McLean in August 1981. While
there, he was notified that he was being terminated for insubordination.
Furious, he sought a hearing before the Merit System Protection Board. Before
the date arrived, the F.A.A. rescinded the firing and retired Mr. Pope due to
disability at full pay. ''So they got rid of me,'' he said.

Shortly afterward, he sued the

F.A.A., seeking $60 million, alleging that the agency engaged in a conspiracy
against him. No trial date has yet been set. Meanwhile, aching to work again,
Mr. Pope chased every engineering job that he heard about. Much to his surprise,
he was hired in September of last year by the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration. His boss, though aware of Mr. Pope's combustive past, didn't
care. Mr. Pope is a mission readiness manager at the Goodard Space Flight Center
in Greenbelt, Md. His job is to test the Cobe Cosmic Background Explorer, whose
eventual mission will be no less than to discover the origin of the universe.
''How's that for an assignment?'' Mr. Pope said. ''It's almost as exciting as
fighting the U.S. Government.''

NASA, of course, is itself embattled because of the space shuttle calamity. The
facility where Mr. Pope works, though, had nothing to do with the shuttle and
Mr. Pope said he has no idea if NASA was negligent.

Around the office, there is scattered joking that things were fine at NASA until
Mr. Pope arrived and then everything went awry.

Mr. Pope is pleased with his new circumstances. He's 62 now, slightly pudgy, a
crusty man with a droll sense of humor. When he's showing slides of some space
equipment at work, he'll slip in a wiring diagram of one of his Studebakers for
laughs.

Still, he sorely misses aviation. Indignantly, he said, ''One of the things I
resent, is that for doing my job I had my life destroyed that way. My career was
ruined and they took me out of the thing I loved the most.''

Around the F.A.A., Mr. Pope seems to be viewed as comic history. ''I think he's
dead wrong,'' a spokesman says. ''I don't know what motivates the man. Who knows
what motivates people.''

The F.A.A. says it is still years away from installing airborne collision
avoidance systems in planes. Any chance he gets, therefore, Mr. Pope keeps on
kicking and fussing.

''The way the Government wins is it outlasts people,'' he said. ''Well, I'm
going to outlast the Government.

When they messed with Jim Pope, they messed with the wrong man.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Charles Atchinson (NYT/Zigy Kalunzy); photo of Jim Pope
(NYT/Mary Katz); photo of Kermit Vandivier (NYT/D. Garton)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

More on The Zumwalts

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 142 words


I am writing in regard to the Sept. 21 letter from Si Lewen, responding to the
article ''Agent Orange and the Anguish of an American Family'' (by Elmo Zumwalt
Jr. and Elmo Zumwalt 3d, with John Pekkanen, Aug. 24). If Mr. Lewen has had a
chance to read ''My Father, My Son,'' not just the excerpts, he will be aware
that my father and my brother did express compassion for the other Americans who
are battling to survive the horrors of Agent Orange.

With regard to his hope that my father ''may find the ultimate courage to admit
that releasing Agent Orange was a mistake,'' you can be very sure that he has
the courage to continue to make it clear that, in wartime, one must make
least-worst decisions and that the use of Agent Orange saved many, many times
the number of lives that it has and will cost.

JAMES G. ZUMWALT
  Herndon, Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 25, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words


Gregory Mcdonald has been having fun with the last two titles in his popular
Fletch series. ''Fletch Won'' came out in 1985. There are several shades of
meaning in the title. Fletch did win. But ''won'' also can be read as ''one.''
And in a way the book really is Fletch One, because chronologically it would be
the first in the series.

Now comes FLETCH, TOO (Warner, $15.95), and this too is a pun. The action picks
up right after ''Fletch Won.'' Thus it is Fletch's second adventure. But ''too''
can also be read as ''also,'' because there are two Fletches in the book. And
there probably are all kinds of other meanings more learned types than this
baffled reader can figure out.

As the action in ''Fletch, Too'' opens, the young reporter is getting married.
Always the iconoclast, he turns up late, dressed in blue jeans and sneakers. He
explains that he was on a hot story. Fletch turns out to be one of the more
unsatisfactory grooms since the invention of the wedding ring. Immediately after
the ceremony he leaves his bride flat and rushes to his mother. Seems he has
just received a letter from his father. His father! His mother had always said
that Fletch's father died in an airplane crash racing home to see his newborn
infant.

Well, Mama explains, nobody ever saw a body. Father was declared legally dead
after seven years. So it now is clear that he ran out on fatherhood. Now that
his son is getting married, Fletch senior extends an invitation to his son and
his bride to visit him in Nairobi. Airplane tickets enclosed. Kenya is a long
way from Colorado, where the couple had been planning to honeymoon. But they
catch the plane to Africa, landing with ski poles and winter gear in over 100
degrees of heat, much to the amazement of the customs people.

The first thing that happens to Fletch at the airport is that he is the sole
witness to a murder in the men's room. As things develop, he does not get to see
his father until the very end. The man does not receive them at the airport. He
does not come to their hotel. The next thing they know he is in jail for
assaulting a local cop. He refuses to see them in jail. The only contact with
him is through his friend, a bush pilot. Mr. Mcdonald has the reader guessing.
Will Fletch ever get to see his father - if, indeed, the man really is his
father?

At the end everything is resolved most skillfully. Even the airport murder is
explained. Otherwise, exotic locale or no, Fletch remains the same irreverent,
fast-talking, unconventional bright young man we expect to encounter. Along the
way we get a bit about the lure of Africa and some of its bizarre fauna and
flora. His wife, Barbara, it is good to report, is pretty much on the same level
as Fletch. She too is bright, amusing, cynical, sometimes caustic and very good
with one-liners. Fans of Fletch will rejoice over ''Fletch, Too.''

The fifth in the Moses Wine series is THE STRAIGHT MAN by Roger L. Simon
(Villard, $15.95). As the book opens, Moses Wine, a private eye in Los Angeles,
is having psychiatric therapy. He is depressed. Everything is going wrong for
him. So his psychiatrist hands him a case. A television star, straight man to a
black comic, is dead from a fall from a window. Suicide? His widow thinks
murder, and Wine takes the case.

He meets some unusual characters, many of them under psychiatric care. That
includes the black comic, who would appear to be based on Richard Pryor. Wine
even hires an assistant, a woman who is a pretty bad stand-up comic. She is a
romantic who has always wanted to be a private eye. She turns out to have real
talent for the business, and one guesses she will be around in future Moses Wine
adventures. The Pryor figure is arrested for the alleged murder of his
psychiatrist. After a while Wine even begins to suspect his own psychiatrist.
Finally he uncovers a very big scam, and things come to a satisfactory
conclusion.

It's a lively story, as many of the Moses Wine stories are. It also has elements
of sadness in the character of the talented, mixed-up, childlike, foulmouthed,
repressed Otis King, the black comic. And it gives psychiatry a few gentle
prods. There is something nostalgic about that. Thirty or so years ago, when
everybody seemed to take psychiatry and its jargon very seriously, psychiatrists
were fair game. Today they seem to have vanished from intellectual life.
Certainly hardly anybody today bores his listeners by giving blow-by-blow
accounts of his last session with his shrink.

Very New Yorkish is a first novel, HEARTLESS, by the very talented Stephen Paul
Cohen (Morrow, $15.95). Mr. Cohen is a lawyer and perhaps has comes across cases
of the kind he describes. The locale is Manhattan, where an unemployed
alcoholic's best friend, a drug addict, is murdered. The police could not be
less interested, and the alcoholic, Eddie Margolis, takes it on himself to see
that justice is done. He is so serious about it he even goes off the bottle.

Eddie is no hero. But he is smart and determined, he knows his New York (the
East Village and Alphabet City, Avenues A through D, a center of the city's drug
trade), and he can even fight when his back is against the wall. His
investigation leads him to drug dealers and runners and a varied assortment of
very tough types. All this is told in gritty, fast-moving prose that never has a
false quality about it. Mr. Cohen's ear is very good. There are some interesting
ideas in RICEBURNER, a first novel by Richard Hyer (Scribners, $16.95). There
also are some turgid stretches. But the plot development is logical, the
characters are well worked out, and on balance this is a promising entry.

The locale is Chicago, where a man who runs an industrial security system meets
an old girlfriend. They arrange to meet at a Vietnamese restaurant. As he starts
to enter the place, it blows up in his face, and at least one man is killed. By
the time the police get through questioning him, it is apparent that he has been
set up. There is an F.B.I. investigation. Vietnam vets who know a great deal
about explosives are part of the action. There is a big real-estate deal.
Everybody lies; everybody has something to hide. The ending contains no great
surprise. Yet there is ability here, and Mr. Hyer's next book should move with
an even more confident swing.

In Robert Footman's ALWAYS A SPY (Dodd, Mead, $15.95), an American, formerly
with the C.I.A., joins a British intelligence woman to find a missing Yugoslav.
The American is a mild-looking man who really is a sort of superman. His partner
is a superwoman. They have an absolutely gooey affair. Meanwhile the Russians
are plotting to take over Yugoslavia. They send platoons of killers after the
couple. Fat chance the killers have. Stuff and nonsense.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of actress Dorothy Loudon (NYT/Don Hogan Charles)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Best Sellers: November 9, 1986

SECTION: Section 7; Page 62, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 903 words


Fiction
            Weeks
This   Last    On
Week   Week  List
1         1     9 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.)
                  Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman who
                  grew up in a small Maine town.
2         2    15 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.)
                  Without using nuclear weapons, the West staves off
                  the Russians in World War III.
3         3     4 HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &
                  Schuster, $18.95.) A top New York model encounters
                  three of Los Angeles's most dynamic men.
4               1 WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.)
                  Iran during the month following the Shah's
                  departure.
5         4     6 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton
                  Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family relationships in
                  South Carolina's low country and New York City.
6         8     2 A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $18.95.)
                  Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a brutal
                  double murder.
7         6     5 THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) Continuing the saga of a
                  turn-of-the-century New York family begun in
                  ''Evergreen.''
8         5    17 WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $17.95.)
                  A rich orphan comes of age while she travels the
                  world.
9         7     4 FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,
                  $16.95.) The hero of the ''Foundation'' series
                  searches for the lost planet Earth.
10        9    10 THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random
                  House, $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and
                  greed mark a young woman's life in 18th-century
                  England and France.
11       11     8 ROGER'S VERSION, by John Updike. (Knopf, $17.95.)
                  A fiftyish professor wrestles with God, sex,
                  science, technology, mathematics and computers.
12       13     7 THE BEET QUEEN, by Louise Erdrich. (Holt,
                  $16.95.) Forty years in a small North Dakota town
                  near an Indian reservation.
13       14     2 PERFUME, by Patrick Suskind. (Knopf, $16.95.)
                  An olfactory vampire kills people to steal their
                  scents.
14 *     12     2 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts.
                  (Naval Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war
                  over Vietnam.
15       10     3 FORTUNE OF FEAR, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge
                  Publications, $18.95.) Countess Krak of Voltar
                  arrives from outer space to save Earth from an
                  invasion.

                  Nonfiction
1         1     5 HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.)
                  From Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized
                  biography of Frank Sinatra.
2         2    27 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday,
                  $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from the
                  television star and father of five.
3         6     2 ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Random House,
                  $18.95.) The comedian's autobiography, beginning
                  with her impoverished childhood in Hollywood.
4         4     5 THE STORY OF ENGLISH, by Robert McCrum, William
                  Cran and Robert MacNeil. (Sifton/Viking, $24.95.)
                  Companion volume to the PBS series about the
                  world's most widely used language.
5         3     5 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow,
                  $19.95.) The crisis in the American automobile
                  industry and Japan's role in it.
6        12     2 DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland with
                  Greg Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The ballerina
                  recalls her checkered career.
7         5     7 MACMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi. (Warner,
                  $16.95.) The autobiography of the quarterback for
                  the Chicago Bears.
8         7    35 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House,
                  $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in
                  pictures and rhyme.
9               1 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                  Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                  recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.
10 *      8     2 DREAMGIRL, by Mary Wilson with Patricia Romanowski
                  and Ahrgus Juilliard. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A
                  former member of the Supremes describes her time
                  with the group.
11       11     7 ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden with
                  Dave Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations on
                  football by the television commentator and former
                  Oakland Raiders coach.
12 *           25 JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot.
                  (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire
                  veterinarian about his favorite animal.
13        9     7 SNAKE, by Ken Stabler and Berry Stainback.
                  (Doubleday, $15.95.) The experiences of the retired
                  Oakland Raiders quarterback.
14       14     6 I, TINA, by Tina Turner with Kurt Loder. (Morrow,
                  $16.95.) The autobiography of a Tennessee
                  sharecropper's daughter who became a rock-and-roll
                  star.
15       13     8 MAYFLOWER MADAM, by Sydney Biddle Barrows with
                  William Novak. (Arbor House, $17.95.) A member of
                  one of America's oldest families tells of the
                  world's oldest profession.

                  Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1         1     8 MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM, by
                  Susan Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.)
                  How to cope with overbearing men.
2         2    25 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton,
                  $15.95.) A regimen based on the Vanderbilt
                  University Weight Management Program.
3         3    64 FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn
                  Diamond. (Warner, $17.50.) A diet for weight loss
                  and physical fitness.
4         4     3 BE HAPPY YOU ARE LOVED, by Robert H. Schuller.
                  (Nelson, $15.95.) Inspiration from a California
                  clergyman.
5         5     2  THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff Smith.
                  (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at
                  moderate cost.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

WHAT'S DOING IN;
Berkeley

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM BRAND; William Brand, assistant business news editor of The
Oakland Tribune, lives in Berkeley.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 10, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1923 words


Berkeley is a city that became a symbol for a generation. The Free Speech
Movement - the first campus revolt of the 1960's - began here on the University
of California's largest campus, focusing the attention of the nation on this
city of 120,000 on the east side of San Francisco Bay.

Anti-Vietnam War activists drawn here during that decade of protests found more
than politics. They discovered that Berkeley was a cosmopolitan place filled
with museums and culture and blessed with a mild climate that made even winter
enjoyable. A lot of visitors stayed adding their energy, talent and ideas to
what was already a heady mix. What's Ahead The poet Gary Snyder will read
selections from his latest book, ''Left Out in the Rain: Poems 1947-1984,'' Nov.
18 at 8 P.M. at Black Oak Books (1491 Shattuck; 415-486-0698).

The Ballet Espanol de Madrid will appear Nov. 21 and Nov. 22 at 8 P.M. at
Zellerbach Hall (415-642-9988) on the University of California campus. Tickets
are $11.50 to $16.50.  Not everything in Berkeley is cerebral. Each November,
there's the annual clash between the University of California at Berkeley's
football team and archrival Stanford from Palo Alto. Rivalry between the two
schools in every area is fierce. Berkeley, for instance, proudly notes it has 12
Nobel prizewinners on its faculty while Stanford has 10. As for the Big Game, it
is pure collegiate Americana. It's in Berkeley this year and before the kickoff
at 2 P.M. Nov. 22, there will be bonfire rallies, fraternity and sorority dances
and round after round of parties. Football fans fill the streets, the parking
lots, the hotels and restaurants. The game is always sold out by game week; the
number to call to see if any tickets are still available is 415-642-5150.

Berkeley's KPFA, a listener-sponsored radio station, holds its 16th annual
crafts fair Dec. 6 and 7 as well as Dec. 13 and 14 from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Articles range from fine, handmade furniture through ceramics and handwoven
fabrics to photography and graphic arts. The emphasis is on quality, but the
fair's sponsor makes sure there is a wide range of prices. It's held in the
Hink's department store building, Shattuck and Kittredge. Admission is $3.
Walking Tours A good place to start is the four blocks of Telegraph Avenue from
Dwight Way north to Bancroft Avenue, where the University of California campus
begins. From the mid-1960's to 1975, this was America's antiwar battleground.
People's Park, a half-block east of Telegraph between Dwight and Haste, remains
but there's nothing to see. There is a huge mural depicting the era on the
southeast corner of Telegraph at Haste.

This stretch of Telegraph is still fun to walk along, however. Craftspeople who
learned to make things by hand a decade or more ago instead of becoming
white-collar workers still line the avenue every sunny day. As the holidays draw
near, the crafts stands proliferate. Tie-dyed T-shirts can still be had, as can
every kind of inexpensive silver ring and earring imaginable. There are also
hand-painted ties for $6.50, Christmas candles, $5 to $10, and handmade wooden
dreidls for Hanukkah, $5.

Both sides of the street are lined with coffee shops, bookstores, art poster
shops and boutiques. One very special place is Cody's Books (Haste and
Telegraph; 415-845-7852). Cody's helpful staff will order any book in print and
mail it to you, and it has just added a pleasant restaurant with a deli-style
menu with a Berkeley flavor (homemade granola, $2.30; an omelet served with
scones, $4.95; a caffe latte in a tall glass, $1.35). For used books in depth -
there are four floors of them - walk into Moe's Books (2476 Telegraph;
415-849-2087), a Berkeley institution.

Telegraph ends at the entrance to the campus of the University of California at
Berkeley, a branch of the state university system with more than 30,000
students. The Campus Visitors Center (415-642-5215) is in the main lobby of the
student union, right across Bancroft. Free guided tours are offered Monday to
Friday at 1 P.M. School ends for a month on Dec. 16, but daily tours continue
until Dec. 24. Tours resume Jan. 5. Museums The Judah L. Magnes Museum, the
Jewish Museum of the West, is housed in an old mansion at 2911 Russell Street
(415-849-2710). It is open Sunday through Thursday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission is free. Showing through Jan. 4 are winners of this year's Interfaith
Forum national competition. Works include spiritual paintings by the American
Indian artists Charleen Touchette and David Gallegos, and designs for new
churches and synagogues.

The Lawrence Hall of Science (415-642-5132), at the top of Centennial Drive in
the hills above the university, opened in 1968 as a memorial to Ernest O.
Lawrence, inventor of the cyclotron (which split the atom) and Berkeley's first
Nobel laureate. The original cyclotron is on display in front of the hall.
Lawrence Hall is open 10 to 4:30 every day. Admission is $1.25 for those over 7
on weekdays, adults pay $2.50 weekends. The hands-on science exhibits are geared
to grade-school and older children, but adults find it fun, too. There are
drop-in half-hour science workshops, biology and computer labs on weekends for
kids.

The Museum of Paleontology (415-642-1821) in the Earth Sciences Building at the
University's North Gate is worth a visit, especially for visitors with children.
It's basically a research museum and it has the largest vertebrate fossil
collection in the world. Spectacular fossils on display include a 30-foot-long
skeleton of a parasaurolophus from 75 million years ago and a juvenile,
one-year-old parasaur 18 inches long. Open 8 to 5, Monday to Friday, free
admission.

The University Earthquake Center has a working seismograph on display on the
first floor of the Earth Sciences building. Quake specialists also post
seismograph printouts of all of the world's recent large tremors. Call
415-642-2160 for a taped report on the latest quakes.

Pacific Film Archive (2625 Durant Avenue; 415-642-1124 for recording daily
listing) is an archive for film scholars. It plays a daily schedule of rarely
seen American and foreign films. Coming this month, for example, is ''Fanny
Trilogy'' from the French filmmaker Marcel Pagnol. Admission is $4.25.  The
University Art Museum (2626 Bancroft Avenue; 415-642-1207) is a glass and
concrete structure across Bancroft from campus. Showing through March is a major
exhibit of the German abstract expressionist Hans Hofmann's work. The museum is
open 11 to 5, Wednesday to Sunday. Admission is $2. The museum's restaurant, the
Swallow, features patio dining and is operated by a workers' collective; among
menu choices are pasta and cold chicken salad and fresh-baked bread ($4.50) and
quiche Lorraine ($2.95).

Even though it's fall, the University Botanical Garden (415-642-3343), on
Centennial Drive below Lawrence Hall, has lots of blooming flowers, from
marigolds to fuchsias, in its African and South American sections. The flowers,
University of California botanists say, still think they're south of the
Equator. Coming up Dec. 6 and 7 is the annual Holiday Season Plant Sale. A
bewildering variety is on sale from orchids to cactuses. Original watercolor
drawings of California flowers by Kristin Jacob, a Bay Area nature illustrator,
will also be on sale.

The half dozen blocks between Rose in North Berkeley and downtown along Shattuck
Avenue have been dubbed the ''gourmet ghetto'' because of the food available
from Chez Panisse to Cocolat, the chocolate truffle store. One store not to miss
is Peet's Coffee and Tea (2124 Vine; 415-841-0564), a block east of Shattuck.
Major Dickenson's blend, $6.95 a pound, is rich and intricate; Peet's French
roast, $6.15, is a dark-roasted, intense brew. Don't like caffeine? Try Peet's
water process decaf, $7.89 a pound. Peet's will ship coffee anywhere. Where to
Stay The Claremont Resort Hotel (41 Tunnel Road; 415-843-3000) is a sprawling
Victorian building that has recently been refurbished. Pool, tennis club,
restaurant, nightly dancing and a smashing view of San Francisco. $154 to $199
for two.

The Marriott at the Berkeley marina (200 Marina Boulevard; 415-548-7920) is
right on the bay and has all the usual amenities. $119 to $139.

The French Hotel (1538 Shattuck; 415-548-9930) is across the street from Chez
Panisse, convenient to many of Berkeley's best restaurants and shops. $58 to
$95.

Gramma's (2740 Telegraph; 415-549-2145) is a Victorian bed and breakfast inn
complex with 29 rooms (many with fireplaces). $71 to $131.

Bed and Breakfast International (151 Ardmore Road, Kensington, Calif. 94707;
415-548-7556) arranges reservations in private homes and small inns in the $30
to $50 range; two-night minimum. Where to Dine This is the 15th anniversary of
Chez Panisse (1517 Shattuck; 415-548-5525; reservations necessary), the
restaurant that brought the world California-style cuisine and still has a
repuation as an innovator. The style is French, but with the lightest possible
sauces and the most delicate ingredients: mesquite-grilled salmon, for example,
was served in a fragrant vinaigrette of olive oil, sage and nasturtium blossoms.
The restaurant's house zinfandel, which is made for the restaurant by Joseph
Phelps, a Napa County winemaker, costs $12 a bottle or $2.75 a glass.

The Cafe at Chez Panisse, which is above the restaurant, was established for the
drop-in crowd who used to do just that downstairs before its fame spread. There
are no reservations, prices are moderate, but the menu's just as exotic and
customers can choose from a large a la carte menu. Examples: baked Sonoma goat
cheese with garden lettuce, $6.50; goat cheese calzone (big enough for two
hearty eaters), $11; beef sirloin with fresh tomato salsa and french fries, $11;
poached pears and raspberries in creme fraiche, $4.

Other less famous but worthwhile spots for dinner:

Fourth Street Grill (1820 4th Street; 415-849-0526). Among the appetizers are
spicy flautitas in a roasted tomato chili sauce; entrees include
mesquite-grilled Yucatan sausage with black beans and shoestring-size french
fries, $10.50, or grilled Pacific swordfish in a spicy pineapple salsa, $15.

Augusta's (2955 Telegraph; 415-548-3140, reservations needed for dinner).
Sauteed Pacific salmon in sea urchin butter ($13) or fettuccine Alfredo ($7.50)
are among the entrees prepared with a light touch.

Two of Berkeley's first-rate Thai restaurants are Plearn (2050 University;
415-841-2148) and Cha Am (1543 Shattuck; 415-848-9664). Plearn tends toward hot
dishes, Cha Am's are milder. Each costs about $20 to $30 for two.

Bridge Creek Restaurant (1549 Shattuck; 415-548-1774), next door to Cha Am,
offers oatmeal hotcakes ($6) or an apple-smoked bacon and cheddar cheese omelet
($9.95) for breakfast. The restaurant has just begun serving lunch and dinner as
well. An apple wood-grilled smoked ham, cream cheese, lettuce and tomato
sandwich is $8.50; pot roasted brisket of beef is $12.

Alice Waters's Cafe Fanny (1603 San Pablo; 415-524-5447) is rather like a
stand-up, Italian espresso bar: little pizzas, open-faced sandwiches, nothing
over $5. Cafe Fanny serves great cafe au lait in large bowls.

For the best dessert, try Cocolat (1481 Shattuck; 415-843-3265) where chocolate
truffles are said to have landed in America 10 years ago. In December, its
founder, Alice Med-rich, is introducing liquor cordials: chocolates filled with
pear, raspberry, quince and kiwi with eau de vie. $1.25 each, $11.95 for a box
of 10.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

An article on Berkeley, Calif., (Travel, Nov. 9) gave an incorrect telephone
number for Bed & Breakfast International. The number is 415-525-4569.

GRAPHIC: Photos of dinosaur model with child, Botanical Garden, coffee apparatus
and jewelry and tie-dyed shirts for sale along Telgraph Avenue (Terrence
McCarthy); Map of California highlighting Berkeley (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PARADE IS DROPPED FOR LACK OF CROWDS

BYLINE: By JACK CAVANAUGH

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 4, Column 6; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 781 words


RUTH CONGDON remembers the large crowds that turned out for the old Armistice
Day parades in downtown Hartford in the years immediately after World War II.

A veteran of four and a half years' service in the Women's Army Corps who was
wounded on Omaha Beach in France just after the Normandy invasion, Miss Congdon
participated in many of the parades and was heartened by the spectators'
response.

Spectator interest has plunged since then, and so this year, for the first year
in 40, there will be no parade in Hartford.

''It's discouraging and I feel very bad about it, but there just weren't enough
people coming out to watch the parade anymore,'' said Miss Congdon, who has
served as the chief coordinator of both the Veterans Day (the name of the
holiday was changed in 1954) and Memorial Day parades for the last 12 years.

''I personally wanted to continue the parade, but the Veterans Day Parade
Committee decided to cancel it,'' Miss Congdon, a member of the committee, said.
''Maybe by canceling it we'll awaken people to how important it is to honor our
veterans and then be able to resume the parade next year.''

The Hartford parade traditionally started at Lafayette Square at the State
Capitol and, after covering 1.3 miles, ended in Bushnell Park near the Capitol,
where a brief ceremony was held. Marching units came from throughout the state,
included veterans' groups, the Governor's Foot Guard and the band from the
United States Coast Guard Academy in New London.

''But the crowds got smaller and smaller, and there would be stretches were the
sidewalks would be empty,'' she said. ''Last year, I think less than 1,000
people came out to see the parade.''

Miss Congdon attributed the small crowds to a decline in patriotism and a
population shift to the suburbs.

But state officials of the nation's two largest veterans' organizations said
they saw no loss of patriotism.

''I think that if there are fewer parades on Veterans Day, it's not because of
any lack of patriotism, which I think is on the rise,'' said the State Adjutant
for the Veterans of Foreign Wars, Dominick Romeo. ''I think it's more a matter
of economics. It's getting to be a little more expensive to put on parades, and
towns don't want to put up the money. Also, there are far fewer marching bands
available - probably 50 percent less than there used to be.''

The State Adjutant for the American Legion, Hugh Graham, also would not link a
decline in enthusiasm for Veterans Day parades to a lessening of patriotism.

''On Memorial Day, when the weather is usually nicer, the crowds have been
getting bigger,'' he said, ''so I don't think it's got anything to do with
patriotism. Also, most towns in the state still have services that usually
include wreath layings at war memorials.''

With the cancellation of the Hartford parade, which like most similar
observances had been held on the Sunday before Veterans Day, the largest parades
this year will be staged today in Stamford and Milford. Other parades are also
set for today in Naugatuck and Enfield.

''Our crowds have been constant for years, and we've continued to get a good
turnout of participants,'' said the Mayor's adviser to the Stamford Patriotic
and Special Events Commission, Tony Pia, who is a leading advocate of veterans'
rights. ''One thing we've noticed is that both the number of spectators and
participants tends to increase following a dramatic incident involving American
servicemen. For example, after more than 200 marines were killed in Lebanon in a
terrorist attack a few years ago, we had a far larger turnout at our Veterans
Day parade, both in terms of spectators and marchers.''

Mr. Pia, a retired Army sergeant, said about 50 units would take part in today's
parade, which starts at 1 P.M. at Scalzi Park and ends across from the Old Town
Hall at the Veterans Memorial Park, where a ceremony will be held.

About the same number of marching units are expected to take part in the annual
Milford parade, which begins at 1 P.M. at the Milford High School field. After
the parade, a Korea-Vietnam Memorial will be unveiled on the Milford Town Green,
in tribute to Milford natives who served in the military during those conflicts.

The chairman of the parade committee, Joseph Von Dietsch, who is also the
parade's grand marshal, said crowds at the Veterans Day parades had been
decreasing in recent years.

''We still get a pretty good crowd, but I think the national patriotic fervor
was diluted when they made Veterans Day part of a long weekend,'' he said.

After protests from veterans' organizations, Congress restored Nov. 11 - the
date commemorating the end of World War I - as Veterans Day.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NBC FILM ON AGENT ORANGE DISPUTE

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 699 words


IN this country's time-honored movie tradition of the little guy doing battle
with Government or corporate bureaucracies, ''Unnatural Causes'' presents the
case for the Vietnam veterans who are demanding redress for their exposure to
the herbicide Agent Orange. The television movie on NBC at 9 tonight makes no
pretense of being a documentary. Total balance is beside the point. This is
drama with a point of view, and the producers make the most of the opportunity,
leaving no doubt as to who their heroes and villains are. And that is what makes
''Unnatural Causes'' riveting.

The script by John Sayles (''Return of the Secaucus Seven'') focuses on one
veteran, Frank Coleman, a fictional composite. He is played with gritty
intelligence and toughness by John Ritter. The film, a Blue Andre Production
directed by Lamont Johnson, opens in South Vietnam in 1968. On their last day of
patrol, Coleman and his men are caught under a downpour of chemical defoliant
being sprayed from planes. ''Only we can prevent forests,'' cracks one pilot.
Jumping to Chicago nearly 10 years later, Coleman, a divorced schoolteacher,
suddenly collapses and is taken to a hospital. His abdomen is riddled with
cancerous growths. He is given a few months to live.

Meanwhile, working for the Veterans Administration in Chicago as a benefits
counselor is Maude DeVictor. Ms. DeVictor, a real person, is portrayed by Alfre
Woodard, giving still another of her impressively powerful performances (she
almost singlehandedly brought dramatic clout to the pilot for the series ''L. A.
Law''). Having noticed a number of unusual ailments and diseases cropping up in
the case histories of Vietnam veterans, Ms. DeVictor has begun her own
investigation into possible links with the herbicide sprayings. When she meets
Mr. Coleman, the two join forces.

At first, they struggle against typical bureaucratic inertia. When Mr. Coleman,
being treated for what is deemed a nonservice-related illness, begins to
complain about the chemicals he was subjected to, the experts talk knowingly
about ''paranoia.'' One doctor assures him that ''this is one of the phases most
of our terminals go through.'' Then, as the Coleman and DeVictor investigation
proceeds, discovering that the dioxin byproducts involved are 2,000 times as
poisonous as arsenic, more official resistance is seen setting in. The
ramifications, going far beyond Chicago, are enormous, ranging from potential
lawsuits to the possibility that, in the words of one observer, ''Vietnam could
take us to the World Court for using chemical warfare.''

Ms. DeVictor finds her V.A. superiors, who were initially cooperative, advising
her to ''keep a lid'' on her findings. She is denied the right to certain
personnel files. The V.A. telephone operators are told to bypass her and channel
all calls about Agent Orange to her superiors. Her desk is moved to a site where
her activities will be more visible for careful monitoring. According to the
show, the official V.A. position on Agent Orange-related charges is that ''any
such claims should be noted but not encouraged.''

Most scenes are brief, and the film moves along crisply, never for a moment
leaving any doubt that the heroes will come out on top. There are one or two
elements that raise nagging suspicions about the film's being too heavily
weighted in favor of DeVictor and Coleman. Jeanette, another V.A. worker, played
by the singer Patti LaBelle, keeps popping up for no other reason than to remind
Ms. DeVictor of how Jeanette won an antidiscrimination case against their
employer. The point may have something to do with the rather surprising but
unelaborated note at the end of the film that ''in 1984, Maude DeVictor was
dismissed from the Veterans Administration in a labor dispute.''

In a long ''afterword,'' the viewer is brought up to date on the series of
class-action lawsuits against chemical companies that grew out of an individual
suit filed by a Vietnam veteran, Paul Reutershan, in 1978. A number of appeals
by veterans and their families are still pending. The producers acknowledge
''the inspiration provided by the life and work'' of Mr. Reutershan, who died in
December 1978.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TV SUBJECTS SHARE LIVES WITH MIXED FEELINGS

BYLINE: By STEPHEN FARBER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1004 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 5


Real people whose stories have been told in television docudramas often have
little to do with the production of the films. But in two new movies to be shown
this week - ''Unnatural Causes,'' tonight on NBC, and ''The George McKenna
Story,'' tomorrow on CBS - the people who inspired the films had a close,
ongoing involvement with the productions. They were in the unusual position of
being collaborators in television versions of their life stories, and they have
some mixed feelings about the experience.

''Unnatural Causes'' focuses on Maude DeVictor (played by Alfre Woodard), the
counselor at the Chicago Veterans Administration who fought to expose the effect
of the chemical defoliant Agent Orange on Vietnam War veterans. John Ritter
co-stars as a veteran dying of cancer. ''The George McKenna Story'' dramatizes
the experiences of a principal at George Washington High School in Los Angeles,
an inner-city school riddled with drug abuse and gang violence when he took over
and resolved to transform it into a model school; he solved many of the problems
through an aggressive, controversial approach that is being emulated by
educators around the country.

The producers of these films emphasized that they had not granted script
approval to the subjects. Nevertheless, Linda Otto, who has produced a number of
fact-based films, including ''Adam,'' said she wanted the real George McKenna
involved in her film.

'Dramatic License'

''I always insist that the person be consulted during the writing process,'' Ms.
Otto said. ''Whenever you do a film, you must take dramatic license in
compressing time, and you can't do that without the help of the person whose
story you are telling. George was also on location part of the time, and he was
extremely helpful in providing motivation for the actors when the script was
unclear.''

Mr. McKenna admitted that he was reluctant to give his blessing to the project
when Ms. Otto first approached him, chiefly because he wondered how it would
affect his position as principal of Washington High. ''I was apprehensive about
the film, and I still am,'' Mr. McKenna said bluntly. ''I think it must be
unprecedented for a film to go on the air while someone is still at the job.
Usually when one of these films is made, the person is dead or has moved on to
another job. I don't know what the responses will be. I have some fans at
Washington High, and I have some people who resent me and may be envious when
they see the film. Some of my teachers think I'm dictatorial. Some of my
superiors think I'm rebellious. They're not going to be happy to see this.''

Denzel Washington, who is a regular cast member on ''St. Elsewhere,'' plays Mr.
McKenna in the film, which is directed by his ''St. Elsewhere'' co-star, Eric
Laneuville. To prepare for the role, Mr. Washington visited the school and also
talked to people in the neighborhood about Mr. McKenna. ''They all said they
respected George because he was actually trying to do something,'' Mr.
Washington said. ''None of them said they liked him. I didn't worry about
imitating George's mannerisms, but I tried to capture his energy. I've had a
chance to play a couple of other real people -Malcolm X and Stephen Biko - and I
think all three of them have something in common. What they want is very simple,
but they want it with such fervor and determination.''

On the Set Every Day

Although Mr. McKenna spent just five days on the set of ''The George McKenna
Story,'' Ms. DeVictor was on the set of ''Unnatural Causes'' every day. She says
she felt an immediate rapport with Alfre Woodard when she met her.

''Alfre is a better Maude than I am,'' Ms. DeVictor commented. ''When I first
saw her, I called her Maude Jr. Sometimes the director, Lamont Johnson, would
call for Maude, and I assumed he was calling for Alfre. He would have to say,
'No, I want the real Maude.' ''

When the real people are so closely involved in the productions, isn't it
inevitable that the films must soft-pedal their shortcomings and opt for
unabashed glorification? ''I think we brought up some negative aspects of George
McKenna's life,'' Ms. Otto replied. ''He doesn't have much of a personal life,
and we showed that. Not every teacher who watches the film will agree with his
philosophy, and we let people come to their own conclusions. On the other hand,
we clearly admire him. I haven't met many people like George. He's a truly
enriching person.''

In both cases the producers and participants insisted that the main purpose of
the film was not to sanctify the individuals, but to raise awareness of the
larger issues implicit in these true stories.

'A Sense of Hope'

''I hope the film will give a sense of hope in suggesting that schools serving
minority children, disenfranchised children, can be successful,'' Mr. McKenna
said. ''I want people to think about dioxin and be concerned about it,'' Ms.
DeVictor said. ''And beyond that, if people are struggling and feel they are not
winning, maybe this film will inspire them. It's important to tell young people
that they can win. So many of them turn to drugs because there are no victories
in their lives. I don't think there was anything heroic about what I did. I was
just doing my job.''

Yet she also admitted that she hoped for some personal vindication as a result
of the film. She lost her job at the Veterans Administration in 1984 and is now
working as a deputy public guardian in San Mateo, Calif., counseling disabled
people. ''I would love to be at the V.A. regional office in Chicago on the day
after this film is shown,'' Ms. DeVictor said, ''to see the reactions of all the
people there who were against me.''

Mr. McKenna, however, sounded a more skeptical note in reflecting on the
ephemeral nature of television celebrity. ''You become the most talked-about
person in the country for one night,'' he observed. ''Then you have to get back
to reality. The problems at Washington High will still be there the day after
this film is shown.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

11th Hour, 11th Day, 11th Month

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 394 words


Bitterness and anger aren't entirely absent on this Veterans Day, but at least
America has begun to pay proper homage to the men and women who served in the
nation's longest, most divisive war. With 143 Vietnam memorials rising in cities
and towns around the nation, the spirit now is of reconciliation and
remembrance.

Armistice Day, it used to be called; already the term is quaint and unfamiliar
to much of the population. The sentiments of that day - Nov. 11, 1918 -are even
more so. Americans then thought they were marking the end of ''the war to end
all wars.'' Within 21 years it needed a Roman numeral: World War I.
''Hostilities will cease on the entire front on November 11, at 11 A.M., French
time.'' So went Marshal Ferdinand Foch's message to the Commanders in Chief of
the Allied armies after he concluded the armistice with a delegation from the
defeated German Government. After more than four years of sodden trenches,
mustard gas, industrialized death and memorable valor, Allied soldiers were
uncertain how to react. Initially, one chronicler wrote, ''There was little
cheering or outward sign of emotion.'' After dark on Armistice Day, however,
celebrations broke out along many parts of the front, with flares ignited,
bonfires lit and ''general rejoicing.''

In Paris, Clemenceau hailed the recovery of Alsace and Lorraine from Germany. In
London, Lloyd George told the House of Commons that the armistice had ended
''the cruelest and most terrible war that has ever scourged mankind.'' He added,
''I hope we may say that thus, this fateful morning, came to an end all wars.''

And in Washington President Wilson, who had led America into the war to ''make
the world safe for democracy,'' declared a holiday for government workers.
''Everything for which America fought has been accomplished,'' he said. ''It
will now be our fortunate duty to assist by example, by sober, friendly counsel
and by material aid in the establishment of just democracy throughout the
world.''

In 1954 Congress changed the name to Veterans Day. After World War II and Korea
claimed several million more casualties, it made little sense to celebrate the
end of only one war or to suggest that the nation would not again have to call
on the courage and sacrifice of its young. To those called to battle - even to
dubious battle - 11/11 remains a day of honor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1986


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 935 words


THE WORLD

President Reagan rejected demands that he disclose details of any Administration
dealings with Iran in efforts to free American hostages in Lebanon. Mr. Reagan
asserted that no laws had been broken.

Page A1

The N.S.C.'s staff involvement in sensitive, paramilitary, potentially
embarrassing operations marks a basic shift in its traditional role, members of
Congress and foreign policy experts said.

A10

News analysis: The U.S. has undercut key policy objectives and left allies and
Arab moderates bewildered in secretly supplying arms to a country linked with
terrorism, United States officials said.

A10

Two French hostages have been freed and taken to Damascus, Syrian sources told
the Associated Press. They identified the two French citizens as Camille Sontag
and Marcel Coudari.

A9

A huge chemical spill in the Rhine confronted Europe with a disaster. Officials
in France, West Germany, the Netherlands and Switzerland said the waterway was
in danger of becoming a dead river.

A1

Moscow would permit development of American space weapons as part of a
comprehensive arms control treaty as long as the models were not tested in
space, Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze said.

A8

Many Filipinos were uneasy even though military leaders in Manila assured the
nation that the situation was ''stable and secure'' after the departure of
President Corazon C. Aquino for Japan.

A3

Japan vowed more aid for Manila. Prime Minister Yasushiro Nakasone made the
pledge in a one-hour meeting in Tokyo with President Aquino as she started a
four-day visit.

A3

Early man may have wiped out a race of giant apes that would have towered over
their predatory human contemporaries, according to fossil evidence discovered in
Vietnam.

C1


End of arms pact put off by U.S.

A1


Argentina protests gene-splicing test

A1


Terror in Turkey linked to Shiites

A9


Pari is struck by 3 bomb blasts

A9


Iceland whale plant sabotaged

A10


Britain wins support on sanctions

A11



THE NATION


 American Catholic-Vatican ties are increasingly strained, the chief bishop,
James W. Malone, said. He voiced hope of discussing the tensions with the Pope
before he visits this country next September.

A1

Competition from Hispanic workers for jobs and the belief that immigration is
uncontrollable led Hispanic-American Congressmen to back or try to change the
immigration bill rather than oppose it.

A12

Whether the death penalty may be mandated by states for all murders by prisoners
serving life sentences without possibility of parole is to be decided by the
Supreme Court.

B8

A feud between Alabama Democrats prompted the election of the first Republican
Governor there since 1872. Gov. Guy Hunt is the first truly country man to be
chosen in Alabama in 30 years.

A12

Wickes plans major purchases. The big building materials, apparel and auto parts
company said it held an option to buy nearly 10 percent of Lear Siegler Inc., a
big aerospace and automotive producer.

D1

BankAmerica plans a big asset sale, according to Thomas A. Cooper, president of
the corporation. He said the bank planned to sell $7 billion to $8 billion worth
of assets in the next two quarters.

D1

Burroughs and Sperry, which agreed to merge five months ago, announced the name
for their new company. The computer maker will be known as the Unisys
Corporation, (prounounced U-ni-sis).

D1

Richard G. Darman's criticism of big companies drew mixed notices. Deputy
Treasury Secretary Darman charged the companies were bloated, risk-averse,
inefficient and inadequate spenders on research.

D1

McDonald's acted speedily after two nonfatal swallowing incidents were reported.
Parents of children under 3 who were given Legos toys can take them to
McDonald's stores and exchange them for the larger Duplos toys.

A13

The homeless mentally ill benefit from a new kind of partnership between
psychiatry and simple compassion that are offered in structured, home-like
surroundings.

C1



Washington Talk

A14


 Seeking the right committees
The monument that is Arlington

THE REGION


 Serious police management woes must be corrected, a special Koch administration
panel said. It told the Police Department to adopt sweeping changes in officers'
recruitment, training and promotions.

A1

Some police officers are protesting anticorruption measures announced last week
by refusing to issue summonses or make minor arrests or are calling in sick,
Commissioner Benjamin Ward acknowledged.

B4

Two confessions are admissible, a judge ruled. The confessions were made by
Cheryl Pierson, 17, a former cheer leader, and Sean Pica, the classmate who
prosecutors say she hired to kill her father.

B3

Major changes in the waterfronts of New York City and New Jersey are
transforming the harbor into a coast of apartment and office buildings and
public spaces, including marinas, promenades and parks.

B1

A publicist collaborated with Donald R. Manes, the Queens Borough President, in
soliciting a bribe for the awarding of a cable-television franchise, an
indictment naming Michael A. Nussbaum charged.

B3

A major group-riding experiment is set. New York City's taxi commission is
expected to approve tomorrow a six-month group riding plan linking York Avenue
at 79th and 72d Streets with Wall Street.

B1


Addicts face cost to get well

A1


Tax rise proposed in Nassau

B1


Students choose dormitary life

B1


Lottery winner toasts victory

B3


Trial in trooper's slaying opens

B2


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SCOUTING;
Fast Forward In Reverse

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 233 words


Bob Wieland, the legless Vietnam veteran who took more than four days to finish
the New York City Marathon, was not the only handicapped participant who used an
unusual method of propulsion.

It was Wieland, of course, who abandoned his wheelchair for the race and covered
the 26 miles 385 yards by swinging his torso through his arms. But Dan
Winchester, a cerebral palsy victim who was another of the contingent of
handicapped runners from the Achilles Track Club in Manhattan, managed to make a
rare kind of marathon run without leaving his wheelchair: He covered the entire
course backward.

This was the first year that anybody had taken such a perspective on the
five-borough race, and the 33-year-old Winchester, who was accompanied by a
couple of volunteers to watch where he was going, had a good reason for it.
Since he has little use of his arms, his preferred method of competition is to
turn his wheelchair around and propel himself by pushing away from the road with
his legs. ''It's easier,'' he says. And also faster. Winchester - one of several
handicapped marathoners who returned to Central Park last Thursday to accompany
Wieland across the finish line after a journey of 98 hours 48 minutes 17 seconds
-completed the course himself in 10:12:38. That was better than four of the 13
other wheelchair racers, including 34-year-old Bill Reilly, who also took the
backward route.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOSSILS POINT TO GIANT APE'S VIOLENT DEATH

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 6; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1315 words


EARLY Stone Age man may have wiped out a race of monster apes that would have
towered over their predatory human contemporaries, recently reported evidence
suggests.

The evidence, a remarkable assemblage of fossils discovered by Vietnamese
scientists, has prompted American anthropologists to mount an expedition of
their own to the site in Langson Province of northern Vietnam. Although details
of the find are sparse, Soviet scientists familiar with the area have confirmed
the potential importance of the discovery and encouraged the Americans to pursue
their investigation.

In a gesture seen as a modest political overture toward the United States, the
Hanoi Government has granted two American anthropologists permission to visit
the site, where the bones of Homo erectus and his stone weapons are said to be
mingled with the remains of the ape Gigantopithecus: the largest primate known
to have lived.

Gigantopithecus had been thought by some paleontologists to have died out long
before the rise of man and proof that the huge ape was actually a contemporary
of Homo erectus would call for re-examination of the chronologies of primate
evolution. Homo erectus was a Pleistocene-epoch ancestor of modern man.

The Americans, Dr. John W. Olsen of the University of Arizona and Dr. Russell L.
Ciochon of the University of California at Berkeley, plan to begin their
one-month sojourn in Vietnam in mid-December. Besides examining the fossils
discovered by the Vietnamese, the Americans intend to evaluate the potential of
the site for future anthropological study.

''We first heard of the site in 1983,'' Dr. Olsen said in an interview. ''We
were working in China at the time, where we encountered some Vietnamese
anthropologists who told us of the discovery. The find was apparently
accidental. The ancient bones seem to have been turned up in the course of
digging bat excrement out of limestone caves for use as fertilizer.''

Since then, Dr. Olsen said, he and other scientists have vainly asked their
Vietnamese counterparts for details about the site and its fossils, which are
believed to be roughly a half million years old. Dr. Olsen said he understood
the site to be at Tham Khuyen northeast of Hanoi, in a range of sugarloaf-shaped
limestone mountains shot through with ancient sinkholes, caverns and underground
streams. The same geological formation extends into the neighboring Chinese
province of Kwangsi.

The anthropologist said he had been urged to pursue the investigation by Dr.
Pavel Boriskovsky, a Soviet scientist whose own excavations in Vietnam were
halted in the late 1960's by American air raids. The Soviet anthropologist said
that before he was compelled to leave Vietnam he had come upon some tantalizing
hints about the character of human existence during the Pleistocene epoch, 1.8
million to about 100,000 years ago.

''It's been maddeningly frustrating,'' Dr. Olsen said. ''We think the Vietnamese
have found something really important, but lacking details about the nature of
the fossils and the geological situation at the site, we've found it impossible
to evaluate the discovery. That's why we've been so anxious to visit the place
and see for ourselves. We've been asking for three years, and we're delighted
that Hanoi has finally agreed.''

The American said he considered himself the beneficiary of a change in Hanoi's
stance toward the United States, by which scientific and cultural exchanges will
be encouraged. The expedition has been underwritten by the L.S.B. Leakey
Foundation of Pasadena, Calif., and is sponsored by the U.S. Committee for
Cooperative Exchange with Vietnam.

Gigantopithecus has been cloaked in mystery ever since its fossil remains were
accidentally discovered in a Hong Kong pharmacy 51 years ago.

Fossil bones were highly regarded in China as ''dragons' teeth,'' which, when
ground up and eaten, were supposed to be potent medicines. Among the Western
scientists who regularly sorted through the stores of ''dragons' teeth''
collected by Chinese pharmacies was G.H.R. von Koenigswald, a Dutch
paleontologist who in 1935 spotted a tooth of immense size from a previously
unknown type of primate.

Dr. von Koenigswald found several more teeth from the same type of ape in other
Hong Kong pharmacies. Paleontologists soon realized that if the body of the
animal were of the same scale as its teeth, which resembled those of a gorilla,
it must have been a veritable King Kong, standing some nine feet tall and
weighing 600 pounds. The genus was thus by far the largest primate known to
science, and was accordingly named Gigantopithecus, or gigantic ape.

Since 1935, scientists have found hundreds of Gigantopithecus teeth and some
jawbones of corresponding size at sites in Pakistan and China. But apart from
some barely identifiable chips, few other bones of Gigantopithecus have ever
come to light, and attempts at reconstructing the animal have remained largely
speculative. Dr. Olsen believed the ravages of ancient hyenas may explain the
difficulty of finding Gigantopithecus bones other than jaws and teeth. ''We know
that hyenas were contemporaries of Gigantopithecus in mid-Pleistocene China,''
he said of the time 700,000 to 100,000 years ago, ''and we know how modern
hyenas in East Africa feed. When they devour the carcass of a large animal, they
eat everything except the teeth and jawbones, which are too difficult to chew
up.''

The paucity of Gigantopithecus bones has led to uncertainty and vigorous
scientific debate over the years. At one time, several leading paleontologists
advanced the theory that Gigantopithecus, which seems to have shared various
physical features with the orangutan, may have been a hominid ancestral to man.
However, the current preponderance of scientific opinion, Dr. Olsen said, is
that Gigantopithecus was a dead-end offshoot from the pongid line of evolution
that led to present-day gorillas and chimpanzees.

The evidence found in Vietnam seems to suggest, he added, that although
Gigantopithecus was apparently the last of its gargantuan evolutionary line, the
animal may have survived to a much later time than had been previously
suspected, and was, in fact, a contemporary of man.

''We now believe,'' he said, ''that Gigantopithecus became extinct during the
mid-Pleistocene, perhaps surviving until about 300,000 years ago, or even a bit
later. Some of our Chinese colleagues would say, in fact, that some form of
Gigantopithecus might have survived to this day as the so-called yeti, or
abominable snow man.''

Dr. Olsen discounts this idea but points out that if some giant primate
approximating the legendary yeti actually did exist, the one part of the world
where it might have evaded capture or detailed observation would be the remote
mountain ranges of Western China and Central Asia.

The American team hopes to find artifacts and fossils in Vietnam that will bring
Gigantopithecus into sharper focus and fix the genus more securely within the
theoretical framework of primate evolution. He also hopes that an investigation
will shed light on the predator-prey relationship that he suspects existed
between Homo erectus and Gigantopithecus. If reports from Vietnam are borne out,
he says, Gigantopithecus may prove to have been no match for man, despite its
enormous size and presumed strength.

''I believe that the mountain gorilla faces today the same fate at the hands of
man as did Gigantopithecus,'' he said. ''Up to now we have lacked direct
evidence that Homo erectus was a contemporary of Gigantopithecus, much less that
man may actually have preyed on his immense relative. We hope our visit to
Vietnam will clarify these matters. But we already know that there's a human
propensity to overexploit the environment at the expense of other species. It
wouldn't surprise me to learn that Pleistocene man shared that propensity with
us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings; Map shows location of Hanoi and Lang Son (NYT); Photo of site
of cave fossil discovery

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 12, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS DAY OBSERVED

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 51 words


Members of the 26th Army Band marching in rain during parade yesterday on Fifth
Avenue, where viewers were sparse. About 700 marchers took part. A traditional
ceremony was held at Arlington National Cemetery and a more informal on at the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Page B4. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 12, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS: MONUMENTS;
Late Remembrance

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


Long after the fading of immediate issues, noble and ignoble, that provoked
conflict, war memorials serve to commemorate the people who fought and died.
Americans have done a good job of honoring those from all its wars save one: the
Korean conflict of 1950 to 1953.

The reason is money. Efforts to build a Korean War memorial during the 1960's
and 1970's were thwarted by the expense of the Vietnam War. In the
deficit-ridden 1980's, $1 million authorized by Congress toward the memorial's
estimated $6 million cost has yet to be appropriated.

Now the South Koreans, whom Americans helped defend against their northern
Communist neighbors, have come to the rescue. Hyundai Motor America has donated
$1 million to begin design and planning of a memorial in the Washington D.C.
area. The American Battle Monuments Commission, which will oversee the project,
hopes most of the rest of the money will come from corporate and individual
contributors.

That would mean completion of a Korean War Memorial in the 1990's. Even after 40
years, a tribute to the 5.7 million Americans who served in Korea, the 100,000
wounded and the 54,000 who died would not come too late.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 12, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 1986


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 966 words


The World


The President, seeking the release of the two remaining American hostages held
by a pro-Iranian group in Lebanon, will persevere through secret Iranian
contacts, Administration officials said.

Page A1

White House counsel was not privy to the National Security Council's direction
of secret dealings and arms shipments to Iran over 18 months, according to past
and present White House officials.

A6

An Italian port may have been used for secret American arms shipments to Iran
without the Italian Government's knowledge. Prime Minister Bettino Craxi ordered
a detailed inquiry into the possibility.

A6

20 South Africans were wounded when two bombs exploded in a small town in Natal
Province. In Port Elizabeth, a General Motors plant said it would break a
two-week strike by using nonunion labor.

A10

Corazon C. Aquino, in Tokyo, assured Japanese political and business leaders
that she has brought stability to the Philippines. President Aquino is seeking
new investment and continued backing.

A13

Envoys crisscrossed Manila between the Defense Ministry and the Malacanang
Palace to help avert fears of a coup. One envoy said, ''We're doing it the
Filipino way, talking out our differences.''

A14

Japan had a record trade surplus of $5 billion with the United States in
October, Tokyo said. But several American economists said they believed the
overall U.S. trade deficit was starting to ease.

D1

Commoners bought 120 lordships of manors at a London auction. The fire sale in
manorial paper titles began with 10 that were purchased at an average clip of
two minutes and $15,000 each.

A4



2 Frenchmen in Lebanon freed

A1


Kurt Waldheim: Lonely leader

A1


Shultz sees Latin shift on Nicaragua

A3


Rome court doubts alibi

A3


Setback for West German unions

A7


Anger over toxic Rhine spill

A8



The Nation


Two moderate archbishops will lead Roman Catholic bishops for three years. The
new president of the group is John L. May of St. Louis, and the new vice
president is Daniel E. Pilarczyk of Cincinnati.

A1

Man in News: Archbishop May takes measured, low-key approaches and is expected
to avoid controversy and seek reconciliation with the Vatican over the next
three years, church officials said.

A28

Senator Robert C. Byrd will lead the Democratic Senate majority in the next
Congress. Senator J. Bennett Johnston of Louisiana, citing the West Virginian's
''aura of electability,'' said he was leaving the race.

A18

A White House aide pressed the Army to negotiate a 1982 contract with the
Wedtech Corporation, a military contractor, according to a Government document.
The aide is identified as Pierre Talenti.

A19

A former convict vowed to serve God the rest of his days. The former inmate,
Jack (Murph the Surf) Murphy, 49, who stole the Star of India sapphire and
committed a murder, has been paroled.

A26

A new air-fare war may occur, industry officials said. Continental Airlines
announced lower fares on some flights out of Chicago and Houston, and other
carriers said they would match the lower prices.

D1

Washington recalled war veterans at rainy ceremonies. Fred W. Smith, a Vietnam
veteran, told 2,000 people at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial that the military
must have the nation's commitment to fight.

B4

A leading Chicagoan has given $6.9 million to help establish a Graduate School
for Public Policy Studies at the University of Chicago. The donor is Irving B.
Harris, a businessman and trustee.

A18

New interest in fresh produce is leading major food companies to use advances in
biotechnology to breed better-testing vegetables and try to market them under a
host of new brand names.

D1

The Bay Bridge is 50 years old. The San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge, which
linked San Francisco with the eastern edge of the bay, shaped the region's
future and altered the way people there live.

A18



Fees for lecturers stir debate

A1


Company admits toxic dumping

A24


Eight states will upgrade schools

A25


Baptists sever Wake Forest ties

A25


Jackson criticizes Democrats

A27


Reprieve for Louisiana elderly

A29


A dissident Archbishop

A29


Mice to aid in Downs' Syndrome

D27



Washington Talk

B6


Seeing visas as manipulation
Some who were excluded
Do microbes and politics mix?

The Region


91 percent fewer traffic tickets were written by New York City police officers
compared with a year ago in the first three days of a work slowdown to protest
anticorruption measures, the department said.

A1

A pothole panacea is in hand, according to Dr. Jameel Ahmad of Cooper Union. He
has developed a new bonding agent that, he says, will make new asphalt stick
where previously it crumbled.

B1

Carmine Persico, summing up his own defense, argued that the prosecution had
presented ''no direct evidence'' against him in a two-month trial over a ruling
commission of the Mafia.

B3

The police found a dynamite bomb in an Elmhurst, Queens, medical clinic where
abortions are performed after the officers responded to an anonymous warning.
They defused the bomb safely.

B3

A key social agency is unchanged despite sweeping changes proposed two years ago
by a mayoral panel, a nonprofit agency reported. The report focused on New York
City's Human Resources Administration.

B1

A smattering of parade watchers turned out in the rain for the Veterans Day
march down Fifth Avenue. Homosexual veterans marched for the first time under
their own banner, which was cut by a bystander.

B4



Friedman denies corruption role

A1


Symphony marks its 15th year

B1


Food irradiation steps up

B1


Inmate allowed to shun haircut

B2


Honoring a Jersey legend

B2


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 12, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM IS A FOCUS FOR VETERANS DAY

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 787 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


Veterans of the nation's wars were remembered in the rain here today in sharply
different ceremonies.

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, filling in for President Reagan,
marked the Veterans Day tradition of laying a wreath with what was, for him, a
traditional speech. Mr. Weinberger spoke at 11 A.M. after joining in a brief
presentation by drill teams of the armed forces at the Tomb of the Unknown
Soldier in Arlington National Cemetery.

A few hours later, a more personal and ambivalent message was heard by a crowd
of 2,000 at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, across the Potomac on the Mall near
the Lincoln Memorial.

At Arlington, as a drizzle fell in the gleaming white amphitheater next to the
marble tomb, the Secretary delivered a harsh assault on ''apostles of
appeasement'' who he said would force the nation's military ''to take a back
seat to what they term fiscal and political 'realities' .''

The ''naive'' insistence of some in Congress on reducing military spending in
favor of ''more popular domestic programs'' he called a ''short-changing of
America's security'' for the security of re-election.

Reagan's Proclamattion

Mr. Reagan made no public appearance for the day, but in a proclamation he urged
Americans to ''reflect on the great achievements of those whose sacrifices
preserved our freedom and our way of life.''

''With a spirit of pride and gratitude,'' he said, ''let us recall their heroic
accomplishments and thank them for their unselfish devotion to duty.''

Addressing an audience of several thousand largely World War II veterans and
active-duty service people, Secretary Weinberger invoked the memory of the
nation's unpreparedness for World War II.

''The 1930's hue and cry against building sufficient aircraft and ships finds a
parallel today in those who would grasp every excuse for weakening America's
defenses,'' he said. ''Wishful thinking and imprudent budget priorities could be
just as tragic now as they were then.''

He said ''the message to us'' of the 37 million American veterans of two world
wars and the Korean and Vietnam wars was clear: ''Safeguard what we have won;
honor us by carrying forward our cause.''

Flag Made of Flowers

At the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, a younger crowd huddled under umbrellas and in
ponchos in a suddenly harder and colder downpour.

The backdrop was an American flag 15 feet by 25 feet, made from 58,132 red roses
and white and blue carnations, one for each name on the black granite memorial
wall. The theme of the speeches was less of material preparedness for defense of
freedom than of political assurance that the nation's future wars reflect the
country's will.

''If you can hear me, brothers,'' said Fred W. Smith, a Vietnam veteran who is
chairman of the Federal Express Corporation, which flew the flowers for the flag
in from Texas and California, ''we promise you that when the inevitable test
comes again, the young asked to risk their lives'' will have the nation's
commitment ''or we will not let them fight at all.''

''Some say the cause for which we fought was not worthy of your lives,'' Mr.
Smith said. ''We pledge to you we will not let those who disparaged our efforts
and your sacrifice escape this fateful truth: freedom has a terrible price.
Millions now live in tyranny, many in the lands where we fought. We leave it to
each conscience as to who was right and who was wrong.

''But we know this: our reason and our riches will not save mankind from a
darker fate if we people are not ready to defend the principles upon which
democracy rests.''

Jan C. Scruggs, the Vietnam veteran who founded the memorial fund, said: ''We
are pround of our military service. For a long time we were forgotten. But now
we are not forgotten, we have our memorial, we've had our parades and Vietnam
veterans are using the strength of character which was sharpened at home and on
the battlefields of Vietnam to rise as leaders for the challenges of the decades
ahead.''

Other speakers were Senators John F. Kerry and Edward M. Kennedy, both
Massachussetts Democrats, and John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, who served
was Secretary of the Navy for part of the Vietnam War.

The floral flag, propped up atop the memorial wall, seemed an expression of the
spontaniety of the Vietnam memorial. It was planned and organized by Victoria
Richards of suburban Virginia, who became involved in veterans' affairs after a
visit to the memorial.

Today, hundreds of individual roses, photographs and letters were propped
against the granite or wedged into the cracks. Shielded in a clear plastic
envelope, one typewritten message said: ''He was my only friend. Why was I
spared? Why did his life end?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of vet photographing model of Vietnam's Women's Memorial
(NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 12, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM IS A FOCUS FOR VETERANS DAY;
CEREMONIES HELD ELSEWHERE

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 156 words


Somber vigils mixed with triumphant patriotism in parades and ceremonies
yesterday, a Veterans Day that brought new Vietnam monuments, from Olympia,
Wash., to Baltimore.

Three jets roared over the Florida Capitol, and high school bands blared
military tunes as veterans marched through Tallahassee. Hundreds of spectators
lined the streets to watch a bagpipe brigade, R.O.T.C. units, military tanks,
trucks and veterans wind along the parade route.

In contrast was the often-solemn ceremony in the Massachusetts Statehouse Hall
of the Flags, where several speakers talked of the need to spare future
generations from taking up arms.

Ground was broken in Olympia, Wash., for a memorial to list the names of 1,055
state citizens killed or missing in the Vietnam War. It replaces a small marble
monument dedicated in 1982.

Ground also was broken for the Maryland Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Baltimore,
which cost $2.5 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: A RED LETTER FOR A 'MARTYR'

BYLINE: By LYDIA CHAVEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 12


Archbishop Raymond G. Hunthausen of Seattle, who has become a focus of the
annual meeting of the nation's Roman Catholic bishops, found support for his
views from several groups, including one from New Jersey that made its stance
known by wearing large patches of the letter ''H'' cut from red cloth.

The Rev. Tom Roberts of Scotch Plains, N.J., said the color was chosen because
it denotes martyrdom. He and others in a delegation from the Archdiocese of
Newark presented the bishops with petitions signed by hundreds of New Jersey
Catholics who support Archbishop Hunthausen.

The H patches caught on even after the New Jersey group left Tuesday. The Rev.
Richard McSorley, director of the Center for Peace Studies at Georgetown
University here, wore the patch across his black clerical shirt. In addition,
his lapels were festooned with a ''Weakland for Pope'' button, in support of
Archbishop Rembert G. Weakland of Milwaukee, and a pin of the Virgin Mary.

''If they can do it to Hunthausen then they can do it to any one of the
bishops,'' Father McSorley said.

Tom Siemer of Columbus, Ohio, also wore an H patch across his chest. ''People
from all protest groups in the church are going to see him as a patron saint,''
he said.

The liveliest debate on church law today focused on the passage of stricter
guidelines for general absolution, a form of simultaneously forgiving a group of
people for their sins.

In the last couple of years, church officials have become concerned that some of
its priests use general absolution to replace individual confessions and
absolutions.

Archbishop Francis T. Hurley of Anchorage said general absolution was useful in
such places as Alaska, where traveling by plane to go to confession would be too
expensive for a venial sin and too dangerous for a mortal sin.

John Cardinal O'Connor, Archbishop of New York, spoke in favor of the stricter
guidelines but also asked that further study be done on whether general
absolution could lead to guiding Catholics to confession. The Cardinal, a former
chaplain, added that he found general absolution useful in the military.

He said his young military charges knew nothing of ''sin except its practice''
and were also unfamiliar with confession. So, at large gatherings on Sundays, he
would explain the Ten Commandments, elicit a promise that the soldiers would
attend confession and give them general absolution in the meantime.

In the end, the bishops found the guidelines too binding and voted, 128 to 121,
to send them back to committee.

Language at a conference of bishops has a style all its own. Supporters of
Archbishop Hunthausen distributed handbills urging that the bishops ''not become
as blind guides who strain gnats and swallow the camel.''

And, when the bishops were late in taking their seats for one of the sessions,
the moderator asked them to ''foresake your friends and go find a seat.''

Generally, conferences in a big city mean business for local shops, including
haberdashers. However, when those attending the conference are bishops, a
regular men's store will not do. As it has in the past few year, Duffy & Quinn
of New York set up shop this year in the Capital Hilton, where the conference is
being held.

On the ninth floor of the hotel, Herbert Goldman, the owner of Duffy & Quinn,
displayed magenta zucchettos, or skullcaps, as well as clerical collars,
pectoral crosses, sashes and even a bishop's ring.

As a general rule, Mr. Goldman said, the gold-filled pectoral crosses, which are
attached to a long chain and worn across the chest with the cross tucked into a
pocket, are purchased by parishioners as gifts to their bishop. They cost about
$500, he said, but a less expensive set can be purchased for $100.

Some of the more popular items, Mr. Goldman said, are the bishops' purplish red
zucchettos, which sell for $21.98 each if the cap is lined with chamois and
$16.98 if not. Also popular are black suits and black clerical shirts, he said.

Mr. Goldman remarked that different colored clerical shirts were becoming
acceptable, and had one in turquoise on hand for the daring cleric. But he
acknowledged that his customers would never be fashion pacesetters. ''Let's face
it,'' he said, ''nothing too sensational happens in this business.''

Among the more polished recruiters at this year's conference were the Army,
Navy, Air Force and Marines. For the first time in memory, each of the military
branches had a booth where they sought recruit chaplains.

The Army's display was reminiscent of the booths at clerical conferences in
which Catholic teen-agers got a glimpse of what life in a religious order is
like, and it all looked like fun.

A photograph depicting an Army chaplain performing the sacraments chose baptism
instead of extreme unction, or the last rites, and another photograph
illustrating the theme of a chaplain's ''presence'' showed him at a picnic with
soldiers rather than in the field.

''We're not in a battle situation'' the Rev. Kenneth Schroeder said as a way of
explaining why the pictures showed the more pleasant aspects of life as a
military chaplain.

Since the Vietnam War, he added, the number of chaplains has declined sharply.
The Army needs 548 chaplains, he said, and now has only 218, or one for every
2,200 Catholic soldiers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Herbert Goldman and Rev. James Namie (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN STUDENTS WELCOMED

BYLINE: By ELAINE LOUIE

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 836 words


THANKSGIVING, Christmas and Hanukkah are traditional days of hospitality, days
for inviting stray friends and the distant fourth cousin home for the holidays.
Foreign students, one of the most neglected groups during this time, may not be
destitute although they may often be alone.

There are 42,311 foreign students in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut,
according to the Institute of International Education in New York City. The
Y.M.C.A. International Student Service, Metro International, International House
and the International Center of New York place several thousand students in
American homes during the holidays for a meal or a weekend.

The agencies work with church groups, community groups and individuals. They
screen the potential hosts by telephone and letters and through personal
interviews. References are checked. Each agency focuses on different segments of
the foreign student population.

Each year the Y.M.C.A. tries to place the approximately 100 students who live in
the city's Y's. Metro International works with 1,500 students from 65 colleges
and universities in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut. The International
Center focuses its efforts on 1,000 foreign students, many of whom entered the
United States as political refugees. International House concentrates on placing
about 500 foreign graduate students.

''Foreign students aren't perceived as needy,'' said Martin Tillman, the
director of the Y.M.C.A. International Student Service. ''They blend with the
city's ethnic diversity, but many live in social isolation.''

Judith Factor, the executive director of Metro International, agreed. ''We had
one student who, at home, had l00 first cousins, but here he was completely
alone,'' she said.

''Most campuses don't have enough dormitory space, so many students live in
apartments in little cultural ghettos, and take the subway to school,'' she
said. Even when students yearn to meet Americans, access may seem impossible.

Olivia Ly, a 25-year-old Hunter College student, escaped with her parents,
brothers and a sister to Indonesia from Vietnam in 1979. In l980, the family
arrived in New York City, where Miss Ly studied English and entered college. She
said three years later she hadn't yet met an American family. ''In New York,
people are in a hurry,'' she said. ''On the street, when I don't know where I'm
going and I ask people for directions, they don't have time to answer me. How am
I going to talk to them?'' The answer for her was Metro International. In
October 1983, she met Darryl and Joan Aubrey of Wilton, Conn., and their
children. After meeting eight other American families through Metro
International, Miss Ly counts the Aubrey daughter, Debbie, as a close friend.

Rogerio and Yluska De Almeida of Brazil are both graduate students at New York
University. Mr. De Almeida, who came to New York eight months before his wife,
made American friends, visited the Amish community in Pennsylvania and saw
Niagara Falls through the services of Metro International and the Y.M.C.A.
''That was my dream,'' he said of visiting Niagra Falls. Introductions by his
hosts in Buffalo to a co-chairman at the State University of New York led to Mr.
De Almeida giving a lecture on Brazil's government to the faculty of the
political science department.

Of all the hosts, none may be as gregarious as Bertha Bowles, a 68-year-old
nurse who lives in the Bronx. Born in Alaska, she grew up in Germany and speaks
eight languages, including Italian, Rumanian and Polish. In l961, she was alone
in New York City, a student at Columbia University. Through the International
Center, Miss Bowles welcomed foreign students to her home. More than 3,000 have
experienced her hospitality. ''I pick them up at the airport,'' she said. ''I
feed them, sleep them, give them the ''I Love New York'' book and a subway
map.''

AGENCIES IN AREA THAT OFFER HELP

 THE following agencies place foreign students in the homes of families for the
holidays:

International House, 500 Riverside Drive, near 123rd Street, 212-316-8400.
Contact: Rebecca Groves. This is home to 530 foreign graduate students of local
universities and those participate in cultural groups.

Metro International, 666 Broadway, near Bond Street, 2l2-533-0544. Contact:
Judith Factor or Stacey Klein. Students are placed with families for one-day
visits.

Y.M.C.A. International Student Service, 356 West 34th Street, 212-563-3299.
Contact: Susan Haskell. It annually assists 7,000 students in programs that
include airport receptions for those arriving in the United States for the first
time, home hospitality on an emergency basis for stranded students whose
airplane flights are delayed and placement with American families for holiday
dinners.

The International Center in New York, 119 West 40th Street, 212-921-8205.
Contact: Stephanie Rosenblatt. It offers services to more than 3,000 members,
who include students, medical trainees, diplomats, business travelers and
political refugees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CABLEVISION, RUNNER OF RISKS

BYLINE: By GERALDINE FABRIKANT

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1562 words


Long known in the cable television industry as highly innovative players, the
Cablevision Systems Corporation and its founder, Charles F. Dolan, are now a
part of the controversy seemingly endemic to that business.

In the last two months, the Long Island-based cable company has been in news
stories regularly, over the question of whether it had been solicited to pay off
political figures in an attempt to win first the cable franchise for Brooklyn
and then the Bronx franchise.

For its part, the company has continually maintained that it was engaged in no
illegalities and said that in none of the hearings to date has it been accused
of wrongdoing. Nevertheless, Mayor Koch, for now at least, has declined to
execute an amendment that would permit the company to proceed immediately with
the wiring of the first group of homes in Brooklyn and the Bronx.

An Aggressive Marketer

Long before the current controversy, however, Charles F. Dolan had acquired a
reputation as one of the industry's most aggressive operators and marketers: He
is credited with inventing the concepts of Home Box Office, regional sports
channels and cable programming services for the arts.

Mr. Dolan is also known for taking dramatic risks, in going after the cable
franchise in Boston, for instance, as well as the potentially complex Bronx
franchise.

Even during the month that the news of purported payoff attempts came to light,
Mr. Dolan, Cablevision's chief stockholder, began a regional news program aimed
at Cablevision's viewers in the New York metropolitan market.

At the same time, Mr. Dolan's company indicated an interest in buying an
estimated $1 billion stake in Viacom International, so that he could eventually
take control of its cable systems, many of which are in the New York market.

Cablevision, the nation's 17th-largest cable operator, with nearly 618,000
subscribers, is already the largest cable operator in New York. Its Westchester
County, New Jersey and Long Island franchises have 330,000 subscribers.

Although the future of its Bronx and Brooklyn franchises has been put in doubt,
if Mr. Dolan ultimately builds them, he has the opportunity to offer cable in
the Bronx to 430,000 homes and in Brooklyn to an additional 600,000. The total
cost of the wiring would be about $500 million.

Some cable analysts view that kind of expenditure as an unnecessary risk. They
say there are many areas of the Bronx franchise where construction will be
difficult and where the residents are not affluent enough to afford the large
number of cable services that produce the heavy cash flows that can make systems
profitable. Indeed, no other cable operator even bid on the Bronx franchise.

Nevertheless, Mr. Dolan prefers the density of the New York franchises.

''What we see is a lot of people in a small area with an undisguised interest in
television,'' he said. He sees the chance to sell them other services.

For instance, Cablevision already supplies viewers with such programming
services as SportsChannel, one of the industry's most successful sports
services. Supported by both advertiser and subscriber revenues, SportsChannel
could be particularly lucrative in the New York area, since it carries Mets and
Yankee baseball games, Islander and Devils hockey, and Nets basketball.

Historically, Mr. Dolan has taken risks that pan out. In the mid 1960's, it did
not seem like such a terrific investment to wire lower Manhattan, since cable
was still solely a means to provide better television reception. At that time,
there were no revenues from additional services.

That was why Mr. Dolan conceived the idea of creating special sports channels to
carry regional sports. And it was why he came up with the concept of a service
that would carry films free of commercials, for which viewers would pay a
special fee.

No Feature Films in Manhattan

Originally, Sterling Communications, the parent company headed by Mr. Dolan, was
forbidden to put the idea into practice with Manhattan Cable TV, because the
city did not permit the showing of feature films on cable.

Because the city's prohibition applied only to Manhattan Cable, Mr. Dolan
circumvented the regulation by starting a separate company that did not program
the service in New York, but did so around the country.

Ultimately, Sterling Communications ran into financial difficulties, and Time
Inc. gained control of the company, including Home Box Office, which it turned
into a huge success.

Mr. Dolan, however, kept control of the Long Island cable systems that became
the basis of his new empire. Using limited partnership financing, he expanded
that empire.

Those partnerships attracted attention from some critics because many were
handled by Burton Kantor, a Chicago lawyer who has been the corporate general
partner in many of Mr. Dolan's deals. Mr. Kantor has been the subject of
Internal Revenue Service investigations. While he was acquitted on a tax
conspiracy charge, one of his partners was convicted in a case unrelated to the
cable industry.

Meanwhile, Mr. Dolan's cable systems, particularly those in Long Island, have
flourished. Part of his success has simply been tied to a savvy choice of
locations. Many of his franchises are in affluent markets that can generate more
income. But additionally, Mr. Dolan has relied on a special marketing strategy.

Mark Lustgarten, president of Rainbow Program Enterprises, the programming arm
of the Cablevision group, said that Cablevision systems have the highest revenue
per subscriber in the country. According to Paul Kagan Associates, a media
consulting firm, Cablevision earns about $36 per subscriber, $9 more than its
closest competitor.

Mr. Lustgarten said that, rather than offering individual pay services for
relatively small sums to its subscribers, Cablevision prefers to provide a group
of services for a slightly higher sum.

Cablevision's array of programming sevices are also provided to Mr. Dolan's
other systems in Connecticut, Chicago and Boston.

Urban Areas a Headache

Over all, however, Mr. Dolan has fared substantially better in his suburban
franchises. The urban systems have been a headache. Boston, for instance, has
yet to turn profitable.

Mr. Dolan won the bidding war there two years ago by agreeing to entice
subscribers with a relatively low basic cable fee of $2 a month. He hoped to
make money by charging high fees for packages of such pay services as Home Box
Office. No other bidder for the Boston market was willing to cut basic prices as
low.

Cablevision promised to build an extremely sophisticated system and did not take
into account many of the construction problems. ''We had to go house by house,
getting permission from each house to lay cable,'' Mr. Dolan recalled. ''It has
been a real mess.'' Because of the complexities of the system, Cablevision has
renegotiated its franchise agreements.

'Our Vietnam'

Mr. Dolan is well aware of the criticism. ''Boston was referred to in our
company as our Vietnam,'' Mr. Dolan concedes. ''Our first mistake was making the
commitment.''

Part of Cablevision's operations were packaged into a new publicly traded
company early this year. Despite the spate of recent publicity, the stock has
done well, rising in the last 10 months from $14.50, to yesterday's closing
price of $20.75 on the American Stock Exchange.

Mr. Dolan alone owns about 61 percent of the company, and Forbes magazine
recently estimated his fortune at $310 million.

Cablevision's cash flow for the first nine months rose to $45 million, from $37
million in the comparable period last year. Analysts say that cash flow is a
telling figure, because high depreciation and amortization can depress earnings.

In the last nine months, Cablevision's losses declined to $16 million, from $47
million in the comparable 1985 period. And the most recent three-month quarter
was profitable.

Wall Street Bullish

Wall Street remains bullish on the company. Neither the Boston system, nor the
Chicago system, both of which have had problems, are part of the public company.
Nor will they be, until they turn a profit, Mr. Dolan said. As for his other
urban franchises, the pending Bronx and Brooklyn operations, he remains
enthusiastic. ''Cablevision still has the franchise rights in Brooklyn and the
Bronx, but the building has been delayed,'' he said. ''I have no idea what the
Mayor has in mind.''

Morris Tarshis, the city's director of the Bureau of Franchising, said:
''Cablevision has been cooperative, and has given whatever information has been
requested. The Mayor is looking for assurances from the District Attorney in
Bronx County and the U.S. Attorney in the Southern District that Cablevision is
not the target of their inquiries. If he does get that assurance, I am confident
he would sign the agreement that would allow Cablevision to begin construction
of the Bronx and Brooklyn franchises.''

CABLEVISION'S LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS

Current franchises for Cablevision Systems Corp. (*) and affiliated companies.
Location               Number
Bayonne, N.J.*         11,000
Bergen County,         38,000
N.J.*
Boston                 78,000
Chicago                57,000
Cleveland suburbs      26,000
Fairfield County,
Conn.                 125,000
Long Island*          252,000
Yonkers*                1,000
Totald                618,000


dAnnounced acquisitions will add 67,000 more subscribers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Charles F. Dolan (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.); graph of
Cablevision subscribers of basic service, in thousands; graph of net income or
loses, in millions, for Cablevision

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE OPERA ENSEMBLE HAS FUN WITH 'FOUR SAINTS'

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 33, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words


WHEN the saints go marching across the stage of the Lillie Blake School Theater
this weekend, the operatic spotlight of New York will focus on a small company
organized seven years ago in borrowed office space with pay phones. This month's
nine performances by the Opera Ensemble of New York of the Gertrude Stein-Virgil
Thomson opera ''Four Saints in Three Acts'' mark one of the season's most
ambitious operatic revivals. Coinciding with the 90th birthday of its composer,
Virgil Thomson, on Nov. 25, the production, directed by John J. D. Sheehan,
designed by Rouben Ter-Arutunian and conducted by Paul Dunkel, is an exercise in
what Mr. Sheehan called ''pageantry and tableau.''

''Staging 'Four Saints' was quite similar to staging a Baroque opera,'' Mr.
Sheehan, the ensemble's co-founder and production director, said the other day.
''The dramatic action is not that significant. It's a matter of making beautiful
pictures and patterns to match the music. In his stage design, Rouben created
different locales in the opera from consumer items. There is a cathedral made
out of soda and liquor bottles, a tree made out of rubber gloves and an opera
box made out of milk cartons and cigarette packages. The set is a metaphor for
what Gertrude Stein did verbally, constructing her complex prose from very
simple words. Paul Dunkel has evolved the characters from the score's vocal
lines. And they are all happy characters - a community of saints.''

The Opera Ensemble of New York, which was established in 1979 by Mr. Sheehan, a
freelance theater director, and the vocal coach Ruth Bierhoff, who left the
company a year and a half ago, is the youngest of New York's five smaller opera
companies. Since its founding, it has grown from using one piano to using two
pianos to using a 25-to-30-piece orchestra. The first-season budget was $30,000;
this season's operating budget is over $200,000.

''The typical way of putting on an opera is for the performers to incubate their
roles with different studios and coaches around the country,'' Mr. Sheehan said.
''It was Ruth's dream to have a group of singers who would develop various roles
vocally and dramatically as an ensemble. Mine was to build a music-theater
company that would consider the theater to be as important as the music.''

Plays Even in War

Mr. Sheehan came to the world of opera circuitously. Born and brought up in
Middlesex, N.J., he was a child actor who worked in television and summer
theater and dabbled in writing plays. At Kenyon College in the early 1960's, he
wrote a contemporary comedy, ''The Spectacular Rendezvous,'' which received
several productions and helped pay his tuition. Drafted by the Army and sent to
Vietnam after graduation, Mr. Sheehan wound up directing a dozen military
touring shows.

''After discovering that even in a war zone my natural tendency was to put on
plays, I figured I might as well make theater directing a career choice,'' he
said.

After the service, Mr. Sheehan came to New York and swept floors at the New York
Shakespeare Festival before going to work for the Circle Rep as a volunteer
stage manager. To learn the technical side of the theater, he got a job running
the prop department at Juilliard, where he discovered opera. In 1976, he wrote,
produced and directed an Off Off Broadway musical revue, ''Tuxedos for Rent,''
in the tradition of Ben Bagley's ''Shoestring'' revues. After spending a
fruitless year in Los Angeles, he returned East and staged Joe Orton's play
''Funeral Games'' at the South Street Theater. After collaborating with Ms.
Bierhoff on two opera workshops - ''The Magic Flute'' and ''Romeo and Juliet'' -
at St. Peter's Church on 20th Street, the pair decided to form the Opera
Ensemble of New York, which had its first production in December 1979.

Although the ensemble's 25 productions have embraced Baroque, Classical and
contemporary work, the company has consistently leaned toward 20th-century work,
including Gian Carlo Menotti's ''Consul'' and ''Amahl and the Night Visitors'';
Benjamin Britten's ''Rape of Lucretia,'' ''Albert Herring,'' ''A Midsummer
Night's Dream'' and his arrangement of ''The Beggar's Opera''; Marc Blitzstein's
''Regina,'' and Robert Ward's ''Crucible.'' This March, the ensemble will
produce the New York premiere of ''Christopher Columbus,'' a comic opera put
together for the Bicentennial using obscure Offenbach melodies.

''In determining our repertory, there are three basic considerations,'' Mr.
Sheehan said. ''We want operas that young singers can perform, with small
orchestral forces. It also has to be able to sell in New York. 'Don Pasquale'
was one of our best productions, but people weren't curious because of the
recent Beverly Sills version. The more obscure repertory is intriguing to ticket
buyers, but it is of little value to singers since they will probably never do
those roles again. Our productions of 'The Rake's Progress' and 'Regina' and
'The Crucible,' have found a happy median.

''A longstanding ideal is to bring the point of view of contemporary theater
into the opera house,'' Mr. Sheehan emphasized. ''I want to bring to opera the
kind of ingenious staging tricks that Marshall Mason brings to his plays. I also
admire the clean contemporary look for which Hal Prince is famous.''

Help From the Composer

In staging ''Four Saints,'' Mr. Sheehan had as advisers both the composer, whom
he met in 1978, and the opera's original scenarist, the painter Maurice Grosser.
''Virgil and Maurice both said that the choreographic text of the piece was
essential to its success,'' Mr. Sheehan said. ''It's a pageant. Just as you
grasp Gertrude Stein's meanings not from what she says but from what her words
summon in your mind, you get the meaning from the resonance of depicting
ordinary activities in pageantry and tableau. At the first rehearsal I had
everybody walk onto the stage and open their arms and close them. It's very
moving when you see people being gracious to one another. Nothing negative
happens in this opera. When you see 34 people on the stage for two hours,
everything has to have a great positive joy.''

Performances are at the Lillie Blake School Theater, 45 East 81st Street.
Performances are tonight at 8 and Sunday at 3 P.M. Tickets are $15. Information
and reservations: 288-1485.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John J.D. Sheehan (Beatriz Schiller)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
A Vietnam Devaluation Is Third in 2 Years

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 113 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 14


Vietnam has devalued its currency for the third time in less than two years,
indicating a continuing failure to curb rapid inflation or solve other economic
problems.

According to an announcment last week in Hanoi by its Central Bank, the
Vietnamese unit of currency, the dong, has been devalued from 15 to 80 to the
United States dollar.

Before the devaluation, the dollar (pegged officially at 15 dong since September
1985) had been buying up to 430 dong on the black market, according to residents
of Hanoi. The black market exchange rate is considered by diplomats to be a more
realistic indicator of the state of the Vietnamese economythan the official
exchange rates.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Gen. William W. Ford, Artillery Commander

SECTION: Section 1; Page 36, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 246 words


Brig. Gen. William Wallace Ford, former commander of the 87th Division Artillery
in Gen. George S. Patton's Third Army in Europe during World War II, died Sunday
in Danbury Hospital after suffering a stroke the day before. He was 88 years old
and lived in Redding, Conn.

A pilot, General Ford served as director of air training at the Field Artillery
School in Fort Sill, Okla., from 1942 to 1943. He was twice awarded the Legion
of Merit.

In the 1960's he became an outspoken critic of American involvement in Vietnam
through Business Executives Move for Vietnam Peace. The organization, for which
he was a military sponsor, was founded in 1967 with an open letter to President
Lyndon B. Johnson urging a bombing halt and negotiated withdrawal from Vietnam.

After his retirement from the Army in 1954, General Ford was vice president of
the Aeronca Corporation of Middletown, Ohio. He then taught mathematics at the
University of South Florida and the University of Massachusetts. He retired in
1973.

His first wife, the former Alice Trowbridge Harris, died in 1976.

He is survived by his wife, the former Sarah Litsey Nye; a sister, Elizabeth
Sprowls of Richmond, Va.; a daughter, Elise Knapp of Redding; three sons,
William W. Jr., of Vienna, Va., Trowbridge H., of Princeton, Mass., Dr. John P.,
of Closter, N.J.; nine grandchildren and 13 great-grandchildren.

A memorial service will be held at noon today at Christ (Episcopal) Church in
Redding Ridge, Conn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WRITERS PROTEST DEPORTATION CASE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 873 words

DATELINE: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M., Nov. 15


A deportation order against a writer here because of her political writing has
stirred a group of prominent American authors to action and has intensified
debate over the country's immigration law.

The writer, Margaret J. Randall, who teaches at the University of New Mexico,
was born in New York but gave up her American citizenship in the 1960's. Her
request for permanent resident status was turned down by an immigration officer
in 1985, and in August an immigration service judge in El Paso upheld that
decision.

Ms. Randall, who is 50 years old, is now appealing to the Board of Immigration
Appeals in Washington. She can remain in this country through that appeal and
any court appeal she may make thereafter.

On Oct. 29, 1985, under the aegis of the American chapter of the writers' group
PEN International, Norman Mailer, Kurt Vonnegut, William Styron, Arthur Miller,
Grace Paley and others filed suit in support of Ms. Randall in the Federal
District Court in Washington, challenging the decision to deport her on several
constitutional grounds.

Discussion of the Law

Ms. Randall's effort to remain has received attention in dozens of newspapers,
and her case and others like it have intensified discussion about changing the
law permitting the exclusion of aliens for political reasons. Ms. Randall has
also prompted heated debate because she gave up her United States citizenship,
lived in Cuba and Nicaragua from 1969 to 1984 and has written extensively and
strongly against United States policies in Vietnam and Latin America. Ms.
Randall returned to the United States in 1984 as a visitor.

PEN American's suit attracted wider attention this August with the action of an
immigration judge in El Paso upholding the 1985 decision to deny a permanent
residency visa to the writer. The judge, Martin Spiegel, said that Ms. Randall
deserved the visa on the basis of family ties: Her elderly parents, estranged
husband and a sibling, who live in Albuquerque, as well as two of her four
children are all United States citizens.

Also, Judge Spiegel noted, Ms. Randall contributes to the academic community at
the University of New Mexico here. She has produced dozens of works in women's
history, politics and cultural and oral history and teaches in the University's
Women's Studies Program.

McCarran-Walter Act Cited

But Judge Spiegel denied her appeal, citing as the sole reason a clause in the
McCarran-Walter Act that permits the Government to bar aliens whose writings or
teachings ''advocate the economic, international and governmental doctrines of
world Communism.''

Judge Spiegel ordered Ms. Randall, who grew up in Albuquerque, to leave the
country by Dec. 1 or face deportation, a decision now under appeal in
Washington.

While aliens have been kept out of the United States because of their writing,
Ms. Randall would be the first actually to be deported, if she ultimately loses
her fight, according to David Cole, a lawyer at the Center for Constitutional
Rights. This organization is handling Ms. Randall's appeal and the PEN American
suit. Mr. Cole argues that First Amendment protection extends to anyone living
in the United States, citizen or alien.

She Will Appear in New York

Editorials in a number of newpapers have supported Ms. Randall, but others have
opposed her. About 25 committees for her defense have sprung up. She has
maintained a brisk pace of speaking engagements, and PEN American will sponsor a
reading, discussion and press conference for her at its New York headquarters on
the evening of Dec. 8.

Opposition has sometimes been bitter. A group of conservative University of New
Mexico students demonstrated at a Federal office building here, displaying a bus
ticket to El Paso and a $5 bill for taxi fare from El Paso to Juarez, which they
later gave to Ms. Randall. A national conservative student newspaper, Sequent,
published an article saying that Ms. Randall, because of articles supporting the
leftist governments in Vietnam, Cuba and Nicaragua, should be treated like a
World War II collaborator.

The course of Ms. Randall's citizenship is also attacked by her opponents. She
says she acquired Mexican citizenship in 1966 because she was married to a
Mexican, had three small children and could not find a good job in Mexico under
stringent laws covering jobs for aliens. In 1969 she began the paperwork, which
she never completed, to regain her United States citizenship.

Immigration Matter, Foes Say

The Immigration and Naturalization Service argues that Ms. Randall renounced her
citizenship as a political statement. Without commenting on that, Judge Spiegel
disputed Ms. Randall's assertion that she had become an expatriate involuntarily
and under economic duress; he affirmed her deportability.

Ms. Randall's opponents view her case as an immigration matter. ''The question
is not whether Ms. Randall is free to express her views or to visit her family,
but whether Ms. Randall is entitled to the privilege of emigrating to the United
States and of becoming an American citizen,'' said Senator Pete V. Domenici,
Republican of New Mexico, in rejecting a request from the president of the
University of New Mexico to support Ms. Randall.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Veteran Ends Hunger Strike

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 38, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 59 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 15


A Vietnam veteran who vowed not to eat or drink until efforts were made to
rescue veterans reportedly imprisoned in Southeast Asia ended his 49-day fast
Friday. The veteran, Ed Gino Casanova, said he decided to resume eating after he
received telephone calls from several people, including an aide to John Cardinal
O'Connor, Archbishop of New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Christine M. Colby to Marry

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 67, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 320 words


Announcement of the engagement of Christine Marie Colby to John Peter Giraudo,
the son of Mr. and Mrs. Peter Giraudo of San Francisco, has been made by William
Egan Colby of Washington and Barbara Heinzen Colby of Arlington, Va., parents of
the future bride. The wedding is planned for June 6.

Miss Colby, who graduated from the Immaculata Preparatory School in Washington
and cum laude from Tufts University, is an account executive at Hill & Knowlton,
the public-relations firm in New York. She was presented in 1978 at the
International Debutante Ball and is a member of the Junior League of New York.

Her father, a career intelligence officer of the Central Intelligence Agency who
held the rank of ambassador while he was head of the Civil Operations and Rural
Development Supports program in Saigon from 1968 to 1971, was named Director of
Central Intelligence by President Richard M. Nixon and served from 1973 to 1976.
He is a principal in Colby, Bailey & Associates, a consulting and lobbying firm
in Washington.

The bride-to-be is a granddaughter of Mrs. Albert G. Boesel of Bethesda, Md.,
and the late Karl A. Heinzen, president of the Bayer Aspirin Company during the
1930's, and of the late Col. Elbridge Colby, U.S.A., and the late Mrs. Colby of
Washington.

Mr. Giraudo, who graduated from St. Ignatius College Preparatory in San
Francisco and summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa from the University of
California at Berkeley, received a bachelor's degree in philosophy from Queens
College of Oxford University and a J.D. degree from the University of California
Hastings College of the Law in San Francisco. Formerly an associate at the New
York law firm of Davis, Polk & Wardwell, the future bridegroom is an attorney
adviser in the office of legal counsel of the Department of Justice in
Washington. His father, who is retired, was a baker for 39 years for American
Bakeries in San Francisco.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Christine Colby (Bachrach)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA AS A MONUMENTAL GAMBLE

BYLINE: BY BENJAMIN BARBER; Benjamin R. Barber is a visiting professor of
politics at Princeton University and the author most recently of ''Strong
Democracy.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1721 words


THE CYCLES OF AMERICAN HISTORY By Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. 498 pp. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company. $22.95.

IN the years between the National Recovery Act of 1933 and the Civil Rights Act
of 1964, America experienced its liberal epiphany. Although interrupted by two
soporific Eisenhower terms, and ended by a Presidential assassination and the
societal splintering brought about by the civil rights revolution and the
Vietnam War, the liberal decades marked by Roosevelt, Truman and Kennedy exuded
a vitality and public promise America had scarcely seen since its founding, and
recast the shape of American politics.

Yet in the bitter decades following Kennedy's violent death, liberalism seemed
to lose its way. It struggled, faltered, lurched onto the defensive and,
finally, stood tottering on the brink of historical obsolescence - steeped in
nostalgia and wrapped in the limp apologetics of prefixes like ''neo'' and
''post.'' Not in the work of Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., however. There is
perhaps no single name more closely associated with the history, the biography,
the political experience and the intellectual positions of liberalism's ''vital
center'' than that of Mr. Schlesinger, who is currently the Albert Schweitzer
Professor of Humanities at the City University of New York. It was his 1949
book, ''The Vital Center,'' that coined the key liberal phrase, his prizewinning
biographies of the Jacksonian era and of Franklin Roosevelt that unearthed for
liberalism a historical tradition, his own service to and biography of the
Kennedy Administration (''A Thousand Days'') that defined for the modern age
what it meant to be a liberal.

Mr. Schlesinger may in fact be the last of the old liberals, and his new book,
''The Cycles of American History,'' which he calls ''a historian's reflection on
the past and the future of the American experiment,'' might better be understood
as an extended elaboration on the theme ''long live liberalism.'' His collection
edits, updates and synthesizes 25 years' worth of his more notable historical
and political essays, constructing from them a definitive profile of American
liberal theory and practice. Mr. Schlesinger both describes and, as an
intellectual engage, embodies liberalism's powerful virtues: its intellectual
circumspection, its political vigor, its antipathy to extremism, its championing
of the unpopular sides of liberty and tolerance and its devotion to social
justice. And, without quite meaning to, he exemplifies some of the defects that
have contributed to its recent decline and that are, in fact, the flip side of
its virtues: the dubiousness of its realism on subjects such as rights or
Communism, its overreliance on bureaucracy, its tendency to dismiss fellow
progressives who are to the left of the ''vital center,'' its fascination with
powerful leadership and its sometimes elitist approach to democracy and the
political public.

The first four essays in ''The Cycles of American History'' are historical
ruminations on the nature of America. In ''The Theory of America'' and ''The
Cycles of American Politics,'' as well as in two essays on foreign policy and
the national character that follow them, Mr. Schlesinger offers a dialectical
portrait of a nation rent by contending self-interpretations. The first of
these, and the one central to Mr. Schlesinger's liberalism, envisions America as
a great but prudent experiment: an exercise in innovative pragmatism conducted
by ''brave and imperturbable realists committed, in defiance of history and
theology, to a monumental gamble'' - the gamble that a virtuous republic might
be established on a new continent free of the corruption and oppression of the
Old World. Yet this modest America has had to coexist uneasily with a messianic
America: a countertradition that construes the country as ''the Israel of our
time'' (Melville), a new Jerusalem embarked on a ''sacred mission'' and
promising ''a sanctified destiny.'' Thus, though Mr. Schlesinger's ideal America
is liberal, his historical America is a nation sundered - a great experiment in
liberal republicanism conducted by an adept and pragmatic people on the one
hand, a glittering city on the hill claiming to offer mankind a second chance at
redemption on the other.

The secular tradition of civic republicanism is associated in Mr. Schlesinger's
mind with realism and the politics of interest; it assumes a modest and tolerant
posture in domestic politics, and it faces the world cautiously. The second,
profoundly religious tradition seizes the moral high ground at home and
confronts the world imperiously, as from a pulpit, forever ready to judge
America's distant neighbors and too often tempted to impose an armed will upon
them. Yet different as the two traditions are, they intersect rather more
frequently than the author allows. They share, for example, an antipathy to the
corruptions and oppressions of the Old World and a devotion to the political
promise of the New. From experimental realism can come both isolationism and
internationalism. Similarly, the exceptionalist conviction that America is
unique can afflict secular liberals no less than messianic zealots.

Where Mr. Schlesinger is most persuasive is in his sense of the rhythms and
cycles of American history for which his book is named. The United States has
experienced its history as a contest between the liberal and messianic
traditions, and its politics can be usefully portrayed as a kind of nervous
pendulum swinging between them, as in the waxing and waning of the power of the
Presidency (see the essay ''After the Imperial Presidency'') and of the
reputations of its occupants (see ''Vicissitudes of Presidential Reputations'').
The lesson Mr. Schlesinger means to teach us in all this is the mutability of
politics, which, over time, brings down the men and the institutions it raised
up, only to raise them up again. Liberalism is not dead but languishing at the
perigee of its historical cycle.

Bracing as Mr. Schlesinger's historical faith in liberalism is, Arthur
Schlesinger the thoughtful historian can find himself undercut by Arthur
Schlesinger the orthodox liberal. To serve both a President and the truth about
Presidential politics creates a powerful conflict of interest. Mr. Schlesinger's
liberalism does not always take the measure of the Kennedy Presidency, but often
seems measured by it. When he cuts into the revisionist accounts of Herbert
Hoover and Dwight Eisenhower, it is the Kennedy ax he grinds and then swings.
For example, when the subject of the escalation in Vietnam arises, Eisenhower
and Johnson are apportioned blame, the lion's share of which, some would say,
belongs to Kennedy himself.

Nor does Mr. Schlesinger's derogation of moralism at home prevent him from
assuming a moralistic posture on rights abroad (for not receiving Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn he indicts President Ford, who was acting from the very prudential
realism Mr. Schlesinger elsewhere praises). He is also very hard on revisionist
historians such as William Appleman Williams who have suggested American
complicity in the cold war. ''The fact that in some aspects the revisionist
thesis parallels the official Soviet argument,'' he writes, ''must not, of
course, prevent consideration of the case on its merits, nor raise questions
about the motives of the writers, all of whom, so far as I know, are
independent-minded scholars.'' He retains a liberal bureaucrat's distrust of
localism, of democratic participation and of the egalitarian's wariness of
charismatic leadership. IF frequency of citation is any indication, Mr.
Schlesinger prefers a certain kind of cosmopolitan elitism to a certain kind of
down-home democracy - prefers Henry Adams to Samuel Adams, Ralph Waldo Emerson
to Walt Whitman, and Walter Lippmann to John Dewey. In his concluding chapter,
''Democracy and Leadership,'' he quotes from Emerson on genius and reminds us
that ''leadership is really what makes the world go round.'' Jefferson might
have suggested it is cooperation that makes the world go round, but Mr.
Schlesinger is persuaded that cooperation works only in ''small settings'' and
that people ''taking charge of their immediate lives and joining together in
cooperative action'' cannot possibly solve the big problems of politics and
economics. Only big government can do this. Yet Mr. Schlesinger does not really
address either the Reagan complaint that big government is part of the problem
rather than part of the solution, or the populist argument borrowed from
Tocqueville that liberty must be local to be real. He seems to insist that
liberals cannot reasonably be expected to be grass-roots democrats, which may be
one reason why so many Democrats have recently become Republicans.

Arthur Schlesinger has served this country well both as one of its most
prescient historians and as a loyal aide-de-camp to one of its most notable
Presidents; the country is deeply in his debt. He retains his faith that as the
cycles of history turn, the liberal star will rise again over Washington. This
could turn out to be more a hope of the Kennedy liberal than an expectation of
the prudent historian, who, Mr. Schlesinger has taught us, knows that while the
past helps explain the present, it does not necessarily determine the future.

Whose Turn Next?
  At some point, shortly before or after the year 1990, there should come a
sharp change in the national mood and direction . . . the turn in the
generational succession for the young men and women who came of political age in
the Kennedy years.

If public purpose holds enough problems at bay in the 1990s, this phase will
continue until, perhaps toward the end of the first decade of the twenty-first
century, the nation tires again of uplift and commitment and the young people
who came of political age in the Reagan years have their turn in power. For, as
Emerson pointed out, both conservatism and reform degenerate into excess. . . .
Yet in the American republic conservatism and reform . . . private interest and
public purpose, join to define the political tradition. The two jostling strains
in American thought agree more than they disagree [and are] indissoluble
partners in the great adventure of democracy.     - From ''The Cycles of
American History.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 16, 1986

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1198 words


Fiction
                  Weeks
This       Last      On
Week       Week    List

1             1      10 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                        horrors haunt six men and a woman who grew up in a
                        small Maine town.
2             4       2 WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.) Iran
                        during the month following the Shah's departure.
3             2      16 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.)
                        Without using nuclear weapons, the West staves off the
                        Russians in World War III.
4             3       5 HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &
                        Schuster, $18.95.) A top New York model encounters
                        three of Los Angeles's most dynamic men.
5             6       3 A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $18.95.)
                        Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a brutal double
                        murder.
6             5       7 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton Mifflin,
                        $19.95.) Complex family relationships in South
                        Carolina's low country and New York City.
7             9       5 FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,
                        $16.95.) The hero of the ''Foundation'' series
                        searches for the lost planet Earth.
8            11       9 ROGER'S VERSION, by John Updike. (Knopf, $17.95.) A
                        fiftyish professor wrestles with God, sex, science,
                        technology, mathematics and computers.
9 *          10      11 THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random
                        House, $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and
                        greed mark a young woman's life in 18th-century
                        England and France.
10 *          8      18 WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $17.95.) A
                        rich orphan comes of age while she travels the world.
11 *          7       6 THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $17.95.)
                        Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New York
                        family begun in ''Evergreen.''
12           13       3 PERFUME, by Patrick Suskind. (Knopf, $16.95.) An
                        olfactory vampire kills people to steal their scents.
13           12       8 THE BEET QUEEN, by Louise Erdrich. (Holt, $16.95.)
                        Forty years in a small North Dakota town near an
                        Indian reservation.
14           14       3 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                        Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over Vietnam.
15           15       4 FORTUNE OF FEAR, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge
                        Publications, $18.95.) Countess Krak of Voltar arrives
                        from outer space to save Earth from an invasion.

                        Nonfiction
1             1       6 HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.) From
                        Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized biography of
                        Frank Sinatra.
2             2      28 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday,
                        $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from the television
                        star and father of five.
3             9       2 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins Publishers,
                        $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as recorded in
                        pictures by 200 photojournalists.
4             4       6 THE STORY OF ENGLISH, by Robert McCrum, William Cran
                        and Robert MacNeil. (Sifton/Viking, $24.95.) Companion
                        volume to the PBS series about the world's most widely
                        used language.
5             5       6 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $19.95.)
                        The crisis in the American automobile industry and
                        Japan's role in it.
6             3       3 ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Random House,
                        $18.95.) The comedian's autobiography, beginning with
                        her impoverished childhood in Hollywood.
7            10       3 DREAMGIRL, by Mary Wilson with Patricia Romanowski
                        and Ahrgus Juilliard. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A former
                        member of the Supremes describes her time with the
                        group.
8             6       3 DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland with
                        Greg Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The ballerina
                        recalls her checkered career.
9             8      36 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House,
                        $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in
                        pictures and rhyme.
10            7       8 MCMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi. (Warner,
                        $16.95.) The autobiography of the quarterback for the
                        Chicago Bears.
11           12      26 JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot. (St.
                        Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire
                        veterinarian about his favorite animal.
12                   29 NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst. (Simon & Schuster,
                        $17.95.) Life is a series of losses, the author
                        argues, and we must confront them in order to grow.
13           14       7 I, TINA, by Tina Turner with Kurt Loder. (Morrow,
                        $16.95.) The autobiography of a Tennessee
                        sharecropper's daughter who became a rock-and-roll
                        star.
14           13       8 SNAKE, by Ken Stabler and Berry Stainback. (Doubleday,
                        $15.95.) The experiences of the retired Oakland
                        Raiders quarterback.
15 *         11       8 ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden with Dave
                        Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations on football
                        by the television commentator and former Oakland
                        Raiders coach.
                        Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1             1       9 MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM, by Susan
                        Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope
                        with overbearing men.
2             2      26 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton, $15.95.)
                        A regimen based on the Vanderbilt University Weight
                        Management Program.
3             5       3 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff Smith.
                        (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at moderate
                        cost.
4             3      65 FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn Diamond.
                        (Warner, $17.50.) A diet for weight loss and physical
                        fitness.
5 *           4       4 BE HAPPY YOU ARE LOVED, by Robert H. Schuller.
                        (Nelson, $15.95.) Inspiration from a California
                        clergyman.


AND BEAR IN MIND

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest) RECKLESS
DISREGARD: Westmoreland v. CBS et al.; Sharon v.

Time, by Renata Adler. (Knopf, $16.95.) Ms. Adler tries and convicts both
journalism and the law in her account of two remarkable libel suits brought by
former military leaders.

THEODORE DREISER: At the Gates of the City 1871-1907, by

Richard Lingeman. (Putnam, $22.95.) This first volume of a two-part biography
meticulously chronicles the emergence from an American backwater of a writer
determined to rise. PAPER DOLL, by Jim Shepard. (Knopf, $15.95.) A detailed
re-creation of life among a squadron of American fliers in England during World
War II. The novel mesmerizes when it is airborne.

POPULUXE, by Thomas Hine. (Knopf, $29.95.) Lucy Ricardo meets

Frank Lloyd Wright in a serious, splendid study of all those gaudy consumer
products cranked out in America in the 1950's and 60's. TO THE LAND OF THE
CATTAILS, by Aharon Appelfeld. (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $14.95.) In 1938 a Jewish
mother and son leave Vienna and travel east to her rural homeland. The reader
gets an almost hallucinatory sense of the Holocaust from this novel, in which
the word ''Nazi'' never appears. THE WISE MEN. Six Friends and the World They
Made: Acheson, Bohlen, Harriman, Kennan, Lovett, McCloy, by Walter Isaacson and
Evan Thomas. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A fascinating, though ultimately
disquieting, book about a ruling class that could see no role for America other
than as leader of mankind. THE PIANOPLAYERS, by Anthony Burgess. (Arbor House,
$16.95.) In a modest, charming novel, the retired courtesan La Belle Helene
recalls the sad demise of her father, a movie house musician in 1920's
working-class England.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Sabotaging the Khmer Rouge

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 474 words


To the Editor:

In her review of Elizabeth Becker's ''When the War Was Over'' (Oct. 26), Emily
MacFarquhar contends that the Malcolm Caldwell murder in Phnom Penh, Cambodia,
in December 1978 is, in Ms. Becker's retelling, ''the only recorded act of
sabotage against the Khmer Rouge rulers.'' The contention is false, unless Ms.
MacFarquhar categorizes the bloody rebellion in the Eastern Zone in the spring
of 1978 as something other than sabotage. Her statement that the author
''uncovered no clues to inner-party dissidence or to the internal workings'' of
the Khmer Rouge is belied by the evidence of virtually every page. Ms. Becker's
book is precisely about such dissidence and such workings, and it is, despite
some editing deficiencies, the clearest and most readable account of the Khmer
Rouge madness that has appeared.

As someone who has visited Cambodia and researched and written about the country
and the revolution, I know that discerning a writer's point of view is
imperative. Some leftist authors, whether scholars or journalists, build cases
to justify Vietnam's invasion and occupation of the country. Still others find a
means of explaining how an otherwise worthy revolution descended into madness.
Those on the right find reason to condemn the Communist revolution and its
aftermath, thus proving to their own satisfaction why the United States was
correct to fight Communism in Southeast Asia. I can only surmise that Elizabeth
Becker, who takes the most middle-of-the-road approach I have seen in all the
literature, has somehow assaulted Ms. MacFarquhar's own prejudices, and that
this accounts for her negative review.

TERRENCE MAITLAND
  Acton, Mass.

Emily MacFarquhar replies:
  The ''bloody rebellion'' in Cambodia's Eastern Zone in 1978 had nothing to do
with sabotage or dissidence, as Ms. Becker tells it. She calls the episode ''the
final purge'' and describes it as an extreme example of how paranoia led the
Khmer Rouge revolution to devour its own.

Ms. Becker does not suggest that So Phim, the Eastern Zone commander, ever
defied Pol Pot in any way. He was just another scapegoat for a failed policy -
this time, an attack on Vietnam. So confident was So Phim of his own loyalty
that he answered a summons from Pol Pot and walked into an ambush. The attempt
by his leaderless troops to defend themselves against murderous Pol Pot forces
was certainly bloody - some 100,000 people died - but can hardly be called an
act of rebellion. A few thousand Eastern Zone soldiers, led by Heng Samrin,
managed to escape to Vietnam. Later, when they were installed as Vietnam's
puppet rulers in Phnom Penh, they invented a history of opposition to the Khmer
Rouge. But these were born-again rebels who became dissidents only in exile and
only after they had been marked out as enemies by Pol Pot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 16, Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words


HAVENS TO PERFORM

Some of Westchester's graying former hippies will remember that Richie Havens
opened the Woodstock Festival in August 1969, and they may even have been there
to hear him sing ''Freedom.''

The singer-songwriter's 25-year career has taken him to Europe for the last
several years, but he is back in the United States now, enjoying a resurgence of
popularity among a new generation of college students.

Mr. Havens will give a concert at 8 P.M. Friday in the Tarrytown Music Hall that
is sure to recall ''Yesterdays.'' It will also include a tribute to Vietnam
veterans. The theater is at 13 Main Street. Tickets are $16 and $18 and can be
reserved by calling 962-2443 or 238-8168.

GERTRUDE STEIN STAGING

A working rehearsal of a Gertrude Stein play called ''A Manoir,'' followed by a
discussion of the writer's life and work is to be held free of charge at at 8
P.M. Monday at the Abbott Kaplan Theater of the State University of New York in
Purchase.

Leading the forum will be Lawrence Kornfeld, dean of theater arts and film; Leon
Katz, professor of dramaturgy and playwriting at the Yale School of Drama and
editor of Gertrude Stein's journals; and the actresses Jan Miner and Marian
Seldes.

Ms. Miner and Seldes are well-acquainted with the subject matter, having
appeared in ''Gertrude Stein and a Companion,'' presented in January of this
year at the Lucille Lortel Theater in New York. The work was a prize-winner at
the Edinburgh Festival a year earlier.

The ''companion'' of the title was Alice B. Toklas, and the script detailed the
two womens' protracted, controversial and volatile relationship.

Gertrude Stein wrote two volumes of plays, along with numerous essays, short
stories, poems and ''The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas.'' One of her
best-known works is the opera ''Four Saints in Three Acts,'' on which she
collaborated with the composer Virgil Thomson. The world premiere was an
avant-garde event of 1934, held in the Avery Theater of the Wadsworth Atheneum
in Hartford and attended by a trainload of artists, writers and musicians from
New York City.

''A Manoir'' was first produced at the Judson Poets Theater in Manhattan in
1972. The Purchase production is the second ever to be presented and is a new
interpretation. Like all of Miss Stein's plays it has no specific characters,
action, plot or location. The full production of ''A Manoir'' will be presented
at the Performing Arts Center of the State University Dec. 4 through 7 and 11
through 13. Tickets can be ordered by calling 253-5900.

Reservations for tomorrow's free program are necessary. Call 253-5016.

WILLIAM COLBY TO TALK

A limited number of tickets may still be available for a dinner and talk by
William E. Colby, former director of the Central Intelligence Agency, this
evening at the White Plains Hotel.

Organized by the Scarsdale Campaign for a Nuclear Weapons Freeze, the program
begins with a reception at 6:30 P.M., dinner at 7:30, followed by Mr. Colby's
talk, titled ''An Intelligence Approach to Arms Control.''

Mr. Colby served with the American embassies in Stockholm, Rome and Saigon
before becoming director of the C.I.A. from 1973 to 1976. Since then he has been
a consultant on international and domestic politics to various corporations,
governments and investment organizations. Last year he became a member of the
international consulting firm of Colby, Bailey & Associates headquartered in
Washington. He was educated at Princeton Unversity, where he was elected to Phi
Beta Kappa, and at the Columbia University Law School.

For tickets at $30 call 472-2248 or 725-4932.

RUGS FOR SALE

Hundreds of handmade Persian and Chinese rugs, and Indian and Pakistani dhurries
will be offered for sale from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. today in the auditorium of the
Free Synagogue of Westchester at 500 North Columbus Avenue, Mount Vernon.

A repeat of last year's successful Oriental-rug bazaar, the event is an
opportunity to make purchases at well below retail prices. The selection is of
high quality and in all sizes. Prices range from $20 to $18,000. Transactions
are for cash or check accompanied by acceptable identification.

To reach the synagogue take Exit 8 off the Cross County Parkway, go left, north
on Route 22, for one-fourth of a mile. Call 664-1727 for more information.

TWO CONCERTS

Two distinguished music ensembles will perform at 3 P.M. today and next Sunday
in Armor Hall of Wave Hill, the environmental and cultural center in The Bronx.
Speculum Musicae, a 16-year-old group of 13 musicians whose concerts are marked
by flexibility in instrumental groupings and variety of music periods, is
today's attraction. Now in residence at Columbia University, and winners of a
Naumburg Chamber Music Award and the Young Concerts International Auditions,
Speculum Musicae's program includes works by Charles Wuorinen, Stefan Wolpe,
Igor Stravinsky, John Gibson, Henry Curtis and Bohuslav Martinu.

Tickets are $9 and include a free guided garden tour at 2:15 P.M. and admission
to an ecological art project titled ''The Book of Seven Lagoons.''

Preceding the Mozartean Players concert next week will be a discussion with its
founder and leader, Steven Lubin, at 1:30 P.M. Mr. Lubin, a noted fortepianist,
studied with Nadia Reisenberg, Seymour Lipkin, Rosina Lhevinne and Beveridge
Webster. He is a graduate of Harvard University and the Juilliard School School
of Music.

Tickets for the discussion, accompanied by coffee are $4, tickets for the
concert, garden tour and exhibition are $9. Call (212) 549-3200 for
reservations. Wave Hill is at 249 Street and Independence Avenue in Riverdale.

A PAPP TRYOUT

The tryout run of a play to be presented later this year at Joseph Papp's Public
Theater in Manhattan may be seen Wednesday through Dec. 14 in New Rochelle.

''Old Business,'' described as a father-and-son drama, has been produced by East
Coast Arts at Wildcliff and Mr. Papp's New York Shakespeare Festival. It was
written by Wildcliff's artistic director Joe Cacaci.

Performances are scheduled at 8 P.M. Wednesdays through Saturdays and at 3 P.M.
Sundays. Tickets are $12.50 and $15. Call 632-0652.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

KIM IL SUNG, AT 74, IS REPORTED DEAD

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1331 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Monday, Nov. 17


South Korea announced today that North Korean loudspeakers along the border had
reported that Kim Il Sung, the North's leader, had been shot to death.

The reports could not be independently confirmed, and the North Korean embassies
in Peking and New Delhi issued denials, deepening the uncertainty. The embassy
in Peking called the report ''a total fabrication.''

In New Delhi, a North Korean diplomat said, ''In my opinion these reports are
not true and are actually South Korean propaganda.''

No U.S. Confirmation

A spokesman for United States forces in South Korea said that they had ''no
independent confirmation'' that the North Koreans had made any announcement over
the loudspeakers across the demilitarized zone. [In Washington, high-level
military sources said the Pentagon had received reports of Mr. Kim's death as
early as Saturday. They said no special alert had been ordered for American
forces in the region.] A Cult of Personality The death of Mr. Kim would have a
great effect not only on North-South relations in Korea but also on security
considerations throughout the region.

Mr. Kim, 74 years old, has led North Korea since the nation was founded in 1948.
During his long tenure, he has encouraged a cult of personality that pervades
his nation. He is known to North Koreans as the ''Great Leader,'' and his face
and his sayings are omnipresent in the country.

In recent years, he has devoted a great deal of effort to promoting the stature
of his son, Kim Jong Il, whom he has named as his successor. Kim Jong Il, who is
43, is called by the obligatory title ''Dear Leader.''

According to diplomats in Seoul, the South Korean Government held an emergency
meeting this morning headed by Prime Minister Lho Shin Yong. The police were
also said to have been put on alert, but Seoul residents said in telephone
interviews that activity on the streets of the capital seemed normal.

A North Korean radio broadcast monitored in Tokyo did not mention reports of Mr.
Kim's death. The radio continued normal broadcasting all morning.

Nevertheless, diplomats in Tokyo and Seoul scrambled this morning for
information. ''I have strong feelings that something has happened,'' a Japanese
diplomat in Seoul said in a telephone interview.

Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone of Japan, asked to comment on the reports, was
quoted by Reuters as saying: ''I have heard of such information but it has not
been confirmed yet. I have instructed the Foreign Ministry to check it.''

The United States military spokesman in South Korea said American forces had
noticed no unusual activity along the demilitarized zone and had continued their
regular tours.

Implacable Enemies

The two Koreas have been implacable enemies since the division of the Korean
Peninsula after World War II. For South Koreans, Mr. Kim has been a hated symbol
of both Communism and a perceived military threat.

His designation of his son, Kim Jong Il, as his successor could bring about the
first dynastic transition in a Communist country and has caused concern among
North Korea's principal allies, the Soviet Union and China.

There have been frequent reports from North Korea that the transition to Kim
Jong Il was all but complete.

Kim Il Sung's health was reported to have deteriorated in recent years,
prompting rumors that his death was imminent or that he was about to turn over
full control to his son.

Reports that Mr. Kim had died began circulating Sunday in a dispatch by the
Tokyo correspondent for the South Korean newspaper Chosun Ilbo.

South Korea Issues Statement

At midmorning today, a South Korean spokesman issued this statement:

''On Nov. 16, the North Korean public address system along the demilitarized
zone broadcast that Kim Il Sung, the North Korean ruler, was shot to death, a
spokesman for the Ministry of National Defense said today.

''However, the official news media of North Korea have not yet made any
announcement or comment on the broadcast. The Republic of Korea's armed forces
are, as always, maintaining their state of readiness.''

A Western diplomat in Seoul said that his embassy was aware of unusual movements
in North Korea over the weekend and that evidence was accumulating that
something important had happened.

''Clearly there is something going on,'' the diplomat said. Referring to Mr.
Kim, he added, ''The fragmentary pieces of evidence we have accumulated over the
weekend suggest that he may have died, but none of the evidence has been
confirmed.''

According to reports from Peking, the North Korean Embassy, in denying the
reports, said, ''The South Korean side always spreads such fabrications.''

In Tokyo, a group of Koreans sympathetic to the North also denied the reports.

A Tightly Sealed Border

One reason for the lack of clear information is that North Korea's borders are
among the most tightly sealed in the world. Few visitors are allowed, and
diplomats based in the capital, Pyongyang, say their movements are severely
restricted.

President Kim has lived a secretive existence, rarely traveling outside North
Korea and moving inside the country with extreme caution. Diplomats in Pyongyang
reported in recent years that he rarely slept more than one night at a time in
the same place and that arrangements at his palatial headquarters in the eastern
suburbs of Pyongyang implied an acute concern for his security.

Travelers found that uniformed men with automatic rifles checked all vehicles at
roadblocks more than a mile from the headquarters and allowed only those in Mr.
Kim's inner circle to pass.

Praise for Leader Is Lavish

Wherever visitors go in North Korea, to hospitals, libraries or the many
monuments and museums that honor Mr. Kim, , guides speak of little but his
accomplishments. Defectors have reported that the mildest dissent is punished
with long terms in labor camps or, in extreme cases, execution without trial.

While falling badly behind the economic accomplishments of South Korea, the
North nonetheless has achieved agricultural and industrial successes under Mr.
Kim that compare well with other Communist countries in Asia, notably China and
Vietnam.

Mr. Kim has also been credited with deft management of the country's relations
with the Soviet Union and China, never allowing either to gain a dominant
influence. Although he has leaned toward Moscow in the last two years, he has
been careful to maintain close contacts with Peking. He has even encouraged a
belief that he might imitate some of the market-oriented economic reforms
instituted in China by Deng Xiaoping.

ASSASSINS REPORTED IN CHINA

 TOKYO, Monday, Nov. 17 (Reuters) - Japan was told by Chinese sources that Kim
Il Sung had been assassinated and that his killers had fled to China, a Japanese
official said today.

The official, in charge of intelligence on North Korea, said he had received
information on Saturday from Chinese sources that Mr. Kim had been assassinated
and that the killers were being held under Chinese protection. But the official
added that Japan had been unable to verify the information.

CONFUSION IN SEOUL

 SEOUL, South Korea, Monday, Nov. 17 (AP) - There was no explanation here of why
North Korea would report the death of its leader through loudspeakers along the
demilitarized zone that divides the peninsula. They are ordinarily used for
propaganda broadcasts beamed to the South.

Lee Heung Shik, spokesman for the South Korean Defense Ministry, said that
regular North Korean radio broadcasts monitored here had made no mention of such
an event, and that no confirmation had been received through other channels.

Police officials announced that the entire national police force had been placed
on full alert ''in connection with the recent situation in North Korea and to
block possible subversive attempts by impure elements.''

The term ''impure elements'' is often used by authorities here to describe
Communists or their supporters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kim Il Sung (Magnum/Hiroji Kubota)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Again, the Imperium

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 716 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Day by day we learn more about the web of deceit and folly spun by the Reagan
White House. And day by day the real import of the Iran affair - the abuse of
the office of President - looks more dangerous.

A President makes a drastic change in foreign policy against the advice of his
Secretaries of State and Defense. He acts through personal aides with little
experience in foreign affairs. Though his action may have profound military
consequences, he keeps it secret from the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He orders the
Director of Central Intelligence to ignore the law requiring him to report to
Congress.

What we learn from this is that a handful of men at the top of the United States
Government can take their country into the most treacherous waters on their own.
They can act in defiance of law, in defiance of undertakings to allies, in
defiance of respect for relationships in their own Government.

In the 200th year of the American Constitution, its careful checks and balances
are thus treated with contempt. Men who learned nothing from Vietnam and
Watergate tell us, again, that to meet the problems of the world we must have an
Imperial Presidency.

Folly is a likely result when a small group of ill-informed people act in secret
on great matters, and it was the result here. Senator Barry Goldwater called the
decision to send arms to Iran in the hope of wheedling help for American
hostages ''a dreadful mistake, probably one of the major mistakes the United
States has ever made in foreign policy.''

Offense to allies, encouragement to terrorists, loss of belief in America's
word: those are some of the results. But they are less important than the issue
of Presidential power.

It is not just that Mr. Reagan and his palace guard acted in defiance of the
constraints that have kept us free. It is that, when caught, they unashamedly
asserted the right to do just that. Donald Regan, the White House chief of
staff, put it this way:

''The President has certain powers that are given to him to do things in foreign
policy that are not given to ordinary citizens - and he's not above the law. But
I'm saying that he has powers that are more than normal powers.''

Of course the President has powers and duties far beyond those of the ordinary
citizen. That is a truism not worth uttering. The real point of Mr. Regan's
defensive statement, despite its reference to law, was that a President is
beyond the usual rules when he decides what is best for the country.

Does that have a familiar ring to it? Indeed it does. It is the very theory that
we heard from Richard Nixon in Watergate: that the President, acting in higher
interests that he alone defines, is exempt from ordinary rules of law. The
Supreme Court rejected that theory in United States v. Nixon. The House
Judiciary Committee rejected it in approving articles of impeachment.

Presidential contempt for the rules would have consequences as bad now as in
1974, if it were accepted. The Justice Department is prosecuting a considerable
number of Americans on charges of sending arms to Iran in violation of a legal
embargo on such shipments. What will this country be saying to the world - and
to itself -if it sends people to prison for violating a law that the President
breached?

Presidents, it is true, have great power in foreign affairs. But there are
limits, and the very scope of the power makes it vital that the limits be
observed.

The tension of power and restraint was well described by Justice William H.
Rehnquist, now Chief Justice, in a 1981 opinion for the Supreme Court. The case,
as it happens, arose from Iran's holding of American diplomats as hostages.

In 1936, Justice Rehnquist said, the Supreme Court had spoken of the President's
''plenary and exclusive power'' in foreign affairs. But in 1952, in the Steel
Seizure case, it rejected a claim that the power was ''virtually unlimited.''
Justice Rehnquist quoted the opinion in that case of Justice Robert H. Jackson,
whom he served as a law clerk:

''The example of such unlimited executive power that must have most impressed
the forefathers was the prerogative exercised by George III, and the description
of its evils in the Declaration of Independence leads me to doubt that they were
creating their new Executive in his image.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARBITRAGERS FACE THE SPOTLIGHT

BYLINE: By ROBERT J. COLE

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words


The mystifying downfall of Ivan F. Boesky - the dapper, undisputed king of the
Wall Street arbitragers -has shocked, saddened and, some say, given a certain
amount of perverse satisfaction to other Wall Street professionals.

The man that many envied for a string of immensely profitable stock market
successes was really not as astute as they thought he was, according to an
informal survey of leading Wall Street traders. And the disclosures about him
have caused deep apprehension among the traders that they will be ''tarred with
the same brush,'' as one expressed it.

''Arbitrage is not illegal,'' a leading arbitrager said. ''It's trading on
inside information that's illegal. And people in our business don't do that.''

Barry S. Lafer, a lawyer by training, financial director of the advertising for
President Ford's 1976 political campaign and now managing partner of Lafer,
Amster & Company, one of the big arbitrage players, explained arbitrage this
way:

''What we do for the most part is commit capital in the stocks of companies that
announce corporate deals - tender offers, mergers, bankruptcies, liquidations,
spin-offs and restructurings. We don't involve ourself in rumors; we wait for
announcements to commit capital.''

However, as the takeover speculative fever has gripped Wall Street in recent
years, some of the arbitragers, especially those at independent investment
partnerships, have taken to betting on which corporate stocks are likely to be
the next takeover target.

While most arbitragers today are young men, exceptionally wealthy - many
probably millionaires - few are known outside Wall Street, and genuinely prefer
it that way.

''Nobody knew what an arbitrager was before Boesky became popular,'' said Alan
B. Slifka, arbitrage chief for Halcyon Investments, one of the biggest firms in
the business.

One of the more visible arbitragers, because of his name, is Daniel R. Tisch, 35
years old, the second of four sons of Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of the Loews
Corporation and acting chief executive of CBS Inc.

Coming to Wall Street from Brown University, the younger Mr. Tisch joined
Abraham & Company (now part of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.) to train as an
analyst. Two years later he joined Salomon Brothers Inc. as a trainee, soon
becoming assistant to Richard Rosenthal, Salomon's legendary chief arbitrager.

Five years ago, when Mr. Rosenthal decided to pursue other interests, Mr. Tisch
took the helm. Unlike some arbitragers, he is not known for swapping tidbits
with others in the business, does not phone Wall Street investment houses or
their clients to ask for information and - most important - does not buy stock
until something official is announced.

Yet Mr. Tisch is recognized as one of the five biggest arbitrage players,
spending $25 million to $50 million in just one stock. And he does it with just
six people (twice the number employed last year).

Another highly visible player, at least to just about everybody on Wall Street,
is John A. Mulheren Jr., chief arbitrager of the Jamie Securities Company.
Although highly secretive by nature, the 37-year-old, square-jawed professional
buys stock under his own name and would be on any list of the very biggest
arbitragers.

''John's a swinger,'' one arbitrager said. ''When he likes a situation, he's
capable of buying millions of shares - and has. And he'll trade in and out of a
situation two, three or four times before it's over.''

''Mulheren has so much guts,'' another said, ''he can buy enormous amounts of
stock. Most guys couldn't do that and sleep at night.''

His investors include such well-known business and financial names as the
Belzberg family of Canada; Jack Nash, former chairman of Oppenheimer & Company,
and, in a small way, James Tisch, a younger brother of Daniel Tisch.

A good friend of T. Boone Pickens, Mr. Mulheren once gave a dinner for the
flamboyant Texas oilman, astounding the usually hard-to-impress arbitrage
community with mounds of caviar and expensive wine.

Robert Steinberg, 41, arbitrage chief for Bear, Stearns & Company, joined the
firm 16 years ago as an analyst, fresh from Columbia Business School with an
M.B.A.

An easy-to-know executive with a strong, analytical bent, Mr. Steinberg is
regarded by other arbitragers as one who ''commits his money well and strong''
and ''a guy who's made some strong plays.''

In one of his more recent coups, he was instrumental in the takeover of
Anderson, Clayton & Company by the Quaker Oats Company. After accumulating a
major stake in Anderson, Clayton, his firm joined with another big arbitrager,
Gruss & Company, to fight a defensive maneuver in the courts while also trying
to take over the company. The two arbitrage firms made millions of dollars
selling their stock just before Quaker made its successful takeover bid.

Goldman's Player

One of the least visible, at least to outsiders, is Robert M. Freeman, head
arbitrager at Goldman, Sachs & Company, always among the biggest players in the
business.

Mr. Freeman, invariably described as ''decent,'' and ''very nice,'' joined
Goldman, Sachs as a trainee, rising initially to become No. 2 man to Robert E.
Rubin, then Goldman, Sach's chief arbitrager but today one of its senior
executives. About two years ago Mr. Freeman moved up to No. 1 in arbitrage at
Goldman, Sachs.

A strong believer in research, he uses traditional methods - such as poring over
annual reports and other financial documents - to decide when to buy or sell. A
typical play: $25 million or more.

The list of important arbitragers also includes George Kellner, 43, of Kellner,
DiLeo & Company, a 1967 graduate of Columbia Law School and a former Boesky
employee.

A few years ago, he left as arbitrage chief of the Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette
Securities Corporation to form his own company. One of his first investors was
Donaldson, Lufkin, whose $250,000 stake, now $1.25 million, averages a
comfortable 45 percent annual return.

T. Brett Haire, 37, head arbitrager at the First Boston Corporation, joined the
company a decade ago as a trainee after a stint as a Chemical Bank lending
officer. A helicopter pilot of Cobra gun ships during the war in Vietnam, Mr.
Haire plays ''the Army way,'' hard but by the rules in a high-risk game. He lets
off steam coaching soccer and hockey teams in suburban New Jersey.

The headlines about Mr. Boesky have left arbitragers deeply concerned that ''an
industry was being tarnished.'' One professional who described himself as ''a
careful, traditional risk arbitrager,'' remarked, ''Boesky was probably the most
aggressive, the most visible and the most speculative - and was not necessarily
typical of most arbitragers.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of the risk arbitrage department of First Boston Inc.; photo of
Alan B. Slifka (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

JAPANESE CHIP MAKERS FALTER

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1597 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Nov. 16


For the first time since Japan became a world power in microelectronics, its
semiconductor industry has badly faltered, amid evidence that Japanese
manufacturers are now paying the price for the strategies they used to defeat
many of their American competitors.

In the past month alone, the five largest Japanese electronics companies have
reported plunges of between 50 and 80 percent in pretax profits for the first
half of the year.

Executives at Hitachi have taken 10 percent pay cuts, NEC and Fujitsu have
scrapped plans to build new manufacturing plants, and every major chip producer
except Toshiba has announced plans to cut capital spending by up to half. There
is even guarded talk about the possibility of layoffs - a sensitive subject in a
country where large employers have traditionally guaranteed employment for life.


Companies Scramble

The downturn has some of the companies scrambling to move into more profitable
ventures, particularly involving specialty-chip makers in the United States.

Fujitsu Ltd., for example, is attempting to take a majority share in
Schlumberger Ltd.'s Fairchild Semiconductor unit, a maker of emitter-coupled
logic chips used in some mainframes and minicomputers. And there were
unconfirmed reports here over the weekend of a plan by the Toshiba Corporation
and Motorola Inc. to set up a joint venture in Japan to produce and sell memory
and logic chips. [Robert W. Galvin, chief executive of Motorola, declined to
comment today about the reports of a possible venture with Toshiba, saying the
company's policy is not to respond to rumors. Toshiba executives have declined
to discuss joint ventures.] The reversal of fortunes has come as something of a
shock to Japan, where the electronics industry has driven much of the country's
phenomenal economic growth. It also comes at a particularly bad time for the
nation's economy, which is increasingly depending on high technology to make up
for huge losses in heavy industries like steel and shipbuilding.

Critical Scrutiny

And in the face of unaccustomed critical scrutiny, normally impassive top
executives of Japan's biggest high-technology companies are now conceding that
they made major misjudgments.

''We predicted that the market would go up 20 to 30 percent a year, just as in
the past,'' said Tomihiro Matsumura, who directs semiconductor operations at the
NEC Corporation, Japan's largest producer of computer chips. ''The mistake,'' he
said in an interview at NEC's sprawling headquarters complex here last week,
''is that we believed our own predictions.''

But Japan's missteps, many here and in Silicon Valley now believe, went beyond
merely overly optimistic forecasts for the sales of computers, video cassette
recorders, compact-disk players and automobiles, all heavy users of
microelectronic components.

Some Japanese executives concede privately that they badly misjudged the impact
of a three-month-old semiconductor trade agreement with the United States, which
has crippled the exports of some manufacturers here, while leaving others
unscathed.

Koreans Underestimated

Others concede that they underestimated the feistiness of small Japanese and
Korean manufacturers, new to the chip business, who are still cutting prices and
challenging Japan's giants at their own game of low-cost manufacturing. And no
one anticipated the steep fall of the dollar relative to the yen, which has made
Japanese electronics far less competitive on world markets.

''It is a painful time for all of us,'' said Kazou Kimbara, a top official of
Hitachi Ltd., the giant Japanese computer and electronics maker. ''And we can't
have much hope of recovery until the end of next year.''

Ironically, Japan's troubles in electronics come just as it reaches a huge
milestone of success. Next year, according to most predictions, Japan will
likely displace the United States for the first time as the world's largest
supplier of semiconductors. Dataquest, a market research concern that follows
the electronics industry, estimates that this year Japan and the United States
each hold about 44 percent of the world market.

Nonetheless, many experts say that the recent Japanese experience in electronics
illustrates how a seemingly foolproof strategy - in this case a successful
effort to dominate the world market for memory chips -can backfire unexpectedly.


An 'Economic Vietnam'

''The memory-chip market has turned out to be Japan's economic Vietnam,'' said
Andrew Grove, president of the Intel Corporation, the Silicon Valley chip maker
that has often protested Japanese trade moves in electronics.

Industry analysts are less pessimistic. In memory chips, Japan's technological
lead appears still to be widening: At a Toshiba research facility in Kawasaki
last week, researchers showed a visitor advanced prototypes of a four-megabit
chip, capable of storing four million bits of data. Only one American
manufacturer has announced a similar breakthrough.

Moreover, few of Japan's troubles have worked to the benefit of American chip
manufacturers, who lost an estimated $600 million last year in the memory chip
market. But even Americans are shaking their heads at the unexpected turn of
events.

''By their own plan,'' one International Business Machines Corporation executive
here said the other day, ''the Japanese should have been bringing in the money
hand over fist by now.''

The plan the executive referred to began to unfold in the mid-1970's. At that
time Japan's Ministry of Trade and Industry organized one of the first
joint-research efforts among Japan's electronic giants, a program in Very Large
Scale Integrated Circuit, or VLSI technology.

Years of Planning

After years of careful planning and investments of hundreds of millions of
dollars, Japan became a major producer of 64K memory chips in the early 1980's,
and built state-of-the-art fabrication facilities for the next two generations
of memory chips: the 256K chips, now used in most personal computers, and the
one-megabit chips, which store a million pieces of data.

Three years ago, a price war broke out, leading American manufacturers to charge
that Japanese competitors were dumping chips far below their production cost in
an effort to seize market share. Combined with Japan's remarkable discipline in
maintaining the cleanest ''clean rooms'' and the highest yield of usable chips
from each silicon wafer, the strategy worked: Today Japan makes roughly 80
percent of all 256K chips, and the figure is likely to rise for one-megabit
devices.

But now that American manufacturers have largely fled the commodity business of
memory chips, Japan, taken by surprise by the length of the computer slump, has
been unable to reap its long-expected profits.

Accord a Factor

Worsening the troubles for many manufacturers here is the semiconductor trade
accord reached this summer after years of on-and-off negotiations. The key
element of the agreement called for the United States Commerce Department to
establish ''fair market value'' prices for Japanese chips sold in the United
States, keyed to the actual production cost for each Japanese company.

The result has been an apparent effort by some Japanese manufacturers to
sidestep the agreement. Both government and privately compiled figures show a
surge in memory chip shipments to Hong Kong, Singapore and Latin America, which
are not covered by the agreement. There, the chips are often repackaged or
inserted on circuit boards and shipped to the United States as
''sub-assemblies,'' not covered in the accord.

Executives of the manufacturers here deny trying to sabotage the accord. ''The
reason for the increase,'' said Mr. Kimbara of Hitachi, ''is that more American
computer manufacturers are shifting their production to that area.''

American competitors dispute that view. ''Either chips are being diverted,''
James Shinn, the general manager of the Advanced Micro Devices' office here,
said dryly, ''or there's a remarkable computer demand all of a sudden in Latin
America.''

U.S.-Japan Talks Last Week

A delegation of United States officials visited here last week to review the
accord and reportedly pressed the Japanese Government to crack down on the chip
diversions. But the officials declined to discuss the outcome of those talks.

For their part, Japan's electronics giants seem to be quickly losing enthusiasm
for memory chips, now that they have wrested them from American producers. In a
refrain heard frequently in Silicon Valley, executives at Hitachi, NEC, Fujitsu
and Toshiba said last week they must quickly move into far more profitable
chip-making ventures. Chief among them are semi-custom chips, gate arrays and
logic chips.

Japan's current electronics slump may slow down the drive into new businesses,
but it seems unlikely to stop it. ''You can't have anything but enormous respect
for their ability to plan and execute in new areas,'' said Mr. Shinn. ''That's
how they got here in the first place.''

JAPAN FINDS THAT A CUT IN CHIP PROFITS . . .

Pretax profits for Japan's semiconductor makers for the half-year ended
September 1986 and estimated for the year ended March 1987, in billions of yen.
(Yen is currently valued at .006 cent.)
               Half-Year

               Full-Year
Company           Income    Change    Income    Change
Hitachi             45.6    -54.7%        92      -42%
Toshiba             12.4       -80        40       -50
Mitsubishi          11.2     -60.2        26       -35
NEC                 20.1     -66.5        55       -42
Fujitsu              7.2     -79.1        30       -21


Source: Japan Economic Journal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of semiconductor sales, in billions of dollars (Source:
Dataquest)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 19, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
Who's in Charge Anyway?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


During the Bay of Pigs disaster, President Kennedy, irritated by the opposition
of the State Department, turned on Ambassador Charles E. (Chip) Bohlen and
demanded to know, ''What's wrong with your department?'' Bohlen replied, ''You
are, Mr. President!''

Secretary of State Shultz, caught between his personal honesty and his loyalty
to President Reagan, was less candid during the recent Iranian flap but was
getting at much the same point.

Bohlen was saying, with the utmost respect, that foreign policy was too
complicated and too dangerous to be left to the whims of Presidents. Nobody
questioned the President's authority as Commander in Chief, Bohlen thought, but
everything depended on how he exercised that authority and where he sought
advice in making his decisions.

Kennedy relied on the Central Intelligence Agency at the Bay of Pigs and failed;
he took the entire Government foreign policy establishment into his confidence
during the Cuban missile crisis and succeeded.

It's not always so, but President Johnson on Vietnam, President Nixon on
Watergate and President Carter in the first Iranian crisis all brushed aside the
doubts of the professionals to their regret. Likewise, President Reagan went
back to Iran with military arms without the knowledge of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, against the advice of the Secretaries of State and Defense, and without
consulting with Congress in advance.

The President has dealt with this latest blunder after his fashion. He has
denied that he has done anything wrong and says he won't do it again. He ignored
Mr. Shultz's advice and is now taking it. He vilified the Democrats during the
Congressional elections, and evaded them on Iran, and is now calling for their
support.

One can only hope that he gets it, for nothing could be worse than leaving the
conduct of foreign policy in the next two years to the collective judgment of a
divided Democratic Party running wild toward the Presidential election of 1988.

The President will, however, have to pay more respect to the responsibilities of
the Secretary of State, unless he is willing to lose him. And he must rein in
the C.I.A. and the subversive operations of the National Security Council unless
he wants a running battle with Congress over the next 24 months.

He is now on his fourth national security adviser in six years, and Admiral
Poindexter, his latest, is not the pride of the Ship of State. He is the officer
who misled the press on the invasion of Grenada, and is the author of the
''disinformation'' program on Libya.

There is no evidence that the National Security Act, establishing the N.S.C.,
gave that body authority to engage in covert operations in Iran or anywhere
else. It started with a staff of 10 and now has over 100 beyond the call of
Congress. It was authorized ''to assess and appraise the objectives, commitments
and risks of the United States in relation to our actual and political military
power; and (2) to consider policies on matters of common interest to the
departments and agencies of the government concerned with the national security,
and to make recommendations to the President in connection therewith.''

Nothing there to justify Bud McFarlane and Colonel North carrying weapons to
Iran, armed with false passports and official lies.

This private government within the White House, however, is the President's
personal responsibility. If the C.I.A. mines the harbors of Nicaragua and the
United States refuses to explain this to the World Court, that can be done only
with a wink and a nod from the President.

It may be, therefore, that something useful will come out of the Iranian
embarrassment. For years now, the C.I.A. and the National Security Council have
been skirting the law, trying to achieve by covert action what they cannot
justify or explain to Congress.

The result is that there is now a crisis of confidence in the Government
precisely at a time of critical negotiations over the control of nuclear weapons
and control of the budget, now in alarming deficit.

This has been a topic of private anxiety here for years. It has poisoned
relations between the White House and Capitol Hill and even personal relations
between members of the Cabinet. But the facts are beginning to come out, and
despite all the official arts of television propaganda, even the people are
beginning to notice.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 19, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'THE HANDS OF ITS ENEMY'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words


IN ''Children of a Lesser God,'' a Broadway hit of 1980, the playwright Mark
Medoff spoke up for the right of deaf people to dignity, fulfillment and
nonverbal eloquence. In ''The Hands of Its Enemy,'' his first play since then,
Mr. Medoff reunites with his deaf leading lady of the previous venture, Phyllis
Frelich, but to less noble ends. If there's a coherent, overriding point to the
new work at the Manhattan Theater Club - and don't bet on it - maybe it's that
deaf people can be as undignified, destructive and, yes, loud-mouthed as
everybody else. In Mr. Medoff's Act I climax, the heroine blurts out a
four-letter word that takes us a very long way from the benign ''water'' with
which Helen Keller broke her silence in ''The Miracle Worker.''

Ms. Frelich's role is that of a deaf dramatist named Marieta whose play, titled
''In Defense of Another,'' is going into rehearsal at a university theater in
the Southwest. Marieta is a boor. She objects strenuously to every script change
suggested by her hotheaded director (Jeffrey DeMunn) or by her daughter (Lucy
Deakins), an aspiring (and hearing) teen-age actress who triumphed locally in
''The Miracle Worker.'' Yet Marieta's play clearly needs all the doctoring it
can get. The tale of an alcoholic, daughter-raping man and the wife who shoots
him, ''In Defense of Another,'' from what we see of it, is the kind of melodrama
that makes ''People's Court'' look like a polite seminar in semantics.

Then again, Marieta's play-within-''The Hands of Its Enemy'' - it might have
been titled ''The 'Enemy' Within'' - is hardly more preposterous than what
surrounds it. In his backstage story, Mr. Medoff has piled on so many overheated
events and coincidences that his unnamed setting smacks suspiciously of Peyton
Place Junior College. Marieta's antagonistic director, we quickly learn, just
happens to be a recently rehabilitated ''abusive alcoholic,'' much like the
father in the play he's directing. The daughter in the play has been
conveniently cast with Marieta's own daughter, and the role of the mother has
unaccountably been given to the lover (Jane Kaczmarek) that the director jilted
in an alcoholic rage when last on campus five years earlier. Marieta's
interpreter and 20-year companion (Robert Steinberg) turns out to be a
homosexual, and, lest any sociological stone go unturned, the otherwise unnoted
father of Marieta's child is revealed in passing to be a casualty of the Vietnam
War.

Perhaps Mr. Medoff mimics Marieta's hokey play with his own potboiler to
illustrate how life can imitate art or vice versa. But where's the art -or, for
that matter, life? Much of ''Enemy'' is a shell game of artificially delayed
plot revelations - with every bombshell preceded by thematic pronouncementss
delivered roughly three times each (six, if you understand sign language).
Although Mr. Medoff wraps himself in Ibsen's mantle in both his title and some
early exposition, he apparently believes Ibsen was nothing other than a
soap-opera writer who emphasized character over narrative. There's no depth to
Mr. Medoff's characters in any case - they might be Phil Donahue show rejects
-but even if there were, what would be the point of their unengaging
histrionics? The evening's predominant conflict - the debate between the
director and Marieta about how to transform her ''little revenge piece'' into
''a big play about domestic violence'' - pays off only in the unsophisticated
reaffirmation that honesty is the most therapeutic policy in writing.

This message, though banal, is true enough. Too bad that Mr. Medoff doesn't
subscribe to it himself. For all his sanctimonious embracing of abused women and
minorities, ''Enemy'' keeps betraying backhanded contempt for those it professes
to champion. The principal (and gratuitous) butt of the play's humorless jokes
is a stereotypically spinsterish university functionary (Joyce Reehling) who
lives to steal a kiss from her boss. The homosexual interpreter is presented as
an ineffectual, petulant eunuch, while the recovered alcoholic is a bully (until
Mr. Medoff suddenly humanizes him for a syrupy ending). The deaf Marieta, while
ostensibly rendered lovable by her irritating habit of playing ''Down in the
Valley'' on her harmonica, is a fount of vulgar gestures even when she's not
dredging up the obscene childhood incident that gives the play its far from
fortuitously placed pre-intermission jolt.

The production does little to make the characters more palatable or meaningful.
With the designers John Lee Beatty and Pat Collins, the director Kenneth Frankel
has, at least, smoothly choreographed the gradual Pirandellian merging of
''Enemy'' with the burgeoning production of Marieta's play in progress. But if
theater is as joyless an activity in university drama departments as it's
portrayed here, no wonder young people would rather go to ''Crocodile Dundee.''
''Enemy'' is hardly a half-hour old before the rehearsal participants are
throwing folding chairs, waving fists and shrieking.

Of the performers, only Ms. Kaczmarek and Ms. Deakins act within a human scale.
Mr. DeMunn's director, whose own sign language consists mainly of furious
waving, and Dann Florek, as his equally argumentative leading man, go so far
over the top that they may surface any night now on the main stage upstairs from
the Manhattan Theater Club at City Center. Nearly as trying is Ms. Frelich, who
too frequently attempts to camouflage naked hostility with the patronizing,
thin-lipped smile of the professional saint. The special actress whose signing
so passionately extolled the theater of the deaf in Mr. Medoff's last play is,
in this one, just another heavy-handed purveyor of the theater of the glib.

A Play in a Play

THE HANDS OF ITS ENEMY, by Mark Medoff; directed by Kenneth Frankel; sets by
John Lee Beatty; costumes by Jennifer von Mayrhauser; lighting by Pat Collins;
sound by Aural Fixation; production stage manager, John Vivian. Presented by
Manhattan Theater Club, Lynne Meadow, artistic director; Barry Grove, managing
director. At City Center Theater, 131 West 55th Street. T. O.Finn...Ralph
Williams; Assistant Stage Manager...Tammy Taylor; Mel Katzman...Robert
Steinberg; Marieta Yerby...Phyllis Frelich; Amanda Yerby...Lucy Deakins; Elma
Pafko...Joyce Reehling; Skip Donner...Dann Florek; Howard Bellman...Jeffrey
DeMunn; Diane Newburry...Jane Kaczmarek.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 19, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY: Printouts;
Using Super Glue In Medicine

SECTION: Section D; Page 10, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 229 words


Anyone whose fingers have accidentally become stuck together while working with
Krazy Glue knows how quickly and tenaciously it bonds skin. However, there is
little practical benefit in gluing one's finger to one's ear when trying to fix
an earring.

Of greater potential value is the use of super glues in medicine, researchers
report.

Medical trials are expected to begin next month on the use of super glues -
technically, cyanoacrylates - to replace needle and thread in some delicate eye
and brain operations. The Food and Drug Administration has given a grant to a
Durham, N.C., company, Bionexus Inc., to develop butyl cyanoacrylates for
experiments at Duke University, for treatment of punctured corneas, and at
Walter Reed Army Hospital, for treatment of arterial and venous malformations in
the brain. Chuck De Smet, director of regulatory and clinical affairs for
Bionexus, a privately held company, said recent advances had allowed his company
to produce adhesives that are less toxic to surrounding healthy tissue than
earlier versions and can sit on a doctor's shelf for longer periods without
deterioration.

The Pentagon is interested in aerosol versions of super glues for battlefield
''wound management.'' Such aerosols were tested in Vietnam, and intelligence
sources say Soviet soldiers now carry standard-issue glue sprays in their
medical kits.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

COCAINE SMUGGLER'S STORY SHOWS U.S. NET WITH 'MORE HOLES THAN CHEESE'

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2308 words

DATELINE: SCRANTON, Pa.


Frederick Luytjes was busy in the spring and summer of 1984. Friday evenings he
would fly here from Tampa, Fla., where he was standing trial on drug-trafficking
charges, and drop off his lawyer, who lived in Scranton.

Then he would fly to Colombia in another plane modified to carry extra fuel and
return to Pennsylvania with cocaine. The roundabout route he took, bringing in
as much as 600 kilograms each trip, bypassed the Government's antidrug defenses
in Florida.

By Monday morning he would be back in the Tampa courtroom.

Whatever the physical and emotional demands of the weekend runs to Colombia, he
presented his defense -that his involvement was as a Federal informer -
convincingly enough to be acquitted.

Mr. Luytjes - pilot, aviation entrepreneur and informer - was eventually
captured and imprisoned on other charges, and is to testify early next month
against one of several other defendants in the case. His story, assembled from
court records, interviews with the Federal authorities and other sources, is a
tale of international intrigue, violence, complicity and duplicity in the
shadowy world of drug trafficking.

It is also a tale that has shown law-enforcement officials just how complicated
the war against drugs can be. It demonstrates the problems the Government faces
when it tries to close down drug operations in Florida, only to find them
diverted to places like Pennsylvania.

The 43-year-old Mr. Luytjes was persuaded by Federal prosecutors early this year
to plead guilty to conspiring to import cocaine. His cooperation led to the
indictment last summer of 12 Americans and Colombians in a case involving what
Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d described as ''the largest amount of cocaine
ever smuggled into this country by a single drug trafficking organization.''

Five of them have pleaded guilty, and Mr. Luytjes has agreed to testify against
three others in return for a 10-year prison sentence instead of what could have
amounted to more than 200 years. Three others named in the indictment have not
been apprehended, and one is dead. Drug Cartel Is Termed Largest in Hemisphere
The indictment of the four Americans and eight Colombians was unsealed in
Harrisburg last August. The trial of one of the Americans, Thomas K. Edenfield
Jr., of Albuquerque, N.M., will begin early next month in Scranton. The three
other Americans pleaded guilty in Federal District Court this month to a variety
of drug-smuggling charges and were sentenced to jail terms of 5 to 24 years.

One of the Colombians named in the indictment is awaiting trial, a second was
kidnapped in July in Colombia and killed after colleagues paid a $50 million
ransom, prosecutors said. The other Colombians are presumed to have fled the
country.

Mr. Luytjes's operation was part of the ''Medellin Cartel,'' which Federal
prosecutors in Miami and Harrisburg describe as the largest drug-smuggling ring
in the Western Hemisphere. Prosecutors announced on Tuesday the indictment in
Miami of nine leaders of the ring, which investigators said used corruption,
violence and murder to smuggle at least 58 tons of cocaine into the United
States in this decade.

''We're seeing the tentacles of that organization being taken apart,'' said Leon
Kellner, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of Pennsylvania.

Much of the chronology of Mr. Luytjes's drug-smuggling operation remains murky.
He is now in prison in Otisville, N.Y., under the Federal witness protection
program and could not interviewed. At least eight attempts were made to discuss
the case with his attorneys and to obtain permission from them to interview him.
They did not respond.

But Federal prosecutors, Drug Enforcement Administration agents and Customs
Service officials, some of whom spoke on the condition they would not be
identified, have provided a glimpse into the organization that they say Mr.
Luytjes served as mechanic and chief pilot. They estimate that the group
smuggled 7.5 tons of cocaine, worth $150 million on the street, into the country
over five years.

James J. West, the acting United States Attorney for the Middle District of
Pennsylvania, said the case had already driven home some lessons for
drug-enforcement officials. It shows, he said, that the authorities had
seriously underestimated how easily narcotics could be smuggled directly into
the Northeast and other areas far from Florida and the Caribbean.

The Luytjes routes showed that ''we've got all our guns fixed in position and
pointed in the wrong direction,'' said one Federal official.

Mr. Luytjes operated out of the Wilkes-Barre-Scranton International Airport in
Avoca, Pa., where he ran an aircraft maintenance company, Air America Inc.
Investigators suspect he chose that name to create an impression he was
connected with the Central Intelligence Agency, which set up a company by the
same name as a cover for operations in South Vietnam.

Mr. Luytjes unloaded his illicit cargo at smaller airports nearby.

Federal officials say Mr. Luytjes became involved in smuggling cocaine through
friends he made in the late 1970's while running his company. At first,
prosecutors said, he merely modified planes for drug smugglers. He became known
as one of the best in the tricky business of installing auxiliary tanks and
interior bladders to carry fuel on small airplanes without destroying their
fragile balance.

But he was soon tempted by the profits of smuggling, prosecutors said. So, they
said, in December 1980 he sent James Cooper, a pilot and an employee, to meet
with a Colombian, Rigoberto Correa-Arroyave, known as ''The Cocaine Cowboy.''

Mr. Cooper carried a letter of introduction provided by a smuggler whose plane
Mr. Luytjes had modified, prosecutors said. They said Mr. Cooper and Mr.
Correa-Arroyave met in Miami and then flew to Colombia and consummated a deal
with Arturo Pablo Correa-Arroyave, who was named in the indictment as the head
of the drug-smuggling operation.

Afterward, Rigoberto Correa-Arroyave returned to the United States to direct Mr.
Luytjes's activities, prosecutors say, and Mr. Cooper stayed in Colombia to set
up a radio system for tracking drug shipments throughout their long trip. A
similar system was installed in Mr. Luytjes's secluded home in Deer Lake, amid
the rolling hills of north-central Pennsylvania. 3,000 Pounds of CocaineIn Six
Flights to U.S.

The first cocaine flight took place in January 1981, prosecutors said. Three
months later, Mr. Luytjes flew on his first trip. Before the year was out, six
flights had brought in more than 3,000 pounds of high-grade cocaine, prosecutors
say.

Officials said the ring at first unloaded the cocaine at airstrips near Lake
Wales, Fla. But at the end of 1981 it moved its operations to north-central
Pennsylvania.

In recent years, officials say, some other drug traffickers have also moved out
of Florida. About 3 percent of the 150 metric tons of cocaine smuggled into the
country each year now comes directly to the Northeast, whereas virtually none
did five years ago, according to rough estimates by prosecutors and
Congressional officials.

Representative Glenn English, the Oklahoma Democrat who heads a House Government
Operations subcommittee with oversight of drug enforcement efforts, said
traffickers now routinely bypassed the Government's Florida defenses.

Smugglers Easily EvadeFlorida Radar Net

''There are more holes than cheese,'' said a member of Mr. English's
subcommittee staff. ''All a drug smuggler has to do to be successful is hang a
right when he gets to the border.''

That's what Mr. Luytjes and fellow smugglers did, prosecutors say. They remained
east of the Government's radar net in Florida until they were north of
Jacksonville and well past the net. Then they turned northwest.

Mr. West, the acting United States Attorney, said it was impossible to monitor
even a small fraction of the at least 200 airports in middle Pennsylvania.

Gordon A. Zubrod, an Assistant United States Attorney, said Mr. Luytjes also
used decoy planes.

Mr. Luytjes also worked to remain above suspicion when he was not flying. He
lived quietly, as far as most people could tell, giving to charities and
cultivating friends in the political and corporate power structure.

''He was the kind of guy that the Chamber of Commerce went to if it wanted to
fund some kind of civic improvement,'' Mr. West said.

Officers describe Mr. Luytjes as an intelligent, charming ''danger junkie'' who
dropped out of Miami Dade Community College and Arizona State University. He
devoted himself to flying even after he was disfigured so badly in a plane crash
that his face had to be rebuilt, the officials said.

Law-enforcement officials around Scranton said Mr. Luytjes, who was born in
Brooklyn and grew up on Long Island, appeared to be a typical young professional
who had made good before tiring of the big-city rat race.

He raised money for local and national Republican political candidates and had
his picture taken in his office with President Ford; he socialized with former
Gov. William W. Scranton and his closest associates; he frequently flew
Representative Joseph M. McDade to and from Washington, the authorities said.
But they added there was no evidence that any of the politicians or their
associates knew how Mr. Luytjes had made his fortune.

Mr. Luytjes, a bachelor, also maintained an estate in Jamaica and held parties
there for officials and business leaders in the Scranton area, whom he flew to
the island on Air America planes. Suspicion Is Aroused Over Lack of Business
Law-enforcement officials said they began to be suspicious of Mr. Luytjes and
his company in the early 1980's. ''We looked and determined that the company
wasn't doing enough business to justify its outlays,'' said Dennis Malloy,
special agent in Harrisburg for the Drug Enforcement Administration. But,
officials said, they still lacked solid evidence.

In October 1984 Mr. Luytjes announced that one R. J. Ortega of Brazil had
purchased Air America for $13.2 million in cash. Day after day, company
employees put stacks of $10, $20 and $100 bills in cardboard boxes and took them
to area banks.

But, prosecutors said, Mr. Ortega was ''mythical'' and Mr. Luytjes still ''gave
all the orders'' at the company.

Law-enforcement officers, well aware of Mr. Luytjes's acquittal in Tampa earlier
that year, thought the announced sale showed Mr. Luytjes was feeling their
pressure. But that seemed like small comfort after three years of pursuit.

''In one fell swoop he managed to launder all his money,'' Mr. Zubrod said.
''And so everybody retires.''

In the Tampa trial, Mr. Luytjes subpoenaed Federal agents and Pennsylvania State
Police officers. All testified that he had informed them about illegal
drug-trafficking from South America. Law-enforcement officials said in
interviews that Mr. Luytjes was recruited as an informer in 1978 after he was
caught transporting methaqualone in his automobile.

It is unclear why the Colombian ring agreed to continue doing business with a
man who had publicly identified himself as an informer. ''They probably thought
it was a gutsy thing to do,'' Mr. West said. ''It probably led to a feeling of
invulnerability - a feeling that 'they tried to get me, they took their best
shot and they couldn't.' ''

The role of informer, officials said, was an almost perfect cover for Mr.
Luytjes, helping to explain his contacts with suspected drug smugglers and
diverting suspicion from himself.

But in the end it may have led to his fall. Drug enforcement agents at the Tampa
trial, according to published reports, also testified that Mr. Luytjes had once
placed a signaling device in a plane flown by one of his pilots, James Cooper.
It was Mr. Cooper, who is listed as an unindicted co-conspirator in the most
recent case involving Mr. Luytjes, who provided the first solid clue linking Mr.
Luytjes to the Colombian ring, the authorities said.

The link emerged two years ago, after Mr. Cooper, while landing a plane loaded
with marijuana on a rural strip in Brunswick, Ga., crashed and killed a man. The
authorities said the man was driving a car on the landing strip, lighting the
runway with his headlights, when he apparently drove under the plane. Mr. Cooper
was severely injured. The authorities said he agreed to cooperate with them
after he was charged with felony murder.

Under questioning, Mr. Cooper volunteered that he had imported cocaine in 1981
for Mr. Luytjes, Mr. Zubrod said. It was the break the authorities had sought.
For the first time, they had a witness tying Mr. Luytjes to drug-smuggling.

But they wanted the whole ring. They arranged several meetings between Mr.
Cooper and Mr. Luytjes near airports, including at least one in July 1985 near
Teterboro Airport in New Jersey.

At first, the authorities said, Mr. Luytjes would search Mr. Cooper, who was no
longer an employee, for a hidden recorder, but slowly he began to trust Mr.
Cooper and tape-recording began. In the end Mr. Luytjes agreed to set up a
flight and began making the arrangements. Drug Suspect Vanishes With Up to $12
Million On Dec. 23, 1985, Mr. Luytjes and others were indicted for conspiracy to
import illegal drugs. But by the time the sealed indictment was opened Jan. 10,
Mr. Luytjes had fled, taking as much as $12 million with him, prosecutors said.
It remains unclear what prompted him to flee.

Then, apparently by chance, a drug enforcement agent sighted his plane in the
Dutch West Indies.

Mr. Zubrod said Federal officials arranged to have the authorities there expel
him. He was put on a plane and arrested as he disembarked at Kennedy
International Airport.

Federal officials then negotiated with him in an effort to win his cooperation.
Finally, Mr. Luytjes was ready to make a deal with the authorities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Group In Thai Talks

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 211 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 19


An American Congressional delegation put pressure on Thailand today to join
efforts to force Japan, South Korea and Taiwan to open their domestic markets to
foreign products.

But Thailand responded with a warning that threats of protectionist trade laws
could damage friendly ties between Washington and its allies.

''The United States should look at the longer perspective of its relations with
other countries before taking trade actions that could trigger a trade war in
which friends forget their former allies,'' Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila
told reporters after meeting the delegation.

Mr. Siddhi said he told the 13-member delegation from the House Ways and Means
Committee that Thailand had little bargaining power in negotiating trade issues.
He said Washington should take into account the records of Thai troops fighting
alongside American forces in Korea and Vietnam.

American officials have asked Thailand to cut import tariffs on cotton, lift a
ban on imports of foreign cigarettes and tighten legislation and enforcement of
copyright, trademark and patent laws. Thai statistics show the country had an
estimated $152 million trade surplus with the United States during the first
seven months of this year, up from $127 million a year ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 22, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SERVICE NEEDS OF ALIENS BRING WORRIES ON COSTS

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1048 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 21


State and local officials around the country say the $1 billion a year the
Federal Government has pledged for social services for illegal aliens who gain
legal status under the new immigration law may fall far short of the need.

They fear that places with many immigrants, such as Los Angeles County and New
York City, could face a disproportionate burden of providing welfare, health,
education and other non-Federal services to aliens who come under the amnesty.
As illegal immigrants, they have been ineligible for many of these services or
have been reluctant to apply for fear of discovery.

''There is no way $1 billion can cover the huge costs,'' said Susan Golding, a
San Diego County Supervisor. The county is the main point of entry for Mexican
nationals.

Few Have Any Estimates

At the same time, Federal, state and local officials agree that no one knows how
much the Federal obligation should be because of uncertainty in several areas.
These include how many aliens could qualify for amnesty, how much the aliens
will need in social services or how many have already received some of these
services and thus would not create new costs.

Illegal aliens are not now eligible for a number of Federal social programs,
including Aid to Families with Dependent Children, food stamps, supplementary
assistance for the aged, blind and disabled, unemployment compensation and most
Medicaid benefits. Nor are they eligible for general welfare assistance
sponsored by the states.

Those granted amnesty under the new law would become eligible for some of these
programs immediately and for others over a period of five years. After five
years as permanent legal residents, they may apply for citizenship, and then
their rights become the same as those of other citizens.

Elibility for a number of programs is hanging in the balance with pending court
cases.

Major Sticking Point

Who would pay the social costs created by legalizing a major part of the
''underground'' alien population was a major issue in the five-year debate on
the immigration law. The state and local governments wanted assurance that the
Federal Government would pay all additional costs, but some of the sponsors did
not want such a commitment while most domestic programs were being cut.

The figure of $1 billion a year was calculated by the Congressional Budget
Office, based on an estimate of 1.4 million aliens gaining amnesty.

The basis of the anxiety in the debate, however, was that the Federal Government
might do what it has done in the past: enact a national program to achieve a
national purpose but then leave it to the states and localities to pay the costs
as best they could.

In New York City, officials have estimated that as much as $78 million a year
might be needed by 1989, based on estimates that 360,000 illegal aliens in the
city are eligible for amnesty. ''But we really don't know, nor do we know
whether any or all of that would be reimbursed,'' said an official who asked
that his name not be used.

Wider State Services Cited

Brian Bilbray, a San Diego County Supervisor, expressed the same uncertainty but
said he strongly believed the Federal money would fall well short of need. ''Our
states have guaranteed access to social services that go far beyond the Federal
programs'' that were the basis for the $1 billion Federal pledge, he said. But
he welcomed the law nevertheless, saying, ''For the first time in 35 years the
Federal Government has begun to recognize that they have an obligation in
this.''

A number of state, local and Federal officials said in interviews that they
viewed the guarantees in the law ''as just a beginning.'' Jess Noah, an
immigration specialist in New York State's office here, said the states and
localities would expect Federal adjustments as needs became clear.

The immigration law is particularly subject to controversy, officials say,
because its costs will not be uniformly distributed among the states.
California, New York and Texas have 70 percent of the nation's illegal aliens,
according to official estimates.

John Sweeten, director of intergovernmental relations for San Diego County,
noted that with the Indochina Assistance Program, which brought refugees to the
United States after the Vietnam War. Federal assistance petered out after most
of the refugees migrated to California and a few other states.

Some Revenue Will Rise

In addition, no one is sure what increases in revenues will flow from the law.
Federal officials said jurisdictions would collect more in taxes when aliens
became legalized because many more would begin paying taxes they evaded while
working ''off the books.''

The new law provides that illegal aliens who have been in the United States
continuously since before Jan. 1, 1982, are eligible for legal residence,
entitling them to most state social services and some Federal ones. Beginning in
the 1988 fiscal year, which starts Oct. 1, 1987, the Federal Government is
committed to an outlay of $1 billion a year for social services.

However, the Federal Government would retain part of the money to pay its share
of some services. What is left would go to states and localities: $930 million
in 1988, $695 million in 1989, $590 million in 1990 and $555 million in 1991,
which is when the legalized aliens would become eligible for food stamps and the
main Federal welfare program. The money is to be distributed under a complicated
formula.

'Problem Is Too Big'

New York City and state officials in the New York area said that although the
matter was under study, no conclusions had been reached as to the likely costs
in the region, which has large numbers of aliens.

Los Angeles County, however, has produced an analysis that shows why officials
are worried. If estimates are correct, the annual cost of providing health and
welfare services there would be $495 million a year, more than half what the
Federal Government would distribute to all the states in the first year.

Mr. Bilbray and Ms. Golding, the San Diego County Supervisors, said constant
monitoring would be needed, possibly by a permanent national body, to determine
the costs and assign them to the Federal Government. ''There is no other way,''
said Ms. Golding. ''The problem is too big.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 22, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PHOTO OF A LOST VAN GOGH SUNFLOWER

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS C. McGILL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 674 words


The assignment was sunflowers. And the photographer David Douglas Duncan
delivered not only pictures of sunflowers, but a photograph of a painting of a
sunflower that has surprised and delighted art historians.

By chance, while researching his newest book, Mr. Duncan stumbled onto a color
reproduction of a sunflower painting by Vincent van Gogh - a painting, believed
to have been destroyed in Japan during World War II, which had previously been
known to scholars only from a black-and-white photograph.

The color reproduction is of one of a dozen paintings of sunflowers that van
Gogh is known to have made in his lifetime. According to experts, it is
strikingly different from the other sunflower paintings in both composition and
color.

''It's a very exciting discovery,'' said John Rewald, an art historian and
leading authority on post-Impressionist painters. ''An important van Gogh
picture no longer exists, and a color plate pops up. It's a great addition to
our knowledge of his output. The sunflowers were absolutely central to his
work.''

Once a Combat Photographer

Best known as a combat photographer during World War II and the Korean and
Vietnam Wars, Mr. Duncan has for the last two decades also roamed the world
making photographic essays on subjects ranging from the Kremlin to the City of
Paris to the everyday life of Picasso.

He discovered the van Gogh print while doing research on his current book,
''Sunflowers for Van Gogh,'' which contains photographs of sunflower fields
throughout France. While he made the discovery too late to include the van Gogh
print in the book's American edition, a picture of it will be published in the
Japanese edition and in the December issue of Life magazine. The American
edition is being published this month by Rizzoli, to coincide with the opening
of the exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum on Tuesday, ''Van Gogh in St. Remy
and Auvers.''

For the book, Mr. Duncan crisscrossed the French countryside taking pictures of
sunflower fields at morning, noon and night, by cathedrals and castles and
rivers, in bloom and going to seed. He conceived the book as a homage to van
Gogh's sunflowers, and thus also gathered photographs of all the known sunflower
paintings from private collections and museums in America and Europe.

But one of the paintings, he discovered, had apparently been destroyed in a
bombing raid on Yokahama in 1945. All that remained was a black-and-white
photograph of the work taken in 1941, which was published in all the studies on
van Gogh.

'I Didn't Dare Believe It'

One night, while dining with the president of the firm that published the book's
Japanese edition, Mr. Duncan was asked by his guest why he had chosen to use a
black-and-white photograph of the lost painting. She then produced a dog-eared
volume, a limited-edition art book made in 1941 in Japan, that contained a
detailed, colored woodblock print of the painting.

''I didn't dare believe it,'' Mr. Duncan said. ''It was like finding a
photograph of Lincoln that's always been there, folded in an envelope at the
National Library, that nobody looked at.'' When he returned to New York, Mr.
Duncan discovered that a color print of the painting also existed, unknown to
scholars, at the New York Public Library.

Susan Stein, a research associate in the European painting department at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art and one of the organizers of the current van Gogh
show, says the work is ''definitely the most dramatic'' of the sunflower
paintings by van Gogh.

In the sunflower series, Ms. Stein said, van Gogh experimented with contrasting
complementary colors, putting the bright yellow of the sunflower against
backgrounds of turquoise, pale green and a brighter yellow.

The painting in the color print discovered by Mr. Duncan, she said, was the only
major sunflower picture in which van Gogh placed his sunflowers against a dark,
royal-blue background.

''We had the score, but we didn't know what the music sounded like,'' Mr. Duncan
said. ''Now we know.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the painting of a sunflower by Vincent Van Gogh

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 1986

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 840 words


THE WORLD

Washington apparently misled Iraq for years about Israel's arms shipments to
Iran, according to present and former American officials and Iraq's Ambassador
in Washington. Page 1 American credibility has suffered among centrist Arab
rulers, and United States policy has been damaged as a result of the secret arms
shipments to Iran, according to both Western and Arab sources. #18 A proposed
bill on arms sales has gained strength from the uproar over Iran, according to
supporters of the legislation. If enacted, it would put control over exports of
weapons back in the hands of Congress. #18 The C.I.A. knew little about Iran
when the United States began its covert arms shipments to the country,
Government officials said, because the agency had no well-placed agents after
the fall of the Shah. #20 Democrats can use the Iran issue to ''reassert''
themselves on foreign policy issues as they head toward the 1988 election, a
pollster, Harrison Hickman, told Democratic leaders in Washington. #30

U.S. shipped Saudi fuel to Iran 1
Iranians apparently got a deal 20 A coup plot in Manila was blocked, military
sources said. Dissident soldiers threatened to take over public buildings, but
called off their plan after a plea by the armed forces chief. #1 Pope John Paul
II rubbed noses with Maori tribesmen in New Zealand at a welcoming ceremony that
drew the Pope into a debate about the Maori revival, a drive for cultural
autonomy and political power. #5 Austrians will elect a Parliament on Sunday.
Because of a close race between major blocs, a grand coalition of the two
largest parties is likely for the first time since 1966. #3

High-profile U.S. envoy in Vienna 3

Rules for Swiss chemical companies are expected to be tightened in the aftermath
of the disaster Nov. 1 when tons of agricultural chemicals and dyes were
accidentally dumped into the Rhine in Basel. #6 Britain's Labor leader hopes to
persuade Americans, in a visit this week, that his party's promise to remove all
nuclear weapons from Britain could serve Western interests. #11

Pretoria again uproots blacks 1
Soviet finishing radar center 8
Rumania votes on military cuts 9
Search of moors stirs a specter 10
Two Nicaraguan court cases 12
Brazil election: Mixed signals 14
India seeks $3 billion for Bhopal 17
5 Soviet deserters rescued 22
Report Saudis abuse Americans 21
Angolan war takes civilian toll 23

THE NATION

Congress will seek to curb takeovers as a way to combat abuses highlighted by
Ivan F. Boesky's case. Two key Senate Democrats are working on legislation that
will make corporate takeovers more difficult. #1 The Citadel's cadets are
suffering in the aftermath of a Klan-like episode in Charleston, S.C. A young
black cadet resigned after five white cadets appeared at his bedside on Oct. 23
wearing sheets and hoods. #26 A sale of 57 works by Henry Moore was made to the
Hall Family Foundation of Kansas City, Mo. The Wichita, Kan., collector who sold
the sculptures reportedly received in the neighborhood of $20 million. #31
Attacks on homosexuals have risen dramatically in three years, according to
groups formed to document the problem, lobby for more protection and counsel the
victims. 36 F.A.A.'s chief medical officer is accused of approving scores of
pilots for service despite doubts about their fitness. Pilot groups and airlines
have called for the resignation of the officer, the Federal Air Surgeon. #28
Plans for the Constitution's 200th birthday party are being solidified, as the
bicentennial commission begins to commit funds to educational programs,
advertisements and pocket-sized copies of the document. #30 A grand complex in
Charleston, S.C., opened as part of a plan to revitalize one of America's oldest
cities. The $78 million hotel and retail complex is at the heart of a 10-year
struggle led by the city's mayor. #35

Dispute on aliens' job rights 1
Steelworkers are in a grim mood 26
Defense in film deaths sees gain 27
G.M. subsidiary approves pact 29
4 charged in sales of tainted feed 29
Busy Presidential hopefuls 30
Lake bed yields ancient canoes 33
Canadian refugee problem 34

WASHINGTON TALK 66
The Congress-judiciary gap

THE REGION

The police pursued scores of tips and other leads as they searched for Larry
Davis, the man suspected of killing seven people this year and shooting six
police officers in the Bronx last week. #40 A jury began deliberating in the
Federal case against Stanley M. Friedman, the Bronx Democratic leader, and three
co-defendants on charges stemming from the New York City corruption scandal. #42


A clash of tactics 42

Mario Biaggi's aide intervened on behalf of Wedtech, a Bronx military contractor
that had hired a law firm associated with the Congressman, according to a
Government memorandum. #40

Reunion for Vietnam reporters 37
Copter company loses license 39
Bones reburied in downtown rite 41
Donovan trial sideshow 46
Boy convicted in game slaying 47

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEFENSE SEES A GAIN IN TRIAL OVER FILM DEATHS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 638 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 22


The defense in the trial over three deaths in the filming of ''Twilight Zone:
The Movie'' says testimony by a special effects technician undercuts the
prosecution's contention that flying debris was the primary factor in a fatal
helicopter crash on the set.

Prosecutors have said the flooring of a bamboo hut on the set of a Vietnam War
scene blew apart when a special effects explosive went off, flew up and caused
the the helicopter's tail rotor to detach.

But Jerry Williams, the technician who arranged the blast, testified in Los
Angeles Superior Court this week that the hut's flooring, though burning, was
''substantially intact'' immediately after the July 23, 1982, crash in which the
actor Vic Morrow and two children were killed.

Unforseeaable, Defense Holds

Prosecutors say the flooring blew apart in the detonation of a special effects
blast that contributed to the crash when debris struck the helicopter's tail
rotor blade. The defense contends that the crash was unforeseeable.

Mr. Morrow, who was 53 years old, was killed along with Myca Dinh Le, 7, and
Renee Shinn Chen, 6, on the movie set at Indian Den's Motorcycle Park, about 40
miles north of Los Angeles.

On trial on charges of involuntary manslaughter are the movie's director, John
Landis; the associate producer, George Folsey Jr.; the unit production manager,
Dan Allingham; the special effects coordinator, Paul Stewart, and the
helicopter's pilot, Dorcey Wingo.

Mr. Williams told how he had placed an explosive device under the hut before the
scene at issue was filmed. After the helicopter hit the ground, setting off a
series of explosions underneath it, Mr. Williams said, he became ''curious'' and
inspected the hut. Asked by Deputy District Attorney Lea Purwin D'Agostino what
he had seen, Mr. Williams replied, ''The structure itself and the bamboo
flooring.''

The Debris Theory

Defense lawyers said Mr. Williams's testimony detracted from the prosecution's
theory that flying debris killed Mr. Morrow and the children. The defense says
the blast in the hut combined with one in midair, creating a fireball that
melted the tail rotor's aluminum skin and causing an aerodynamic imbalance that
sent the helicopter into an uncontrollable spin.

Mr. Williams, who conceded that he was a friend of Mr. Stewart, testified that
the device he put under the hut, a special effects ''mortar,'' was a square one
rather than a round one.

Square special effects mortars explode outward, he said, while round mortars
explode upward and with greater force.

Witness Reports Intimidation

He also said that investigators of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's office, who
interviewed him less than two months after the incident, tried to intimidate him
into saying he had put a round mortar under the hut.

He said they threatened to have his California pyrotechnics license revoked or
have him prosecuted as an accessory if he did not testify that he had put a
round mortar under the hut.

In interviews with reporters, Mrs. D'Agostino depicted Mr. Williams as a
''hostile'' witness because of his friendship with Mr. Stewart, who hired Mr.
Williams for the filming and worked with him several other times. But she also
said Mr. Williams had undermined the defense contention that the crash had been
unforeseeable.

'An Inherent Danger'

Mr. Williams testified ''there is an inherent danger'' in detonating special
effects explosives on movie sets and that ''misfires'' in which special effects
explosions go off in the air are uncommon but do occur ''on some occasions.''
The defense says such a ''misfire'' occurred in this case.

Mr. Williams also testified that he had heard Mr. Landis order the helicopter to
''get in tighter, lower'' seconds before the crash.

The trial goes into its 11th week when it resumes Monday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REFUGEE PROBLEM PERPLEXING CANADA

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 34, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, Nov. 19


Like the United States, which recently enacted landmark immigration legislation,
Canada finds itself wrestling with severe refugee and immigration problems.

At issue is a system often lauded as being more humanitarian than those of many
other nations but is criticized as ineffective.

More than 20,000 people, many of whom have waited for years, are now seeking
refugee status in Canada. About 50,000 foreigners are estimated to be here
illegally, and public opinion is turning against increased immigration.

Population experts say Canada, the most sparsely populated country in the world,
with 25.5 million people or about 1.5 to the square mile, needs to increase
immigration drastically if it hopes to maintain even a stable population in the
next century.

Legislation Introduced Oct. 30

The Canadian Government introduced legislation Oct. 30 to streamline its
immigration process, although not necessarily to toughen it. The number of
immigrants will increase to 125,000 next year, from 115,000, while the number of
refugees remains stable at 12,000.

Illustrating Canada's perceived humanitarianism, the country last month was
honored by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees for ''outstanding
achievement'' in aiding people fleeing oppression.

This generosity to refugees is one reason the problem of illegal immigration
appears less severe here than in the United States, experts say. But the problem
certainly exists, with estimates of the number of illegal aliens here generally
set at about 50,000.

Although penalties are on the books for hiring illegal aliens, employers say
they are seldom if ever checked. Usually a complaint, and often two or three,
must be filed before an investigation is undertaken, said Victor Malarek, who is
writing a book on Canadian immigration policy.

Partial Amnesty in 1970's

In the early 1970's Canada granted a partial amnesty to all illegal aliens who
could prove they had settled in Canada and lived productive, law-abiding lives.
Only about 5,000 came forward. A decade later, when the same thing was done
again, 3,250 appeared.

This year the authorities established a new program for what they term ''illegal
de facto residents.'' They estimate 10,000 of the 50,000 illegal immigrants
could meet the criteria, but they have deliberately not advertised it.

The situation differs from one of sharing a border with an economically troubled
country such as Mexico. Although thousands of Americans who came north to escape
the draft in the Vietnam War stayed on, most Americans come here legally for
relatively short periods, work for American companies and go home.

Rather, the problem is coping with the millions of people, primarily from third
world countries, who use modern means of transportation to escape to a safer,
better life. As the 155 Tamil refugees found in two small boats off the coast of
Newfoundland in August demonstrated, Canada is no longer able to select the
refugees it wants from camps around the world. Easier Than the U.S.  For such
people, Canada is considerably easier to enter than the United States.
Immigrants with forged or slolen documents are routinely turned back at the
American border. Canada, on the other hand, routinely admits them to begin
waiting for a final determination of refugee status, a process that often takes
five years or longer.

During this period, refugee claimants, of whom there are now more than 20,000,
are allowed to work and receive various Canadian medical and social benefits. By
the time their cases are reviewed, most have married Canadians, held long-term
jobs or otherwise demonstrated that they are so much a part of Canadian life
that they should be permanently admitted.

Still, as many as 65 percent go to the United States, according to estimates by
the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service.

The United States authorities say an undetermined number of illegal immigrants
use Canada as a back door to the United States. This, experts such as Mr.
Malarek suggest, may be the reason that higher estimates of the number of
illegal aliens in Canada, often exceeding 200,000, are probably not true,
because so many have gone south.

Canadian Jobs Not Threatened

Employment of illegal immigrants is generally not deemed to take many jobs away
from Canadians because most of them work for far less than the minimum wage,
with no benefits, experts say.

To be hired, workers must have the equivalent of a Social Security card. If the
person has not yet been granted status to live in the country, the card has the
number 9 in front of it. In these cases, the employer must receive written
permission from the Federal Government to hire the individual.

This creates the possibility of abuse on the part of aliens sharing or forging a
card, or by employers ignoring the process altogether. Since so few cases are
prosecuted, Government officials say it is impossible to know the extent of the
problem.

But polls indicate Canadians are tiring of this leniency. A September Gallup
poll of 1,020 people showed 72 percent thought the country was doing more than
enough to help refugees, and 58 percent wanted cuts in refugee levels.

Static Birth Rate

That flies in the face of mounting belief that Canada needs more people than are
expected to naturally reproduce. A 1984 study by Ottawa, for example, suggested
that this nation's static birth rate means 275,000 immigrants, three times the
current level, are needed annually.

But that means major changes in the complexion of Canada, a country that has
systematically excluded such groups as American blacks and Jews fleeing Nazi
Germany. The English and French communities that still reflect this country's
essential demographics - albeit with significant waves of European immigrants,
such as Italians, in the immediate postwar years - would be fundamentally
altered.

''Canadians will have to realize that the vast majority of these people are not
going to come from England,'' Mr. Malarek said. ''They're going to come from
third world countries.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM WAR REPORTERS REMINISCE AT REUNION

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 37, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 494 words


It was a reunion, so there were the usual embraces, jokes and snapshots. But
because it reunited the reporters and photographers who covered the Vietnam War,
the celebration was tempered by sobering thoughts of the war and commemorations
of those who died in the crossfire.

''I think it influenced everybody here tonight,'' said Eddie Adams, the former
Associated Press photographer who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1969 for his
photograph of a South Vietnamese police chief shooting a Vietcong soldier in the
head. ''It was the most photographed war ever.''

The reunion, held Friday by the Overseas Press Club at the 7th Regiment Armory
in Manhattan, attracted correspondents from television, newspapers and
magazines, as well as some military and Government officials. Some old
controversies flared, especially about the news media's role in shaping public
opinion about the war.

''The press didn't kill anybody,'' said Kevin Buckley, who was a correspondent
for Newsweek in Vietnam from 1968 to 1972.

Some Preferred Censorship

But retired Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr., former commander of the United States
naval forces in South Vietnam, said at dinner that he believed not controlling
the press was the downfall of the United States in Vietnam.

''You can keep them fully informed and lose it, or have censorship and win it,''
he said.

Tom Schuster, who was in the Navy and was stationed in Da Nang as an escort for
reporters from 1967 to 1968, said the war had one of two effects on most
correspondents.

''They either said, 'This is the worst thing I've ever seen' and they got on the
next plane out, or they became fascinated with it,'' he said. ''I think most of
the people here got pretty sincerely wrapped up in it.''

Played a Cruical Role

Barry Zorthian, a chief United States spokesman in Vietnam in the 1960's, wore
two lapel pins he called ''war medals'' awarded to him by reporters. One read
''Zorthian: Chief Leak'' and the other proclaimed, ''Ambushed at Credibility
Gap.''

''I think the press played a crucial role in informing the Congress and the
American public,'' he said, shortly before he was accosted by George McArthur,
who wrote about the war for the Associated Press.

''This man will tell you anything but the truth, the whole truth, so help him
God,'' Mr. McArthur interjected with a smile.

The only real consensus at the reunion was the sorrow. At dinner, all 250 people
stood for a moment of silence in memory of their colleagues who died covering
the war.

Keyes Beech, who wrote from Saigon for the Chicago Daily News and the Los
Angeles Times, delivered a toast to ''all the Asians who died in that war.''

He noted that some reporters wrote that the Vietnamese did not fight. Yet from
1960 to 1974, according to Defense Department records, more than 254,000
Vietnamese were killed. ''I don't think they were all shot in the back,'' he
said.

His colleagues rose, raised their glasses and, once again, were silent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JERRY COLONNA, 82, COMIC AND BOB HOPE'S FOIL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 44, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 402 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 22


Jerry Colonna, a comic actor whose trademarks were his wide, rolling eyes,
walrus mustache and bellowing, opera-lampooning voice, died of kidney failure
Friday at the Motion Picture and Television Country House and Hospital in
Woodland Hills. He was 82 years old.

Mr. Colonna appeared in films and in personal appearances on the road with Bob
Hope and made 12 overseas trips with Mr. Hope to entertain American troops in
three wars. He appeared as a sailor for Navy audiences, as a soldier for Army
audiences and as a flier for Air Force audiences.

On the 'Roads' to Fame

He appeared in filmed comedies with Mr. Hope, including ''Road to Singapore'' in
1940, ''Star-Spangled Rhythm'' in 1942, and ''Road to Rio'' in 1947.

''He was a dear friend, a great entertainer whom I traveled all over the world
with for 25 years,'' Mr. Hope said in a statement issued through his spokesman,
Ken Cantor. ''He provided millions of laughs for millions of people. He
delighted the entire world with his unique style of comedy - a great loss to the
entertainment industry. I'll miss him.''

Mr. Cantor said Mr. Hope, who is 83, would preside at Mr. Colonna's funeral, but
no date was immediately set for the services.

Drums, Trombone, Then Comedy

Gerardo Luigi Colonna was born in Boston and began his professional career in
1917 by organizing a jazz band in which he played the drums. Seven years later
he became a trombonist, and he was a staff trombonist for CBS on radio. He went
to Hollywood in 1937 and turned to comedy.

After appearing in nightclubs and musical revues, he signed a radio contract
with Mr. Hope in 1938 and remained with him for 25 years, until he became ill,
Mr. Cantor said.

Mr. Colonna's other movies included ''52d Street'' in 1937; ''College Swing''
and ''Little Miss Broadway,'' 1938; ''Naughty but Nice,'' 1939; ''Comin' Round
the Mountain,'' 1940; ''Sis Hopkins'' and ''Ice Capades,'' 1941; ''True to the
Army,'' ''Priorities on Parade'' in 1942; ''Atlantic City,'' 1944; ''It's in the
Bag,'' 1945; ''Kentucky Jubilee,'' 1951; ''Meet Me in Las Vegas,'' 1956; ''Andy
Hardy Comes Home,'' 1958, and ''Road to Hong Kong,'' 1961.

He also appeared in ''The Bob Hope Vietnam Christmas Show,'' which was
originally made for television but was released to theaters in 1966.

Mr. Colonna is survived by his wife, Florence, of Woodland Hills, and his son,
Robert, of Providence, R.I.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Robin Reeves to Wed Gregory

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 79, Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 183 words


Prof. and Mrs. Thomas C. Reeves of Glenside, Pa., have announced the engagement
of their daughter Robin Louise Reeves to Gregory Jannig Zorthian, a son of Mr.
and Mrs. Barry Zorthian of Washington and New York. A May wedding is planned.

Miss Reeves, who is studying for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University,
graduated from Yale College and received a master's degree in the classics from
Somerville College, Oxford University. She was, until recently, the sales
manager for Intercontinental Televideo Inc., a New York processing facility for
the videotape industry. Her father is associate professor of engineering
technology at Temple University in Philadelphia.

Mr. Zorthian, the business manager of Fortune magazine, a Time Inc. publication,
graduated from Phillips Academy and Yale and received an M.B.A. degree from
Harvard University. His father is a public-relations consultant in Washington
and a former vice president of Time Inc. He served with the Foreign Service from
1964 to 1968 as Minister-Counselor for Information at the United States Mission
in Saigon, South Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MAN OF THE HOUSE

BYLINE: BY JOHN M. BARRY; John M. Barry is the Washington editor of Dun's
Business Month

SECTION: Section 6; Page 52, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4150 words


EARLY LAST MONTH, Speaker of the House Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr. banged his
gavel for the last time to recess the House of Representatives and retire from
the most powerful job in Congress. His successor, to be chosen on Dec. 8, will
almost certainly be Representative James Claude Wright Jr., a 63-year-old Texan
who has sought power ever since com-ing to Congress 31 years ago.

Wright, the House majority leader, is unopposed, with commitments from 80
percent of the House Democrats, who will choose the next Speaker - and he is
eager to assume the post. He intends nothing less than to change the
institutional balance between the White House and Congress. ''Even here on the
Hill there are those who believe in the saying that the President proposes and
the Congress disposes,'' says Wright. ''I don't believe that's true.''

His intentions have been reinforced by the Democrats' success in the recent
elections. The party now has a 55-to-45-seat advantage in the Senate and a
258-177 advantage in the House. Wright gets along well with Senate Democrats,
especially Robert C. Byrd, who will be majority leader, and fellow Texan Lloyd
Bentsen, who will head the Senate Finance Committee, and expects the House and
Senate to work well together. The Democrats' gains, he says, will ''make it
possible for Congress to put some initiatives on the President's desk.''

Despite the importance of the job he is about to step into and all his years in
public office, Jim Wright remains an enigmatic, unknown figure, even to
colleagues. His selection as Speaker will have nothing to do with his beliefs or
political principles. Instead, it will be a triumph of the minutiae of politics,
of things as basic as fund raising and memorizing a freshman Congressman's name.

Wright's critics worry that he will be unable to rise above this minutiae, that
his age and personal style will mark him as too reminiscent of the past to
attract an electorate concerned with the future. What is more, some of his
colleagues have a personal uneasiness about him. Though Wright was chosen as the
most respected member in a 1980 poll of the House, Robert C. Eckhardt, a former
Texas Representative - who says he thinks ''very highly'' of him overall -
concedes, ''He can be a chameleon, brown on the bark and green on the leaf.''

An eloquent speaker, generally considered the most persuasive debater in the
House, Wright is a courteous man, and invariably cordial. But he is also a loner
who reveals little of himself. Eckhardt, for instance, has known him since 1947
but didn't know if he had children (he has four). And no one has pithy anecdotes
to explain him. Even a master storyteller such as O'Neill, who strongly supports
Wright's succession, says: ''You don't have anecdotes about Jim. Maybe that's an
anecdote.''

A T A CLEVELAND meeting with a group of business executives before the recent
elections, a dark-suited Wright was reserved, urbane, incisive, very much the
powerful next Speaker, intimating that the executives' support of Edward F.
Feighan, their beleaguered Representative -who subsequently won re-election -
could prove useful. Not long afterward, at a barbecue in Washington for a group
of Fort Worth constituents, Wright, wearing a flannel shirt, was a good ol' boy,
singing and playing tunes on his harmonica.

Now in his Capitol office, Wright is in between, wearing a blue sports jacket
whose slightly padded shoulders give him an unstylish, country look. His heavy
trademark eyebrows seem less prominent since his red hair has turned silver. He
appears, in fact, quite unremarkable - until he speaks. His voice can catch one
up in its rhythm, and when he talks he gauges his listener's reaction with an
almost tactile sensitivity. Everything about him is directed. He already knows
precisely what he plans to do.

Historically, it is the President who sets a legislative agenda before Congress
and the Speaker of the House who reacts to it. But Wright intends to develop his
own agenda. ''Those who wrote the Constitution intended the legislative branch
not simply to react passively to recommendations from the President, but to take
initiatives of their own,'' he says.

Isolated Congressional attempts to formulate policy are nothing new, but Wright
will take a systematic and comprehensive approach. This approach has already had
a trial run, he notes, with passage earlier this year of omnibus House trade and
drug bills. Both were Wright's initiatives, and both dominated the agenda.

Wright's plans, which he formulated almost a year ago, are similar to the agenda
recently put forward by Byrd and other Senate leaders. The budget deficit is his
first concern. One way to tackle it, the pro-defense Democrat says, is by
slowing defense spending - ''achieving the same goals as Reagan's program, but
taking longer to get there.'' He will, however, resist budget cuts in domestic
programs such as food stamps, education and Social Security.

Several Democrats say that, had Wright been Speaker, the House would have pushed
for a tax increase earlier this year. Wright opposed tax reform because it was
revenue-neutral, though loyalty to O'Neill prevented his working to kill it.

For now, Wright will only say that taxes ''are a likelihood down the road -
there are no specifics I care to talk about.''

He also plans to reintroduce last year's trade bill, which passed the House but
stalled in the Senate after the Administration pressed the Republican leadership
to sit on it. Now, however, trade legislation has strong bipartisan support in
Congress and is almost certain to pass. The House bill, which was aimed at
cutting the trade deficit and improving this country's competitiveness, included
provisions for import quotas. This led to Wright's being termed a
''protectionist'' by some free-trade advocates, but Wright denies the label.

Welfare reform is another item on Wright's agenda. He is impressed with the
Massachusetts program, which offers education or job training to those receiving
aid. He would explore emulating it on a national scale. Other priorities are the
farm crisis -Wright favors help for family rather than corporate farms, and
lastly, a program to rebuild highways and bridges, to be financed by a dedicated
''pay as you go'' tax.

Even before the Democrats' recent electoral successes, Wright was ready to take
on the Reagan Administration, with which he has both personal and ideological
differences. Though an advocate of a tough foreign policy (he was a hawk on
Vietnam), Wright is a liberal on domestic issues. As a freshman Congressman, he
was one of a very few southerners supporting the 1954 Supreme Court integration
decision -although he opposed the 1964 Civil Rights Act - and he has been
committed to such programs as income-support and Social Security. Thomas Foley
of Washington, the likely new House majority leader, says: ''He'll protect
Democratic constituencies. There's a populist streak in Jim that's very real.''

Wright's differences with Ronald Reagan could hardly be more fundamental. In his
1981 inaugural address, the President said, ''Government is the problem.''
Wright believes in an activist Government that invests in and protects its
citizens, and attacks problems. ''The Government isn't the enemy,'' he says.
''We own it. It's an instrument of the public will.''

Scorning the Administration's reliance on market forces, Wright says, with some
heat: ''In 1985 the percentage of the gross national product going to the bottom
60 percent of the population was the lowest ever recorded. I'm not talking now
just about the misfortunate people at the very bottom of the economic ladder,
I'm talking about a majority of the people. Today, the average 30-year-old man
earns 10 percent less than his father at the same age.''

This, he says, ''is antithetical to everything we stand for as a political
party, and all that we've stood for as a nation.''

Wright's personal relations with the President are not good, either. Mr. Reagan,
for instance, occasionally aimed jokes at O'Neill. The former Speaker let them
pass, but they affronted Wright, who takes courtesy seriously.

And he stops just short of publicly calling Mr. Reagan a liar - accusing him of
speaking ''falsehoods.'' ''When the President found his Lebanon policy a failure
and withdrew the troops, several hundred of our people having been killed, he
publicly blamed the Democrats in Congress,'' Wright says. ''This was a just
almost unforgivable placing of blame on others,'' Wright contends. ''Mr. Reagan
just somehow doesn't seem to have the grace ever to accept any blame upon
himself.''

Wright also complains that, even when invited by the White House to ''seek a
bipartisan solution, I've never yet had the pleasure of any of my
recommendations of any sort being accepted.''

''These things rancor,'' he adds. ''They build up.''

Still, some cooperation with the Administration is possible because Wright looks
at issues eclectically, in isolation, and because he starts out much closer than
O'Neill was to the Administration's foreign policy. Though agreeing with
liberals in opposing aid to the contras in Nicaragua and the Administration's
overall arms-control policy, Wright supported the President on El Salvador.
''Without him we wouldn't have had aid to El Salvador, period,'' says W. Dennis
Thomas, a White House aide. Wright also initially supported - but later opposed
- the MX missile, and says he is ''attracted'' to the idea of the Strategic
Defense Initiative, though he favors neither deployment nor the requested level
of financing for the so-called Star Wars plan.

Representative Richard Cheney of Wyoming, a member of the House Republican
leadership, says: ''He has a more open mind than Tip. If I had to choose one to
talk to about substance, I'd take Wright.''

W RIGHT WANTS to continue a move in the House of Representatives toward a
stronger speakership, a move that began in 1974, when the Democratic Caucus -
which comprises all Democrats in the House who, if in the majority, have the
power to rewrite House rules - attacked the seniority system. The caucus gave
the Speaker absolute control over the Rules Committee, which dictates what
legislation can be brought to the floor, and dominance over the Democratic
Steering and Policy Committee, which now names all committee chairmen and
Democratic members, subject to caucus confirmation.

But the caucus also undercut leadership by giving junior members more power and
more subcommittees -enough subcommittees that more than a third of House
Democrats now head one. These new chairmanships have created a host of separate
fiefdoms. Coupled with easy access to television -which can make an individual
member a national figure even if he does nothing inside Congress - they add up
to more independence from the House leadership and a diffusion of power. The
result: much motion, little action.

Wright hopes to unite Democrats with the promise of action. After developing
legislative initiatives - for instance, a bill for combating the farm crisis -
Wright explains, he intends to ''bring in the Steering and Policy Committee, get
the initiatives declared the goals of the caucus, rally people around and say
these are the things we're going to do this year.'' He adds: ''Having done that,
with the force of the total leadership behind you, you call in the committee
chairmen and say, 'Look, we need this the third week in April.' That's my idea
of a leadership role.''

For the record, at least, House Democrats say they favor firmer leadership.
Representative Robert G. Torricelli, a young liberal Democrat from New Jersey,
recalls that when first elected in 1982 he thought: ''Wright represented
everything I was against in the Democratic Party. Later, I found myself one of
the first to support him, not so much for philosophy, but because I think he can
make the institution work.''

Norman Y. Mineta, a California Democrat, an aggressive subcommittee chairman who
oversees aviation, believes, ''It's a question of everyone giving up a little to
gain a lot.''

''He'll discipline us,'' Representative Mary Rose Oakar of Ohio says. ''We need
it.''

And even two of the most powerful Democrats in the House - John D. Dingell of
Michigan, chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, and Jack Brooks of
Texas, chairman of Government Operations, who often pursue their own agendas
-sound receptive. ''I don't see any conflict,'' Brooks says. ''Committees will
still write the legislation. It will be good to have more support from the
leadership.''

Dingell adds: ''Over the years, we've had this enor-mous proliferation of power
centers. I think Jim recognizes something must be done in this direction.
Certainly I do.''

To accomplish his aims, Wright will have to rely on his persuasive abilities. On
the one hand, he can be a natural bridge-builder who likes to repeat Abraham
Lincoln's remark that the best way to destroy an enemy is to make him a friend.

On the other hand, he can be intimidating. ''You get the sense you wouldn't want
to cross him,'' says Richard Cheney.

Craig Raupe, a former aide, now a lobbyist, who is one of Wright's closest
friends, sums him up as a man who understands human weakness and ''is as
complicated as Lyndon Johnson, just not as mean.''

Wright wants to foster a sense of camaraderie among members of the House; he
talks fondly of the ''mutual respect'' under the legendary Speaker Sam Rayburn -
who ruled the House with an iron hand. Wright is much more accessible than
either Rayburn or O'Neill were, welcoming fresh thoughts from younger members.
And, unlike many senior colleagues, he pointedly treats younger members with
dignity.

Collegiality could extend to Republicans too, despite Wright's reputation for
partisanship. Robert H. Michel of Illinois, House G.O.P. leader, who feels
O'Neill abused the rules, says, ''I think the House will be a fairer place under
Wright.''

Even Newt Gingrich, a Georgia Republican whose confrontational style makes him
perhaps the single most annoying member to the Democratic leadership, says: ''He
makes everyone feel part of the institution. I remember asking him once for
floor time. He could have finessed me, kept me from speaking at all. That
clearly was in the best interests of the Democrats. Instead, he took 30 minutes
and gave me 30 minutes. Things like that - if he does it - draw 90 percent of
the poison out of this place.''

Wright dispenses favors where he can - organizing Texas Democrats to raise money
for California Democrats to fight a redistricting referendum; handing out an
estimated $500,000 from his own political action committee, the Majority
Congress Committee, to House Democratic candidates this year.

He once invited Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts, then a freshman
and one of the most liberal members of the House, to serve as master of
ceremonies for a Wright roast. ''I was touched by that,'' says Frank.

Then there is the minutiae. Kirk O'Donnell, head of the Center for National
Policy and a former O'Neill counsel, says: ''So much of leadership's time goes
to meetings to overcome an individual member's problem - in the district, or a
committee chairman who won't let them ask a question so they can get on TV.
Wright helps.'' But Wright can also push, and there's a hardness underneath the
cordiality. Recently, he went to Les Aspin, the Armed Services chairman, and
asked for 30 more F-16's, which are built in Wright's district. Aspin, who is
from Wisconsin, is likely to face a challenge to his chairmanship next year.
With Wright's support, Aspin should win; without it, probably not. Aspin agreed
to the F-16's.

There is another side to Wright, too, which shows itself when his self-control
cracks. His voice rumbles, a shoulder drops, the eyebrows cock. ''He looks like
he could choke you,'' says Labor Secretary William E. Brock 3d.

Wright has, in fact, twice come close to blows on the floor of the House in
recent years, once with a Democrat, Fortney H. (Pete) Stark, and on another
occasion with a Republican, Dan Lungren. In the case of Stark, Wright later
demanded, and received, an apology. In Lungren's case, Wright sought him out and
apologized for the incident himself.

W RIGHT WANTS TO matter and be respected, but this ambitiousness is complicated
by equally strong - and somewhat innocent - desires to improve the world and be
liked. Larry L. King, a former aide and author of ''The Best Little Whorehouse
in Texas,'' says, ''I'm cynical about politicians, but I really think Jim wants
to do good.'' The desire to be liked has led Wright over the years to build not
a wall but a see-through mirror between himself and others - he sees out and
others see their own reflection. His first wife, Mary Ethelyn, who died of a
heart attack in September, once said of Wright: ''I think he wants to become
what the person he's with thinks he is. He's a very kind man. He'll go to great
extremes to avoid hurting someone. But I never knew if something upset him,
because his reaction was always to laugh.''

Wright was born on Dec. 22, 1922, in Weatherford, Tex., about 20 miles west of
Fort Worth. His family - in addition to Jim there are two sisters - moved around
a lot because Wright's father, who did promotion work for small-town merchants,
frequently changed jobs. By the time young Jim started high school, he had lived
in 10 different towns.

His first ambition was to coach football, because, he says, his coach was ''the
most admired man in the community.'' And he conformed: ''I did whatever Dad
wanted me to do, whatever Coach wanted me to do. I wasn't a rebellious person. I
wanted to be part of the team.''

Wright and his sisters were under pressure to perform. One sister, Mary Connell,
a writer, until recently believed she would be a failure unless she won the
Nobel Prize. She says her brother's goal was the Presidency, and at 15 he was
speaking at political rallies for a gubernatorial candidate.

Wright says of his parents: ''My father had a wonderful flair - I'll never match
it. Mother was a patrician and Dad was an egalitarian. I suppose I inclined
toward Dad's view, though I always cherished mother's belief in us and her
insistence that we were something special.''

His father once placed an ad in a newspaper attacking the Ku Klux Klan and,
according to Ms. Connell, ''The only prejudice we had was against Baptists who
didn't drink, dance, smoke, or play cards.''

At age 19, with World War II on, Wright dropped out of the University of Texas
to become a B-24 bomber pilot in the Pacific, where he won a Distinguished
Flying Cross and the Legion of Merit. At 23, he ran unopposed for the State
Legislature, and by 32 was a member of Congress.

Wright is reluctant to discuss his private life. He has (Continued on Page 108)
been married twice, having divorced Mary Ethelyn in 1972 after a two-year
separation. His current wife, Betty, is a former aide to the House Public Works
Committee. (In October, one of his four children, 27-year-old Alicia Carnes, and
her husband, John, were arrested near Fort Worth and charged with possession of
a controlled substance and illegally carrying a weapon. Wright refuses to
comment on the matter.) His hobbies reflect Wright's intensity. He enjoys boxing
(he trained into his 50's and once tried to arrange a sparring match with
then-champion Joe Frazier); writing (four books on political issues); painting,
gardening. ''I am alert to the inexorable movement of the hand on the clock, the
pages on the calendar,'' he says. ''What do you have after two hours of golf? If
I spend two hours in the garden, I have something to show for it.''

F OR WRIGHT, everything has gone like clockwork this year. He engineered the
comprehensive trade bill, designed to combat the $170 billion trade deficit, for
example. It provided him with an opportunity to test the procedure he plans to
adopt as Speaker. A Democratic Caucus task force studied the issue, then
virtually every major committee passed relevant legislation within their
jurisdictions. Wright kept it on schedule and oversaw the melding of popular
provisions and the abandoning of divisive ones to come up with an omnibus
measure that collected 295 votes, including 59 from Republicans.

Though O'Neill says, ''The caucus has moved in Jim's direction - he's in great
position to lead the House,'' there are still mine fields. Most dangerous is his
own determination to lead. A senior Democrat observes: ''Wright's impatient to
act. He doesn't like to wait and count votes before he moves. He believes you
move forward, then go out and get the votes.''

This could create major problems if he tries to push programs past lukewarm
members. Wright recognizes the danger, and admits that he can sometimes be
pigheaded. He tells a story about a man who insisted he was going to dig a hole
despite a rainstorm, and drowned. Possible areas of conflict with his fellow
Democrats are defense and foreign policy. Wright split with the Democratic
Caucus on El Salvador. He also switched from support of the MX missile to
opposing it after being attacked in the caucus. This prompted one fellow
Democrat to declare that Wright ''gave two of the best speeches on the MX I ever
heard, one for and one against, separated by a matter of weeks.''

There are two views about Wright's switch. One colleague says, ''I think he saw
an issue around which opposition to his speakership could coalesce.''

Barney Frank, however, says he believes ''It wasn't just politics. You could see
the guy rethink it in the caucus. He was losing an argument. You don't see him
losing many arguments.''

Another problem Wright will have to overcome is his relationship with the press,
which has not been good. His troubles with reporters go back to two incidents.
The first was in 1976, when he used money from a fund-raising event to pay off
personal debts. He says now that, ''The debts I owed were the direct result of
my having assumed personally the campaign debt'' from his 1961 Senate race, when
he sold his ranch and borrowed to pay creditors. But the 15-year lapse troubled
critics.

The second incident was when he lobbied the Egyptian President Anwar el-Sadat in
1979 on behalf of a man with whom Wright had invested on another matter, and the
press implied a conflict of interest. Wright insists, ''I don't believe I'd be
justified in refusing to assist any constituent in a matter in which I thought
he was being wronged solely because I had made another investment with him.''

Wright's performance on television will be important to his success. Critics
contend that his rococo oratory - even in casual conversation he will say things
like ''Impatience with soluble evils has always been the spark that fires the
engine of success and solutions'' -won't play well on television.

But Wright, who says he is ''nauseated by the emphasis on image in politics
instead of substance,'' disputes this, noting that he has used television since
his first campaign in 1954, and that it has served him well. Unlike O'Neill, he
intends to seek out opportunities to appear on television. ''I think I, too, am
a good communicator,'' he says.

W RIGHT IS DRIV-ing on the highway, heading for Weatherford. The land is dry,
hard, part of the prairie that begins here and runs north and west for hundreds
of miles. Looking out at it, he says with a sigh, ''It takes a lot of acres out
here to make a living.''

One real regret in his life was having to sell his ranch near here. ''Everybody
tells me I won't come back here to live,'' he says. ''I imagine they are
right.''

A few years ago, Wright wrote an ''affirmation'' on three pieces of lined
notepaper that he carries with him still. In it, his self-control, his ambition
and his style are reflected: ''No person can take from me my inner peace, for I
shall quietly, calmly, gently, pleasantly hold onto it - for it is mine, a gift
of God. I shall be open to new things, new thoughts, new truths that I can learn
from other people. I have performed well in the past, and I fully expect success
in the future. I deserve to have happiness, career success, and economic
security. The Lord wants me to have them. Because I like and respect myself, I
am not adversely affected by the attitudes of others. If they think they do not
like me, it is because they do not know me.''

Now Wright sees the House speakership as a flowering, a fulfillment. A colleague
says, ''Being in charge will be a weight lifted off him.''

He will, of course, be very different from Tip O'Neill. O'Neill succeeded as a
symbolic rallying point; Wright is too complex to be a symbol. Just how
successful he will be is impossible to predict. But Newt Gingrich observes:
''The rules of the House are designed for a speaker with a strong personality
and an agenda.'' Wright fits the description.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of James Claude Wright Jr. in his Washington office (Michael
Evans); Photo of Speaker Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr. autographing photos of
himself (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AWAKE IN A NIGHTMARE

BYLINE: BY ROBERT COX; Robert Cox, who lived in Argentina for 20 years, where he
was editor of The Buenos Aires Herald, is the author of ''The Sound of One Hand
Clapping''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 588 words


EL YAQUI By Douglas Unger 300 pp. New York: Harper & Row. $16.95.

DOUGLAS UNGER'S highly praised first novel, ''Leaving the Land,'' was set in an
18-mile stretch of the western Dakotas. He wrote of a small world, believable
and recognizable even to a reader who has never set foot in the Middle West. His
second book is a terrifying leap into a nightmare, with a story set largely in
Argentina and briefly in New York City and on Long Island. ''El Yanqui'' reeks
of desperation, and the reader, finding the work an ordeal to read, sympathizes
with the author. It must have been that much more of an ordeal to write.

In moving from a familiar landscape and people to a lurid land that I believe
will be unrecognizable to anyone who knows Argentina well and will be
unbelievable to someone who has never lived there, Mr. Unger has waded out of
his depth.

The year is 1969 and a young American, James, is in Argentina on an exchange
scholarship. The overture to Argentina's tragic 1970's is about to begin as the
curtain goes down on the North American 60's. The young man, renamed Diego and
nicknamed El Yanqui, receives letters from his elder brother in Vietnam, who is
going out of his mind because of drugs and the war. There is a flashback to New
York, where the protagonist has been raped by two men after taking a few puffs
of opiated hashish. His escape from the New York drug scene is engineered by the
award of a scholarship to live for a year with an Argentine family in Buenos
Aires.

In Argentina, El Yanqui moves in upper-middle-class porteno society and loves
the pampered life he leads. But things begin to go wrong. He goes on a wild
drive after drinking heavily and precipitating a personal disaster by making a
lunge at a young maidservant following dinner with a monsignor (the rector of
the school he attends in Buenos Aires). Sent to the campo (the book is spattered
with Spanish words), El Yanqui is initiated into manhood by gauchos. He learns
how to ride and round up cattle and is first in line to have sex with a
legendary prostitute. He also has a marginal involvement with a group of young
Peronist guerrillas.

Finally, when the author has run out of cliched encounters, narrated in an
irritating melange of Spanish and Spanglish (literal translations of Spanish
into English), he sends his central character back to Long Island to rescue his
brother from the psychiatric ward in a veterans' hospital. A decade passes and
the book ends with a letter from Buenos Aires in which El Yanqui learns of the
even greater tragedy that overtook his elegant adoptive family in Argentina.
DESPITE a foreword excusing the jumbling of actual events in the name of
''narrative license,'' there is no apparent reason for rearranging recent
Argentine history. The effect the author achieves is that of a distorting
mirror. Mr. Unger, whose acquaintance with Argentina seems to have been
fleeting, does not have the knowledge to record its realities and lacks the
imagination to reinvent its myths.

As the overuse of folkloric embroidery indicates, Mr. Unger has failed to master
his material. The result is unintentional parody and unwitting caricature. There
are flashes of talent amid turgid passages of desperate writing. There were
enough of them to send this reviewer in search of the author's first novel,
which has the quietude, observation and fidelity of detail that are lacking in
''El Yanqui'' but that, one hopes, will characterize his next book and redeem
the promise of ''Leaving the Land.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 23, 1986

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1149 words


Fiction
            Weeks
This   Last    On
Week   Week  List
1         2     3 WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.) Iran
                  during the month following the Shah's departure.
2         1    11 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                  horrors haunt six men and a woman who grew up in a
                  small Maine town.
3         3    17 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.)
                  Without using nuclear weapons, the West staves off the
                  Russians in World War III.
4         4     6 HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &
                  Schuster, $18.95.) A top New York model encounters
                  three of Los Angeles's most dynamic men.
5         5     4 A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $18.95.)
                  Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a brutal double
                  murder.
6         6     8 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton Mifflin,
                  $19.95.) Complex family relationships in South
                  Carolina's low country and New York City.
7         7     6 FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,
                  $16.95.) The hero of the ''Foundation'' series
                  searches for the lost planet Earth.
8        14     4 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                  Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over Vietnam.
9        11     7 THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $17.95.)
                  Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New York
                  family begun in ''Evergreen.''
10       12     4 PERFUME, by Patrick Suskind. (Knopf, $16.95.)
                  An olfactory vampire kills people to steal their
                  scents.
11       13     9 THE BEET QUEEN, by Louise Erdrich. (Holt, $16.95.)
                  Forty years in a small North Dakota town near an
                  Indian reservation.
12 *     10    19 WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $17.95.) A
                  rich orphan comes of age while she travels the world.
13        8    10 ROGER'S VERSION, by John Updike. (Knopf, $17.95.) A
                  fiftyish professor wrestles with God, sex, science,
                  technology, mathematics and computers.
14        9    12 THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random
                  House, $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and
                  greed mark a young woman's life in 18th-century
                  England and France.
15              1 THE MIRROR OF HER DREAMS, by Stephen R. Donaldson.
                  (Del Rey/Ballantine, $19.95.) First of two novels
                  about Mordant, a strange land where reality is
                  intertwined with illusion.
                  Nonfiction
1         1     7 HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.) From
                  Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized biography of
                  Frank Sinatra.
2         3     3 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins Publishers,
                  $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as recorded in
                  pictures by 200 photojournalists.
3         2    29 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday,
                  $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from the television
                  star and father of five.
4         5     7 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $19.95.)
                  The crisis in the American automobile industry and
                  Japan's role in it.
5        10     9 MCMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi. (Warner,
                  $16.95.) The autobiography of the quarterback for the
                  Chicago Bears.
6         7     4 DREAMGIRL, by Mary Wilson with Patricia Romanowski and
                  Ahrgus Juilliard. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A former
                  member of the Supremes describes her time with the
                  group.
7         4     7 THE STORY OF ENGLISH, by Robert McCrum, William Cran
                  and Robert MacNeil. (Sifton/Viking, $24.95.) Companion
                  volume to the PBS series about the world's most widely
                  used language.
8         9    37 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House,
                  $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in
                  pictures and rhyme.
9         6     4 ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Random House,
                  $18.95.) The comedian's autobiography, beginning with
                  her impoverished childhood in Hollywood.
10       11    27 JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot. (St.
                  Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire
                  veterinarian about his favorite animal.
11       12    30 NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst. (Simon & Schuster,
                  $17.95.) Life is a series of losses, the author
                  argues, and we must confront them in order to grow.
12        8     4 DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland with
                  Greg Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The ballerina
                  cacas s her heheckered career.
13       15     9 ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden with Dave
                  Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations on football
                  by the television commentator and former Oakland
                  Raiders coach.
14            176 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper &
                  Row, $13.50.) Light verse, with drawings by the
                  author.
15              1 WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Putnam, $14.95;
                  $16.95 after Dec. 25.) A new collection of columns by
                  the journalist and television personality.
                  Advice, How-to and
                  Miscellaneous
1         1    10 MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM, by Susan
                  Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope
                  with overbearing men.
2         2    27 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton, $15.95.)
                  A regimen based on the Vanderbilt University Weight
                  Management Program.
3         3     4 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff Smith.
                  (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at moderate
                  cost.
4              44 CALLANETICS, by Callan Pinckney with Sallie Batson.
                  (Morrow, $17.95.) Exercises to enable women to look
                  ''10 years younger in 10 hours.''
5         4    66 FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn Diamond.
                  (Warner, $17.50.) A diet for weight loss and physical
                  fitness.


AND BEAR IN MIND

MY MOTHER'S SABBATH DAYS: A Memoir, by Chaim Grade. (Knopf, $19.95.) A
survivor's chronicle, long but dense with muscular memory, of life and survival
in Vilnius, Lithuania, before World War II and under Soviet and Nazi occupation.
THE CYCLES OF AMERICAN HISTORY, by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Houghton Mifflin,
$22.95.) A distinguished liberal's portrait of American history as a dialectic
of two self-interpretations, the pragmatic and the messianic. ON ACTING, by
Laurence Olivier. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) Lord Olivier's own account of how,
with nerve and impetuosity, he seized, holds and means to keep the crown of the
English theater. RECKLESS DISREGARD: Westmoreland v. CBS et al.; Sharon v. Time,
by Renata Adler. (Knopf, $16.95.) Ms. Adler tries and convicts both journalism
and the law in her account of two remarkable libel suits brought by former
military leaders.

THEODORE DREISER: At the Gates of the City 1871-1907, by

Richard Lingeman. (Putnam, $22.95.) This first volume of a two-part biography
meticulously chronicles the emergence from an American backwater of a writer
determined to rise. TO THE LAND OF THE CATTAILS, by Aharon Appelfeld.
(Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $14.95.) In 1938 a Jewish mother and son leave Vienna
and travel east to her rural homeland. The reader gets an almost hallucinatory
sense of the Holocaust from this novel, in which the word ''Nazi'' never
appears.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW & NOTEWORTHY

BYLINE: By Patricia T. O'Conner

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words


WORLD'S FAIR, by E. L. Doctorow. (Fawcett Crest, $4.95.) E. L. Doctorow's hybrid
of novel and memoir is told from the point of view of Edgar Altschuler, a boy
growing up in the Bronx in the 1930's, and follows him from babyhood through age
9, when he visits the World's Fair of 1939. As an amalgam of fiction, biography
and oral history, the novel ''has a fractured and inconsistent feel to it,''
David Leavitt wrote here last year. But in the ''breathtaking final 100 pages,''
he said, Edgar's meticulous account of the fair is ''dizzying in its
specificity,'' and Mr. Doctorow ''conveys perfectly the extent to which a fair
becomes a world unto itself.'' THE SOCIAL HISTORY OF THE MACHINE GUN, by John
Ellis. (Johns Hopkins University, $8.95.) John Ellis traces the development of
the machine gun from its beginnings in the 1860's to the trenches of World War I
and into the gangster haunts of Al Capone, Baby Face Nelson and the Barker gang
- who, we are told, really did carry theirs in violin cases. Arguing that the
history of technology is inseparable from social history in general, Mr. Ellis
weighs the machine gun's impact on weaponry, warfare and society in 19th- and
20th-century Europe and America, and suggests that it precipitated the modern
arms race. In 1976 our reviewer, Trumbull Higgins, called the book ''a brief but
brutal tract for our times.'' FROM THE FIFTEENTH DISTRICT, by Mavis Gallant. (G.
K. Hall, $5.95.) Nearly all the characters are expatriates of one sort or
another in these nine stories, which are set in a variety of European countries.
Mavis Gallant's writing, Anne Tyler said here in 1979, is ''coolly, dead-center
accurate,'' each story ''densely woven, wide-ranging, rich in people and plots -
a miniature world, more satisfying than many full-scale novels.'' VIRGINIA
WOOLF: A Writer's Life, by Lyndall Gordon. (Norton, $8.95.) Lyndall Gordon's
study of Virginia Woolf is both ''highly original'' and ''mildly idiosyncratic''
in its conservative emphasis on Woolf's marriage and its underestimation of her
love of women, Carolyn Heilbrun said in these pages last year. But the work
''will help to direct future Woolf criticism away from both the derision common
among British critics and the ponderous oversights so frequently produced by
American male historians of modern literature.'' Harvest/ Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich has reissued THE SECOND COMMON READER ($7.95), a collection of
Woolf's essays in literary criticism. In the pieces, our reviewer wrote in 1932,
Woolf becomes ''as nearly perfect as Heaven grants it to the critic to be.''
SERMONS AND SODA-WATER, by John O'Hara. (Carroll & Graf, $4.95.) These three
novellas set in the 1920's, 30's and 40's have a common narrator - James Malloy,
a young writer. In all three, Harry T. Moore wrote in The Book Review in 1960,
John O'Hara ''projects with skill the behavior and idiom of his characters,
which range from Boston clubmen to Pennsylvania Dutch bartenders, all of whom
capture the accent and excitement of the America he knows so expertly.'' I
WONDER AS I WANDER: An Autobiographical Journey, by Langston Hughes. (Thunder's
Mouth, $9.95.) ''I Wonder as I Wander,'' the second installment of Langston
Hughes's autobiography and a companion volume to ''The Big Sea,'' includes
accounts of the black poet and author's travels to Russia, China, Spain and
Japan in the 1930's. In 1957 one reviewer called it ''an immensely interesting
book, written with bounce and zest, about a time that now seems very long ago.''
IN COUNTRY, by Bobbie Ann Mason. (Perennial/ Harper & Row, $6.95.) Set in
western Kentucky in 1984, ''In Country'' is built around the thoughts, actions
and conversations of a teen-age girl, Sam Hughes, whose father was killed and
uncle damaged physically and emotionally in the Vietnam War. In The Book Review
last year, Joel Conarroe called the book ''an exceptional achievement, at once
humane, comic and moving.'' THE BRANDON PAPERS, by Quentin Bell. (Harvest/
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $5.95.) Quentin Bell's first novel, about an
Edwardian suffragist and do-gooder pursued posthumously by a gaggle of
biographers, is ''a deliciously readable sendup'' and an ''irreverent satire on
feminist hagiography,'' our reviewer, Angeline Goreau, said in 1985. She called
it ''a crazy fictional quilt'' full of ''reversals, contradictions, lies and,
above all, shocking revelations.'' HAROLD ARLEN: Happy With the Blues, by Edward
Jablonski. (Da Capo, $10.95.) This biography of Harold Arlen, composer of such
American pop standards as ''Stormy Weather,'' ''Blues in the Night,'' ''That Old
Black Magic'' and ''Over the Rainbow,'' has much that will be of interest to the
show-business buff, Lewis Funke said here in 1961. ''An interesting story has
been told,'' he said. CHILDHOOD AND OTHER NEIGHBORHOODS, by Stuart Dybek. (Ecco,
$8.50.) ''Startling observations and sharp images'' distinguish these 11 stories
about growing up poor in Chicago, Ivan Gold said in The Book Review in 1980.
Stuart Dybek ''grounds his stories in the city's streets and alleys,'' he said,
''in the feel his young children and adolescents have for the neighborhood
landscapes of their early years, and then bends his flair for naturalism on an
anvil of fantasy.'' THE COMPLETE LETTERS OF SIGMUND FREUD TO WILHELM FLIESS
1887-1904. Translated and edited by Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson. (Harvard
University, $8.95.) This edition of Freud's letters to his friend and colleague
Wilhelm Fliess includes 133 previously unpublished items. Jeffrey Masson asserts
that the originals were censored to protect Freud's reputation and conceal his
uncertainty about a crucial point -his abandonment of the seduction theory of
childhood mental disorders. Last year our reviewer, William J. McGrath, found
Mr. Masson's introduction and notes ''informative and evenhanded'' but said he
has focused ''too narrowly on the issue of seduction per se, thereby neglecting
the historical place of this issue within a complex web of closely related
investigations.'' -

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of F.B.I. agent with Thompson gun

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
Stages Adjust Season, Canceling and Adding

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 27, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 756 words


ALTHOUGH two elaborate productions in the state's theater season have been
canceled, some star-studded substitutions and new plays are adding something
different to local stages.

The national tour of the hit Broadway musical ''La Cage aux Folles'' was to have
been mounted at New Haven's Shubert Performing Arts Center Dec. 2-14. After the
tour was terminated, reportedly due to excessive traveling costs, the Shubert
management came up with two replacements: the vintage comedy ''Arsenic and Old
Lace,'' with Jean Stapleton in the role she is playing in the current Broadway
revival, and the musical ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum,''
with Mickey Rooney in the part originated by Zero Mostel.

Shubert audiences have other date-switching to contend with. Since the original
dates announced for the pre-Broadway tour of ''Legends,'' starring Carol
Channing and Mary Martin, would have conflicted with ''Forum,'' the James
Kirkwood comedy has been advanced from March to January. However, the future of
''Legends'' appears uncertain, since Miss Martin has announced her intention to
leave the show in mid-January; the search for her replacement is on.

For the second successive season, Stamford's Hartman Theater has called off the
American premiere of ''Uncle Maroje,'' a comedy by the Yugoslavian playwright
Marin Drzic. What was referred to as a postponement last season is now being
called a cancellation because of a ''shortfall'' in advance ticket sales,''
according to a theater spokesman.

Instead, Hartman audiences can now see Alan Ayckbourn's ''Bedroom Farce,'' a
proven success on London and Broadway stages, starring Nancy Marchand and Jerome
Kilty, two Connecticut residents.

Some ''to be announced'' slots have been filled by two theaters. For its third
production, the Hartford Stage Company will present ''Children'' by A. R. Gurney
Jr., a Roxbury resident who is one of the American theater's most prolific and
widely produced playwrights. ''Children'' is a comedy drama about family life,
adapted from a John Cheever short story. It was seen at Off Broadway's Manhattan
Theater Club in 1976 with Miss Marchand in one of the leading roles.

The third work at Long Wharf's main stage in New Haven is ''Self Defense,'' a
new play by a new playwright, Joe Cacaci, who describes his nine-character drama
as ''an amalgum of events closing in on a public defense attorney who is in the
throes of deciding whether or not to get out of a corrupt system.''

And there will be plenty of plays-in-progress. The Yale Repertory's seventh
annual Winterfest series will present four works: a comedy about three widows on
their monthly visits to their dead husbands' graves (''The Cemetery Club''); a
mystery about a widow, a spinster and a ''cursed mask'' (''The Memento''); a
variation on a Christmas tale, set in Maine (''Apocalyptic Butterflies''), and a
comedy drama about the Vietnam generation (''Exact Change'').

To those, add Yale's two new play readings and Long Wharf's workshop series.

A schedule of the recently announced productions follows:

    Hartman Theater, Stamford - Through Dec. 5, ''Bedroom Farce.'' There will be
a performance tomorrow instead of the previously announced show Nov. 27.
    Hartford Stage Company, Hartford - Jan. 3-Feb. 7, ''Children'' by A. R.
Gurney Jr.
    Shubert Performing Arts Center, New Haven - Jan. 13-18, ''Arsenic and Old
Lace.'' Feb. 27-March 8, ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum.''
Jan. 21-25, ''Legends.''
    Long Wharf Theater, New Haven - Jan. 16-March 1, ''Self Defense'' by Joe
Cacaci.
    Long Wharf workshop series: Dec. 22-Jan. 11, ''Duse Died in Pittsburgh'' by
Paul Vincent; Jan. 13-Feb. 1, ''Men in the Kitchen'' by Loren-Paul Caplan.
Remaining workshop plays have not yet been announced.
    Yale Repertory Theater Winterfest, New Haven - Jan. 13-Feb. 7, ''The
Cemetery Club'' by Ivan Menchell; Jan. 15-Feb. 7, ''The Memento'' by Wakako
Yamauchi.

Jan. 15-Feb. 3, ''Apocalyptic Butterflies'' by Wendy MacLeod. Jan. 16-Feb. 7,
''Exact Change'' by David Epstein.
    The Winterfest Seminar Series - ''Design'' Jan. 17, ''Music'' Jan. 24,
''Performance'' Jan. 31, and ''Theater and Everything Else'' Feb. 7. Winterfest
play readings, with titles to be announced, will be on Jan. 23 and Jan. 30.

There will be two marathon festival weekends, Jan. 23-24 and Jan. 30-31, during
which one play reading, one seminar and all four Winterfest stage plays can be
attended. Call 432-1234.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Editorial Notebook;
Even Hardball Has Rules

BYLINE: By Karl E. Meyer

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 490 words


American views about espionage have changed considerably since that age of
innocence when a code-breaking unit was shut down in 1929 by Secretary of State
Stimson because ''Gentlemen do not read each other's mail.'' In the age of cold
war, most people acknowledge the need to play hardball. Small countries may have
the luxury of virtue; great powers are locked in a clandestine combat in which
no mercy is expected.

But what if the great power is a democracy and what if it plays hardball by
giving an execution list of Soviet agents to a hostile tyranny like Iran?

That's what the C.I.A. is supposed to have done, according to unnamed officials
in a Washington Post account. The agency reportedly provided Ayatollah Khomeini
in 1982 with a list of as many as 200 names of Soviet agents, most of whom were
swiftly executed. If it happened, the ostensible purpose was to curry favor with
Iran and to cripple K.G.B. operations in a vital country. For the sake of the
C.I.A. and America's honor, one hopes this terrible transaction never took
place. All dossiers are fallible. In Vietnam, Americans found to their dismay
that Operation Phoenix, a secret program of ''neutralizing'' spies, claimed
innumerable innocents. As one officer recalled: ''I found examples in my own
nets of Vietnamese reporting people to whom they owed money or longstanding
family fights or had personal arguments.'' It's hard to believe that American
agents have any surer knowledge of Iran, or are better placed to evaluate what a
Soviet defector might say.

In Iran, mere suspicion can be fatal, with ''proof'' extracted under torture. If
the C.I.A. gratuitously furnished a list of spies to Khomeini's brutal police,
the K.G.B. could well compete in this deadly game by purporting to unmask
Western agents. At the crudest level, this blood trade wins no favor since Iran
knows that the C.I.A. is also covertly helping exiled Iranians. In the end, that
kind of hardball only confirms Teheran's belief in the Great Satan's perfidy.

Bitter experience has persuaded Americans that espionage needs rules and limits.
The Church Committee exposed botched attempts to kill foreign leaders like Fidel
Castro and to destabilize unfriendly regimes. Then came disturbing revelations
about past recruitment of Nazi war criminals like Klaus Barbie as anti-Communist
intelligence ''assets.'' Bit by bit, another dreadful story has been emerging:
The cynical Western betrayal in 1945 of perhaps a million Russian exiles and war
prisoners, indiscriminately returned to certain death in the Soviet Union.

There's no colder phrase in diplomacy than ''raison d'etat,'' the justification
that enables decent people to do the indecent for flag and country. But only
extreme circumstance can excuse a democracy's secret connivance with evil to
combat evil. Turning over names of alleged traitors to Iran is the kind of
hardball that Americans ought not play, and cannot win.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
The Hollow Center

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 746 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, a man not given to easy rhetoric, was talking about
President Reagan's dealings with Iran. ''I think the President was not fully
aware,'' he said, ''or informed, or capable of assimilating all the information
his staff gave him.''

In that gingerly way Senator Nunn approached a truth made plain by the Iran
affair. The Government of the United States has at its center a man who is not
informed about the substance of foreign policy, who is unwilling or unable to
grapple with the hard questions, who operates on instinct and hope.

People on all sides of politics are reluctant to see that truth, naked as it is
now. Reagan supporters may naturally prefer to obscure it. And critics are
mostly too delighted with a vulnerable Ronald Reagan, after all the Teflon
years, to think about what it means for a superpower to have a vacuum in its
leadership.

The Iran affair is not just a matter of political advantage. It has shown us
something frightening. The most powerful country on earth is run by a group of
people who will play games in a dangerous corner of the world without knowledge
of the players, without consultation, without respect for our system of
government.

Here is a President who, when the facts of his secret arms shipments begin to
emerge, tells his people that he was trying to bring ''an end to that terrible
war'' between Iran and Iraq. And the way to do that, he wants us to believe, is
to send 235 highly sophisticated antiaircraft missiles and 2,008 antitank
missiles to the side that refuses to talk peace, that presses the war as a
religious mission!

This is hardly the first occasion that has demonstrated Mr. Reagan's weak grasp
of foreign policy questions. At Reykjavik, for example, he was confused on basic
arms control issues, and his advisers could not agree among themselves because
the President had never settled their longstanding conflicts of policy.

But the Iran affair tested Mr. Reagan's competence in foreign affairs as nothing
else has, because he chose to fly solo. He operated without the expertise of the
operating departments, State and Defense.

There was no one to say to the President, at any stage: ''This is against common
sense, Mr. President. It is too dangerous. Please think again.'' No one wanted
to remember the lesson learned by President Kennedy at the Bay of Pigs, that
policies worked out in secret by a small group of yes men are likely to fail.

Critics are crying for the scalps of the two White House assistants who managed
the Iran adventure, Donald Regan and John Poindexter. Of course a person of
honor should resign after managing such a debacle. But the President who chose
men so grotesquely ill equipped to run a foreign operation will be in office for
26 more months.

Now Mr. Reagan's old California friends are said to be pushing, with Nancy
Reagan's support, for the removal of Secretary of State Shultz. They say Mr.
Shultz has been disloyal in making his distaste for the Iran adventure so clear.

The argument fits the philosophy of the Reagan Administration. What matters is
not substance - America's effectiveness and credibility in the world - but
politics. What matters is how Ronald Reagan looks. You let the Iranians who
destroyed Jimmy Carter diddle you, for months, in the hope that the President
will be able to stand on the White House lawn with freed hostages before
Election Day.

George Shultz is a man of deep loyalty. If he stays on, at least for a time, it
will be because of his loyalty. At the press conference last Wednesday night the
world saw a President who has lost his way. For Secretary Shultz to go now would
be devastating to Mr. Reagan's true interest, and the country's.

The departure of Mr. Shultz would also intensify the most dangerous feature of
the Iran affair: the arrogance of power it represented. As with Lyndon Johnson
in Vietnam and Richard Nixon in Cambodia, a President who did not want to hear
about disagreeable realities acted on his own abroad in lawless stealth. Once
again, in David Broder's phrase, there was ''the fatal blend of ignorance and
arrogance.''

The danger is not limited to Mr. Reagan's violation of the law requiring
''timely'' notice to Congress of covert ventures. It lies in the underlying
state of mind: the contempt of this executive branch for the way the American
system works. The checks and balances may seem inconvenient, but they have saved
this country from much folly and autocracy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW DEFENSE CHIEF HAS RIGHT RESUME FOR THE JOB

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 749 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Nov. 23


Rafael M. Ileto, who became Defense Minister of the Philippines today only
minutes after President Corazon C. Aquino accepted the resignation of Juan Ponce
Enrile, has in many ways been preparing for this job all his professional life,
according to those who know him.

It was Mr. Ileto, now a 66-year-old retired lieutenant general, who in the early
1950's organized and commanded ranger units that fought an earlier Filipino
Communist insurgency, the Hukbalahap - or Huk - rebellion. Military experts say
this West Point graduate, known to his friends as ''Rocky,'' is now in a
position to test again his small-unit, quick-strike strategies against a new
generation of left-wing guerrillas.

''The priority will be the unification of the armed forces, and then with the
help of the people maybe we can solve this insurgency problem,'' Mr. Ileto said
today.

It was also Mr. Ileto who balked at the imposition of martial law by President
Ferdinand E. Marcos in 1972. He became the only military leader to dissent, and
his stand eventually led to his retirement from active duty and the beginning of
a diplomatic career.

His diplomatic service took him to Iran, where he witnessed the fall of Shah
Mohammed Riza Pahlevi, and to Thailand, where a Communist insurgency was being
defeated through a combined force-and-persuasion policy.

Finally, in February of this year, when Mr. Enrile and Gen. Fidel V. Ramos broke
with Mr. Marcos, it was Mr. Ileto, then Ambassador to Thailand, whom both sides
sought as a trusted intermediary, according to Cecilio T. Arillo, a
military-affairs journalist close to Mr. Enrile who wrote the book ''Breakaway:
The Inside Story of the Four-Day Revolution in the Philippines.''

President Aquino made Mr. Ileto Deputy Defense Minister shortly after she came
to power. ''In hindsight,'' a diplomat said today, ''she may have been putting
him in place to replace Enrile right from the start.''

A Calming Influence

He is widely predicted to be a calming influence after the stormy Enrile reign
and is known to be highly respected by the rest of the army. Officials believe
he is the one candidate who would have the respect of even the man he replaced.

Rafael Ileto was born on Oct. 24, 1920, in Nueva Ecija, in central Luzon. He
studied engineering at the University of the Philippines and then spent a year
at the Philippine Military Academy before enrolling at the United States
Military Academy.

He graduated from West Point in 1943, when the Philippines was still an American
colony. He served with the United States Army in the Pacific theater in World
War II, from New Guinea north to his homeland.

Anti-Insurgency Background

In 1950 Mr. Ileto became an officer in the army of the newly independent
Philippines, while simultaneously taking a law degree from the University of
Manila.

From 1950 to 1955 he formed and led the Scout Rangers in anti-insurgency
activity. He then served as military attache in South Vietnam and Laos, where
Communist movements were growing. On his return to the Philippines in 1959, he
became operations chief of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency.

Mr. Ileto rose quickly to commanding general of northern Luzon, Assistant Chief
of Staff for Intelligence, Commanding General of the Philippine Army and Deputy
Chief of Staff.

After leaving the army in 1975, he went to Iran as Ambassador, and then to
Thailand in the same post. In Bangkok, an official who knew him there said
today, he renewed ties with other West Point graduates in the Thai Army and was
popular in both diplomatic and military circles.

''He was a very good Ambassador,'' a Thai official said. ''He was quiet but
quietly effective - and always a gentleman.''

The new Defense Minister is known among military officers and diplomats here for
his professional approach to military service, an attitude he shares with
General Ramos, the Philippine Chief of Staff and another West Point graduate. He
is highly regarded for his confident but soft-spoken leadership skills.

Mr. Ileto was known to have suffered some heart problems while Ambassador to
Thailand, but acquaintances say he was apparently cured of his illness and seems
healthy enough now to play golf.

Mr. Ileto, who is married and has five children, tells acquaintances he would
like nothing better than to be a farmer, ''tending to his piggery.'' He owns and
farms land, ''very successfully,'' a diplomat said. ''He could be independently
wealthy just doing that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Corazon Aquino (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

J.P. McCONNELL, EX-AIR FORCE CHIEF OF STAFF, DIES

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section D; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 553 words


Gen. John Paul McConnell, retired, a former Air Force Chief of Staff and vice
commander of the Strategic Air Command, died of cancer Friday at a nursing home
in Bethesda, Md. He was 78 years old.

General McConnell, who spent 41 years in the military, received his fourth star
in 1962 and was appointed as Air Force Chief of Staff by President Johnson in
January 1965. As such, he became a key figure in the controversies stirred by
the war in Indochina and the rapidly gathering American involvement in it.

A hawk on the bombing of North Vietnam, he was reconfirmed for a second two-year
term in 1967 and served through the first months of the Nixon Administration
until his retirement on July 31, 1969.

Dispute Over B-52 Successor

General McConnell publicly defended the concepts of cost-conscious management
and strong civilian control over the Armed Forces imposed by Defense Secretary
Robert S. McNamara under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. But when Mr. McNamara
came under fire in the mid-1960's from members of Congress who demanded an
advanced manned-bomber, the lawmakers could cite General McDonnell's call for
''full deployment and full development'' of one.

As Congress moved to add funds for the would-be successor to the B-52 bomber,
Mr. McNamara's critics on Capitol Hill accused the Secretary of falsely
asserting that he had the full backing of the Joint Chiefs of Staff when he had
actually overridden them on the issue.

General McConnell also disagreed in Congressional testimony with Johnson's
decision to limit the bombing of North Vietnam when he ordered it in early 1965.
Keeping the raids confined to the south of North Vietnam cost additional
American casualties, the general told the Senate in 1967.

He said the Joint Chiefs had urged that the United States ''go in there with a
very severe application of air power.'' They had, he said, wanted a ''sharp,
sudden blow'' while North Vietnam still lacked air defenses.

At the same time, General McConnell worried out loud that the rapidly increasing
demands on the American Air Force in Vietnam had stretched its Tactical Air
Command to the limits of its resources. Running short on crews, spare parts and
planes, the command's function had been reduced to one of training rather than
combat, he complained in 1966.

Military Career Begins

John Paul McConnell was born in Booneville, Ark., the son of a doctor. He
entered West Point in 1928 despite bad eyesight and overcame that handicap when
he started his military career as a pilot in 1933.

But a bent for staff work and organization guided his career in those directions
in World War II, at Army Air Force headquarters in Washington, in training
commands in the United States and in India, and in staff work in Southeast Asia.

He became director of plans at the Stategic Air Command in 1953 and Vice
Commander in Chief eight years later.

It was while he was serving as deputy commander for United States forces in
Europe in May 1965 that Johnson chose him as Vice Chief of Staff of the Air
Force. Known as an intellectual militarist, General McConnell was then the
designated successor to Gen. Curtis LeMay for the top job.

General McConnell leaves his wife, the former Sally Dean, and two sons, Bruce
William of Washington, D.C., and Dorsey Winter of New Haven.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 25, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

An obituary yesterday of Gen. John Paul McConnell, a retired Air Force Chief of
Staff, carried an incorrect listing provided by the Air Force for his survivors.
General McConnell and the former Sally Dean were divorced in 1970.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. John Paul McConnell (AP)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 25, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REFUGEES ARRIVE IN LOS ANGELES FROM VIETNAM

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 24


There was no fierceness in their eyes today, no jaws set against adversity and
attack in jungle blinds. The group of Vietnamese montagnard villagers who
touched their first American soil at an airport here today looked more like
tourists than former allies of American troops in Vietnam.

''I have many friends and family killed by the Communists - many times I'm
almost killed myself,'' said Ksa Thaniel Ha-Doi, a leader of the group. ''Many
long years fighting, but nobody to know or supply us.''

The 209 montagnard refugees include 159 men, 17 women and 33 children,
originally from the mountain areas of Vietnam. They were to stay in Los Angeles
overnight on their way to resettlement in North Carolina around Raleigh,
Greenboro and Charlotte.

The montagnards will join more than 800,000 Indochinese refugees who have been
resettled in the United States since 1975. It is the first time so large a group
of montagnards has come to this country, according to the State Department.

The montagnards were known as staunch anti-Communists who fought alongside
United States forces in the Vietnam War. They have been brought to this country
by the State Department for immediate resettlement in North Carolina, where
their resettlement will be overseen by the local arm of the Lutheran Immigration
and Refugee Service, the Lutheran Family Service of North Carolina.

Most of the group's members have continued fighting the Communists in the
Cambodian resistance since the Communist takeover of South Vietnam in 1975, said
Sheppie Abramowitz, a project officer for the Bureau of Refugee Programs at the
State Department in Washington.

Difficult Journey to America

The course of their journey to this country has been a difficult one. Mr. Ksa,
notwithstanding his sport shirt and slacks amid his similarly dressed friends at
the Los Angeles airport, used to be a farmer in the village of Dam Pao in the
Central Highlands region of South Vietnam. When the Communists came into their
mountains, he and others became resistance fighters. After the Communist
victory, they fought their way to the border between Cambodia and Thailand,
where they continued what he called ''the struggle.''

For 10 years, he said, they fought with what weapons they still had from the
ousted South Vietnamese Government. Occasionally, they received a little food
and clothing from the Thai Government, but mainly they were on their own.

Finally, last year, he said, everyone in their group ''agreed to put down
weapons, go to Thailand, and go to the U.S. Government.''

''If we go back to Vietnam, maybe we die,'' Mr. Ksa said. ''If we stay in
Thailand, we are miserable. Every day we fight. Now'' - at his age, 42, which
was not untypical for the group - ''we have a new life.''

The request for so large a group to be resettled together was unusual, Mrs.
Abramovitz said. ''They've been together, they wanted to stay together, and we
decided to honor that,'' she said.

Drawn From 3 Tribes

The group's members are drawn from three tribes: the Rhade, the Bahar and the
Jarai. Ethnically, they are related to another Vietnam mountain people, the
Hmong, who have been resettled around the country over the past 10 years with
concentrations in such regions as the Sacramento area in northern California,
the Texas Gulf, and urban neighborhoods in Philadelphia.

For the Hmong, as an isolated mountain people, the resettlement experience has
sometimes been a struggle. There have been conflicts between Hmong fishermen and
American counterparts. Others have been the victims of urban crime in big-city
neighborhoods.

In an effort to avoid such problems, the State Department set up for the
montagnards a six-month program of study of American culture and the English
language in the Philippines, which they have just completed. ''I can't guarantee
it, but we believe some of those problems will not be taking place,'' Mrs.
Abramowitz said. Mrs. Abramowitz, who is the wife of Morton I. Abramowitz, the
American Ambassador to Thailand from 1978 to 1983, had worked in refugee
programs for the International Rescue Committee in Hong Kong in the 1960's.

In addition, the group was to be met at Los Angeles International Airport by
Touneh Han Tho, a montagnard leader from Sacramento who may be a prime example
of the future that the State Department hopes is awaiting the new refugees.
After working for a while as a refugee coordinator for the state of California,
he has gone on to own a chain of bakeries, Mrs. Abramowitz said.

Self-Sufficiency to be Encouraged

The Department regards the Lutheran host agencies in North Carolina as
particularly well suited to oversee the resettlement. In addition to the
participation of Lutheran congregations in the area, the organization has
enlisted the help of 34 other churches to help in the resettlement, said Terry
Rusch, a State Department officer in charge of the resettlement in North
Carolina.

The church organizations have located housing and jobs for the montagnards, and
they will be encouraged to become self-sufficient. ''We have jobs for
everbyody,'' said Raleigh Bailey, head of refugee programs for the Lutheran
Family Services. ''Mostly jobs Americans don't want, entry-level factory jobs.''

On Tuesday, there is to be an arrival ceremony planned with welcomes by state
and Federal officials in Greensboro. After that, they will begin to be dispersed
to their new homes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Montagnard refugees (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 26, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW LIVES AWAIT 209 MONTAGNARDS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: GREENSBORO, N.C. Nov. 25


The cupboard is stocked with cans of bamboo shoots, a 50-pound burlap sack of
rice and a package of cookies. Upstairs, in one of the house's eight bedrooms,
plastic bags containing toothpaste and shaving cream rest beside secondhand beds
with matching green sheets and pillow cases, all awaiting 16 montagnard refugees
from Southeast Asia in their new home on Friendly Avenue.

For a month now, men and women from three churches here have been scrubbing
floors at the former college fraternity house, filling it with used sofas,
dishes from a local cafeteria and a 23-volume set of the Encyclopedia
Britannica. The oil tank is full and the $850 a month in rent has been paid
through December.

This evening the volunteers from Christ United Methodist Church, First Lutheran
Church and Ebenezer Lutheran Church served homemade soup, stir-fried vegetables
and rice to the new arrivals.

The 16, all men, were among 209 montagnards, Vietnam's mountain tribesmen, who
arrived at the local airport today wearing American-style clothes. The 159 men,
17 women and 33 children were greeted by a patriotic concert by the Southeast
Gilford High School Band and speeches by local dignitaries, and by a community
of well wishers eager to show gratitude to the montagnards who fought and died
alongside American Special Forces in remote jungles.

Hundreds of Volunteers Recruited

Lutheran Family Services of North Carolina, because it has successfully
resettled 3,000 Asian refugees in both Carolinas since 1979, was chosen by the
State Department to prepare for the arrival of the group of montagnards to reach
this country. The agency recruited hundreds of volunteers from 59 church and
community groups in central North Carolina and divided the montagnards among the
state's three largest cities: Greensboro, Raleigh and Charlotte.

''We have settled them where the Lutheran churches are,'' said Celia P. Shankle,
sponsorship developer with the state Lutheran Family Services Office in
Greensboro. ''There are enough jobs for all of them.''

Sponsors have arranged jobs for the refugees at furniture mills, textile plants
and a car lot. A local television station has hired several montagnards as
production assistants and janitors. Volunteers will drive them around town until
the refugees learn to get about on their own.

The Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital has retained a translator in case of medical
emergencies, and the hospital's pharmacy has agreed to offer discounted
prescription drugs.

Fought on After Fall

The montagnards, fierce fighters who call themselves Dega people, fought the
French and the Vietnamese before aligning themselves in the early 1960's with
the Americans. When South Vietnam fell to the Communists in 1975, the
montagnards continued to fight.

Most are still there, but some montagnards fled into the Cambodian jungles,
seeking asylum in the West. Many were captured and imprisoned by the Khmer
Rouge. A few escaped to a refugee camp on the Thai border, where they were found
by old American friends who convinced the State Department to accept them as
immigrants.

Mrs. Shankle, the Lutheran worker, conceded that her office had received a few
complaints that needy Greensboro residents were being ignored while so much
attention was being paid to the Asian refugees. Many local citizens, however,
have been generous with their time and money.

Francis L. Perkins, a retired businessman, said he and other members of Christ
Methodist Church were determined to help the montagnards feel comfortable in
America. ''My understanding is that when we pulled out of Vietnam, we promised
to help these people out,'' Mr. Perkins said. ''We haven't done it. I felt that
was an unfulfilled promise.''

Other volunteers said the Montagnards' loyalty to American G.I.'s had little to
do with this evening's warm welcome. ''My congregation has never even heard of
them before - neither had I,'' said the Rev. Stephen E. Ehlers, pastor of the
Lutheran Church of Our Father, which is sponsoring six refugees. ''It's the way
we regard the gospel: If you have two coats, give your brother one.''

'Network Makes Difference'

Mr. Ehlers said local churches have a strong tradition of charity work. ''You
could say it's southern hospitality, but it's more than that. There is a network
that makes a big difference.''

That network includes scores of area residents such as Audrey M. Henson, who
cheerfully agreed to house and employ six montagnards on her family's 400-acre
farm about 30 miles south of Greensboro. ''I thought of it this way,'' said Mrs.
Henson, ''what if I was trying to come to this country? Wouldn't you help?''

Mrs. Henson has renovated a small house that she had been saving for her
20-year-old son. The montagnards can stay there rent free as long as they wish,
she said, and will be offered jobs with her family's landscaping business.

''We're out in the country,'' she said. ''We have ponds where they can fish. We
have a little house in the back yard. We added bedrooms and I fixed up a utility
room for their washer and dryer. I've got it completely furnished. It's not real
fancy, but it's not anything I'd be ashamed to use myself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 26, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
The Outlook: Steady Growth

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


THE ability of the stock market to roll with the hard punch of the Boesky affair
suggests that the slow but surprisingly steady expansion of the economy is
likely to continue.

The statistics lend credence to that mixed but hopeful outlook. After-tax
corporate profits rose by 4.3 percent in the third quarter. Personal income
gained four-tenths of 1 percent in October, although consumer spending dropped 2
percent. But that spending should pick up next year with the help of the cut in
personal withholding tax rates.

Business investment remains sluggish, with industry operating well below its
preferred operating rates; capacity utilization edged down to 79 percent in
October from 79.2 percent in the two preceding months. The new tax law, by
removing the investment tax credit and many tax breaks, may put additional drags
on business investment and on commercial and multifamily construction.

Federal spending is expected to continue to rise, although at a slower rate next
year. Military spending has been surging as outlays catch up with
appropriations, accounting for much of the upward revision in third-quarter
G.N.P. to an annual rate of 2.9 percent. However, Congress is likely to hold
down the rate of growth in both military and social spending in the coming year,
worried about worsening the budget deficit.

The deficit was $25.26 billion in October, the first month of the new fiscal
year. If that rate continues for a year, the fiscal year 1987 deficit would
total an incredible $303 billion. But James C. Miller 3d, director of the Office
of Management and Budget, yesterday predicted a deficit of merely $170 billion
(the Gramm-Rudman target is $144 billion). Most economists think his figure is
too low.

With the economy growing slowly inflation continues low, although it is unlikely
to stay as low as the 1.5 percent it averaged in the last 12 months, the lowest
rate since 1964, before the Vietnam War buildup broke the nation's long spell of
price stability.

Low oil prices, which have inflicted economic damage on Texas, Louisiana,
Oklahoma and other oil-producing states, have been easing the burdens of
consumers and businesses in the rest of the country. And petroleum-based
exports, such as chemicals, have been helping the American trade position, but a
dramatic improvement in the trade deficit remains elusive.

The dollar remains weak, though a further fall against the Japanese yen and the
German mark as steep as the one in the last year and a half seems improbable.
Japan, hard hit by the drop in the dollar, has yielded to American pressure to
step up its rate of growth by a more stimulative fiscal and monetary policy. But
the West German Government continues to resist the American pressure, insisting
it is growing quite fast enough, thank you, and inflation would result if it
tried to grow faster.

The strength of European and Japanese economic advances remain a crucial element
in the outlook for the United States economy.

A new study by an international group of economists - the Nobel laureate Franco
Modigliani of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Mario Monti of Bocconi
University in Milan, Jacques Dreze of the Catholic University of Louvain, in
Belgium, Richard Layard of the London School of Economics and Herbert Giersch of
Kiel University, a leading German economist who is president of the Kiel
Institute of World Economics - has lent its weight to the case for stronger
European action to spur growth.

The study finds that the European countries have been overly concerned about
inflation and too little concerned about chronically high unemployment. With the
jobless rate hanging at a near-depression level of 11 percent for Western Europe
as a whole, the economists say the countries have been pursuing policies that
involve ''a huge waste of resources and much human misery.''

To create more jobs, they call for a faster rate of capital formation. Europe,
they say, should relax its tight fiscal policy and adopt a coordinated monetary
expansion. They recommend ''time-limited investment incentives and marginal
employment subsidies.''

The success of the proposed expansion, they stress, will depend in large measure
on its occurring ''more or less simultaneously'' in all members of the European
Community. Any one country trying to expand alone - with the possible exception
of West Germany - would soon face a deficit on trade and current account that
would have to be financed by capital imports. And if capital could not be
attracted, that would create a risk of currency depreciation and renewed
inflationary pressure.

Unfortunately, however, ''coordination'' is becoming a dirty word in West
Germany and other industrial countries.

Nevertheless, unless the nations of Europe, North America and the Far East learn
to see how much their separate national interests depend on the functioning of
the international economy, and shape their policies accordingly, each will
suffer. It is not a question of self-sacrifice but of enlightened self-interest.

That is the clear conclusion of the economists whose report, ''Reducing
Unemployment in Europe,'' has just been published by the Center for European
Policy Studies. The problem they see cannot be solved by them but only by the
politicians. They call the job of economic coordination ''a political issue
beyond the scope of this report.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 27, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

OUTGOING GOVERNOR IN NEW MEXICO BARS THE EXECUTION OF 5

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words

DATELINE: SANTA FE, N.M., Nov. 26


In a dramatic Thanksgiving Eve move to thwart his successor, Gov. Toney Anaya of
New Mexico today commuted the death sentences of all five men awaiting execution
in the state, saying the penalty was ''inhumane, immoral and anti-God.''

Lawyers said it was believed to be the first mass reprieve since Gov. Winthrop
Rockefeller of Arkansas commuted the death sentences of all 15 inmates awaiting
execution in 1970.

Todays action came just five weeks before the Democratic Governor is to complete
his four years in office, during which he stayed all pending executions. ''My
personal beliefs do not allow me to permit the execution of an individual in the
name of the state,'' he said minutes after signing executive orders reducing the
sentences to life imprisonment.

He added that to leave office without acting would assure the execution of one
or more of the five men and ''for me to simply walk away now will make me as
much an accomplice as others who would participate in their execution.''

His Republican successor, Garrey Carruthers, had campaigned heavily on the crime
issue and had said, ''The first thing I want to see on my desk after I'm elected
Governor is the paperwork necessary to restart the death penalty.''

Mr. Carruthers denounced Mr. Anaya, saying: ''I personally asked the Governor,
in a recent private conversation, not to take this action and to leave
implementation of the capital punishment statute to my administration. I believe
a Governor is duty-bound to implement the law or aggressively seek to change the
law. Until today the incumbent chose to do neither. We should, and I will,
uphold New Mexico's capital punishment law.''

He added that he would seek to determine if the action could be challenged in
court. Aides to Mr. Carruthers and the Attorney General-elect, Hal Stratton,
conferred today to see if there was any legal ground to reverse Mr. Anaya's
action.

But few lawyers saw any chance of that.

''He's on pretty solid ground,'' said Paul Bardacki, the Attorney General of New
Mexico, adding that it would be a ''tough legal row to hoe'' to upset the
action. He said the power of pardon given the governors of most states had long
been interpreted by courts to include reducing penalties.

However, Mr. Bardacki said that he thought New Mexicans would be shocked by the
action and that there might be a move to restrict the Governor's pardon
authority by amendment to the State Constitution. ''I do not believe this action
was good for the criminal justice system of New Mexico,'' he said.

Mr. Anaya's move provided a rare bit of encouragement for the foes of capital
punishment, who have become discouraged by the quickening pace of executions.
There have been 66 executions in the United States since the death penalty was
reinstated by the Supreme Court in 1976, 34 of them in the last two years.

According to the American Civil Liberties Union, as of Oct. 1 there were 1,789
men and women on death row in the 37 states that have the death penalty. This
population grows by about 250 a year, and the governor in each state has the
power to commute sentences. New York has no death penalty, and no one has been
executed in the state since 1963. In March, Governor Cuomo vetoed a bill that
would have restored the death penalty for defendants who murdered police
officers and prison guards, contract killers and inmates serving life who killed
in prison. In New Jersey, where the law provides execution by lethal injection,
21 inmates were on death row in October. Connecticut has a death penalty law but
no prisoners facing a death sentence.

Reaction Is Mixed

In Washington, Ira Glasser, executive director of the American Civil Liberties
Union, called the New Mexico action ''a major act of moral and political
greatness, which will resound in our society and around the world.'' Mara Taub,
spokesman for the Committee to Stop Executions, a New Mexico group, applauded
Governor Anaya's ''refusal to continue the cycle of violence.''

But the general reaction in New Mexico was not so positive, and Mr. Anaya today
was surrounded by an unusually heavy cordon of bodyguards.

Mr. Anaya said he had originally planned to commute the sentences to life
without possiblity of parole but had changed his mind because New Mexico has no
such sentence and he feared it might form the basis for a legal challenge to his
orders. Under law, a life sentence means an absolute minimum of 30 years here,
but Mr. Anaya said it was extremely unlikely any of the murderers would ever be
set free.

Former Pilot in Vietnam

The five are: William Wayne Gilbert, 37 years old, a former pilot in Vietnam,
who was convicted of rape, kidnapping and first-degree murder of an Albuquerque
woman. He was scheduled to die by lethal injection Jan. 16. He has been
convicted of three other murders, including his wife's. Richard Reynaldo Garcia,
31, serving time for robbery, jail escape and the murder of a prison guard. His
execution date was Jan. 1. Michael Anthony Guzman, 24, convicted of raping and
murdering a coed at the Univerity of New Mexico in 1981. Joel Lee Compton, 33,
convicted of murdering an Albuquerque policeman. He is the one who would be
eligible for parole at 65. Eddie Lee Adams, 24, convicted of the rape and
strangulation murder of an 80-year-old Clovis, N.M., woman.

Mr. Anaya coupled his action with a call for greater aid to the victims of
violent crime and for wider efforts to eliminate child abuse, racism and other
root causes of crime.

The last person to be executed in New Mexico was David Cooper Nelson in 1960.
Since the penalty was restored, seven have been sentenced to death, two reversed
by the courts. Mr. Anaya reprieved the five others. ---- PHILADELPHIA STAY OF
EXECUTION PHILADELPHIA, Nov. 26 (AP) - A 35-year-old man convicted of murdering
an off-duty police officer and a bicyclist in separate shootings won a court
order today, delaying Tuesday's scheduled execution.

Judge James Cavanaugh of the State Superior Court granted the stay to Leslie C.
Beasley, pending appeal.

There have been no executions in Pennsylvania since 1962, and of 75 death row
inmates,, only Mr. Beasley faced a current death warrant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 27, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Turn Over Remains of 3 War Dead

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 193 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 26


Vietnam today handed over what it described as the remains of three Americans
missing in action in the Vietnam War, an American officer said.

The turnover in Hanoi came as Vietnam neared the halfway point of its pledge to
resolve the issue of missing servicemen by the end of 1987.

American officials, who list 1,784 servicemen missing in Vietnam, say Hanoi must
significantly accelerate its efforts to accomplish that goal. The total number
of missing, including those lost in Laos and Cambodia, is 2,424.

A 15-member United States military delegation received the remains in a short
ceremony at Noi Bai Airport in Hanoi, said the leader of the group, Lieut. Col.
Paul Mather. He said the three coffins, each covered with a folded American
flag, were loaded onto a C-141 transport plane and flown to Honolulu for
analysis at the Army laboratory there.

Hanoi usually provides tentative identification, but Colonel Mather said only
that the Vietnamese had informed American officials that they found the remains
while checking reports from villagers.

In April, Vietnam made one of its largest turnovers - the remains of what it
said were 21 Americans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 27, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
The Fault, Dear Brutus

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


In the political turmoil of the last 20 years the press has often been accused
of destroying the President. The truth in every case has been what we see so
clearly now: The President destroyed himself.

In each case the fall has come the same way. A President gripped by the sense of
his own rightness and power brushed the rules aside to have his way. Lyndon
Johnson sent 500,000 men to Vietnam, after campaigning against a wider war, on
the pretext of a Tonkin Gulf incident that did not happen. Richard Nixon ordered
the secret bombing of Cambodia, and to cover his tracks went down the road of
lies and lawlessness.

The roots of Ronald Reagan's disaster lie in Nicaragua. He was obsessed by the
desire to overthrow the Sandinista Government. To that end he aided terrorists.
He mocked international law and the constraints laid down by Congress. The end
justified the means.

All that makes it laughable to suggest that responsibility for the funneling of
Iranian money to the Nicaraguan contras stopped with Lieut. Col. Oliver L.
North. The President laid down the policy of aiding the contras by any means, at
any price. If a subordinate took the policy seriously, the President is
responsible - whether or not he knew the details. If a subordinate showed
contempt for the checks and balances of American Government, he was only
following the President's lead.

Of course it would be interesting to know more about Oliver North. For he must
be one of the most amazing performers to hit Washington in years: A regular
superman.

This Marine lieutenant colonel, all on his own, made the intricate financial
arrangements to get millions of dollars' worth of weapons from United States
stocks and have the money repaid. He went to the armories and packed all those
weapons into crates: 2,008 anti-tank missiles and 235 anti-aircraft missiles. He
arranged the shipping and the security.

He did all that without anyone in the Defense Department knowing a thing about
it, or anyone in the White House except, vaguely, John Poindexter. That is what
we are supposed to believe.

The new White House strategy for dealing with the crisis is reminiscent of that
Watergate coinage, ''The modified limited hangout route.'' We get a degree of
candor but still, by all signs, with the essential aim of keeping the cap on the
bottle.

The appointment of a review commission to study the operations of the National
Security Council staff is a serious step. Especially with Brent Scowcroft, a
respected former National Security Adviser, as a member, the commission could do
much to plumb the corruption of that institution.

But no one can believe that the facts of all the underhanded dealings with the
contras and Iran are going to be brought out by Attorney General Meese. The very
reason we have a statute calling for the appointment of a special prosecutor is
that there may be a conflict between the political attachments of high Justice
Department officials and their duty to enforce the law. Few have had a closer
attachment to a President than Mr. Meese.

There can be no confidence that the law is being enforced in this matter until a
special prosecutor is appointed. If Mr. Meese tries to stonewall about that, he
will be making a fatal mistake. Watergate surely taught everyone that
damage-limitation tactics only intensify public skepticism.

The unraveling process will go on. Congress and the press will be digging. It is
better for the Administration to face, at once, the pain of a special
prosecutor.

The Administration's real worry, I am convinced, is the Nicaragua story. For
there President Reagan is on the line. He is the man who said the contras were
the ''moral equal of our Founding Fathers.'' He ignored strong evidence of
illegal links between officials and so-called private aid to the contras after
Congress cut off U.S. funds.

Colonel North was named long ago as a manager of supposedly unofficial help for
the contras. Since the supply plane was shot down in Nicaragua and Eugene
Hasenfus captured, there has been much other evidence of connections - and of
terrorist involvement. Mr. Hasenfus identified as his boss a man named Luis
Posada, who was convicted in Venezuela of blowing up a Cuban airliner with 73
people aboard.

The truth, or much of it, is going to come out eventually. That is the way this
country works. And as it comes out, it will hurt. Presidents who consort with
terrorists and ignore the law seal their own fate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 27, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEWS;
HOW TV IS COVERING THE IRAN STORY

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 977 words


WHEN President Reagan appeared on television at noon on Tuesday, announcing that
he had not been ''fully informed'' about policy toward Iran, television became a
major arena in which the new crisis would be acted out. What did the President
know and when did he know it? The question, asked often on news broadcasts, drew
its resonance from Watergate. The question went unanswered, but one thing became
clear: television was in full-throated pursuit of a story.

What kind of story? ''A bombshell of a story,'' Dan Rather said on CBS. On ABC,
Peter Jennings declared that ''the Iran affair is now a scandal.'' On NBC, John
Chancellor was somber. ''The scandal of dealing with terrorists,'' he said,
''has turned into a political disaster.''

The crisis dominated the evening news broadcasts. Later CBS and NBC did
specials, and ABC expanded ''Nightline'' from 30 minutes to one hour. By 2 A.M.
yesterday, Fred Graham, the host of CBS's ''Nightwatch,'' was confessing to ''a
sense of deja vu.'' He was referring, of course, to Watergate.

In fact, Tom Brokaw had expressed the same sentiment on the NBC special four
hours before. The White House must be wondering, he began by saying, whether
''there is any end to the Iranian quagmire - it seems to be getting deeper by
the hour.'' Mr. Brokaw concluded by saying, ''It does seem we have been here
before.'' President Johnson foundered on Vietnam, while President Nixon had
Watergate. The parallels with Vietnam and Watergate, Mr. Brokaw said, were
clear.

Well, perhaps, but this did seem to be a rush to judgment. Vietnam and Watergate
were introduced slam-bang. Implicit in the television coverage was a problem:
most of what was known about the crisis by then -clearly and objectively known -
was known by midday on Tuesday. Therefore, much of the subsequent television
coverage dealt with that trickiest of all journalistic questions: What did the
crisis mean? Comparisons with Vietnam and Watergate were easy outs.

At the same time, there were snappy explanations and characterizations. On CBS,
Mike Wallace declared that Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, dismissed as a member of
the staff of the National Security Council, had been ''hung out to dry by the
Reagan White House.'' Who was Colonel North? ''A soldier of fortune more or
less,'' Mr. Brokaw said, ''who conducted things with a 'Mission Impossible'
theme.''

This was zippy, but it didn't add much to our knowledge. Hooray for the
''MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour,'' which made the crisis its sole topic, and the
expanded edition of ''Nightline.'' On the latter, Ted Koppel interviewed, among
others, Henry A. Kissinger and Alexander M. Haig Jr., two former Secretaries of
State. Indeed, Mr. Kissinger had a busy night.

He told Mr. Brokaw that it was ''inconceivable to me'' that Colonel North had
acted alone on the diversion of arms to Nicaragua. He told Mr. Rather, ''I have
difficulty believing Colonel North did this on his own.'' Mr. Rather had begun
the CBS program by mentioning ''hip-pocket diplomacy.'' It was the zippiness
mode again. Mr. Kissinger, very somber, seemed to be speaking more in sorrow
than in anger.

Inevitably, Mr. Kissinger spoke about the television coverage; so did Mr. Haig.
Mr. Haig said cautiously that the new crisis was ''somewhat overdramatized, in
my view.'' Later he noted the ''burden on the press.'' One wished he had been
more specific. Mr. Kissinger said the press, the Administration and Congress, in
a way, were in this together. One wished he had been more specific, too.

For an important question now is, how will television run with the story?
Congress promises to hold hearings on the crisis, but Congress does not go into
its new session until January. The ''burden'' that Mr. Haig mentioned is
presumably the burden the press must shoulder on responsibly annotating the
issues. Television, as always, will help shape the Congressional agenda.
Correspondents and anchormen, whether they choose to be or not, are now
surrogates for both the public and the new Congress.

This was clear on Tuesday. Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, who does not appear
much on television other than in formal speeches, turned up in various places,
including the ''CBS Evening News.'' Clearly, the Administration knew what was at
stake.

Mr. Rather shot questions: ''Someone's committed a crime - have they not?'' Did
the Central Intelligence Agency know what was happening? How could Colonel North
have acted alone? Mr. Meese, the picture of great good humor, adroitly parried.
It was a standoff, but we had the feeling that the two were taking each other's
measure.

What happens now is unknown; there are still unanswered questions. At the same
time, it will be a pity if commentary and analysis overwhelm hard reporting.
Thus far, there has been a fair amount of television commentary about the damage
to foreign policy and the United States image abroad. Presumably, there is
damage; presumably the image has suffered. On the other hand, the only
representative of a foreign government who seemed to turn up on the major news
broadcasts was Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the Nicaraguan leader, scarcely an
unbiased source.

It should be noted now, also more in sorrow than anger, that on ''Nightline''
the ordinarily precise Ted Koppel asked Senator Patrick J. Leahy a very
imprecise question. ''Do you have,'' he said, ''the foggiest notion of what's
going on?''

Mr. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat, leaped at that one. He said, of course, that he
didn't. This was hard to believe; Mr. Leahy sounded like a politician making
hay. A moment later, however, Mr. Koppel got down to more serious things,
wondering whether some politicians weren't pleased to sit back now and ''let the
press take a few whacks at the crisis.'' Mr. Leahy looked solemn then and said
the press must be responsible. It seemed like a timely warning.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

OFFICIALS FEAR AIDE DESTROYED PAPERS ON IRAN ARMS DEAL

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1439 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 27


The Government has information indicating that Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, the
dismissed White House aide, destroyed several documents from National Security
Council files last weekend, Reagan Administration officials said today.

Colonel North has been linked by the White House to the diversion of millions of
dollars in profits from Iranian arms sales to the Nicaraguan rebels.

One Administration official, who requested anonymity, said he understood that
Colonel North had destroyed documents considered critical to investigations of
the arms dealings. Other sources were unable to confirm this information,
however.

Private Inquiry by Meese

The destruction occurred as Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d was conducting a
private inquiry into the weapons sale without the assistance of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, the Administration official said.

The official said some of the destroyed documents involved the relationship
between Colonel North and Robert C. McFarlane, the former White House national
security adviser who traveled to Iran as part of the secret dealings.

In a conversation today, Colonel North declined to discuss the reports of
destruction of documents or any other details of the case.

North Declines Comment

He told a reporter, ''I'm not talking until later.'' His lawyer also would not
comment on the reports.

Colonel North did confirm, however, that President Reagan telephoned him after
his departure from the White House and thanked him for his Government work.

A Pentagon source said Colonel North would report to Marine Headquarters Monday.
The source said he would normally be permitted to retire in 18 months but could
seek to retire earlier if he could claim disability from his service in the
Vietnam War.

There was continued confusion today regarding the whereabouts of the White House
files maintained by Colonel North and the former White House national security
adviser, Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, who resigned this week.

Locks Are Changed

Don Mathes, a White House spokesman, said he understood that the combination
locks in Colonel North's office were changed on Tuesday, but said he did not
know whether the files had been moved elsewhere.

In Santa Barbara, Calif., Donald T. Regan, President Reagan's chief of staff,
said he had no comment on reports that Colonel North had destroyed documents.

Mr. Regan, however, suggested that if such documents were national security
papers, there would have been copies in other files. ''I do know that national
security documents are not in the possession of just one person,'' Mr. Regan
said. ''There are copies of them and there is a central file and that is under
close supervision so that there is no chance that those would be missing.''

Asked if there would be copies even if such documents were destroyed, Mr. Regan
said: ''If they are national security documents, yes.''

The destruction of documents was first mentioned publicly in an article in The
Los Angeles Times today. Law-enforcement officials said the F.B.I. had
information about the incident before the newspaper began making inquiries.

As a rule, Federal officials no longer use paper shredders to destroy documents.
Instead they are placed into a machine that pulverizes them into a fine dust.
Shredding machines were largely abandoned after Iranian officials were able to
piece together shreds of classified documents left behind by American officials
after the fall of the Shah.

In another development today, the White House denied a news report that Mr.
Regan had long known that money from the Iranian payments was deposited in Swiss
bank accounts used to support Nicaraguan rebel groups. The report, by United
Press International, was attributed to an unnamed White House official.

Regan Denies Report

Mr. Regan denied the report, which could not be independently corroborated.

Meeting with reporters today, Mr. Regan described the report as ''ridiculous''
and added that he had not heard of the diversion of money to the rebels until
Monday. ''I never heard of it until the news came out Monday about the Iranian
money and the contras,'' he said.

Dan Howard, a White House spokesman, said Mr. Regan's first information that
funds had been diverted came Monday during a conversation with Attorney General
Meese. He said that ''anyone who claims to have any information should turn it
over to the Justice Department.''

Investigation in Early Stage

Law enforcement officials said their investigation was still at a preliminary
stage but so far showed that Mr. Regan did not know about the diversion of funds
until this week.

There were these other developments:

* The White House said Colonel North had attempted to enter the White House
grounds this morning, although he had been placed on the ''do-not-admit list.''
He gave up his effort to gain entry when he was approached by reporters.

* A law enforcement official said Justice Department and the Customs Service had
begun an investigation of purported arms sales to Honduras last year by Maj.
Gen. Richard V. Secord, a retired Pentagon official who has been identified as a
key figure in both the Iran arms deal and the private network of aid to the
Nicaraguan rebels. General Secord, who could not be reached for comment, has in
the past denied any wrongdoing.

* Eleven Democrats on the House Judiciary Committee demanded appointment of an
independent counsel in the Iran arms case and cited numerous laws that might
have been violated by the transcations with Iran.

* The Attorney General placed Stephen S. Trott, the Associate Attorney General,
in charge of the Justice Department's investigation of the Iran arms deal, and
ordered tight restrictions on the information made available to the public.

Administration officials said today that if Colonel North destroyed documents
critical to the inquiry, he could face Federal charges of obstruction of
justice. The officials added that today's reports might indicate extraordinary
flaws in the handling of the investigation by Mr. Meese and the Justice
Department.

Officials said that the F.B.I. was not brought into the investigation until
Wednesday and that Mr. Meese and others had not acted to secure Col. North's
office and files in the White House for at least two days after the Justice
Department began its investigation last Friday.

The delay, they said, would have permitted Colonel North complete access to his
files as the Justice Department continued its inquiry. One official, who asked
not to be named, said the F.B.I. learned late Wednesday that documents might
have been destroyed by the colonel.

Justice Department officials said that under normal procedures the F.B.I. would
have taken possession of the documents or otherwise secured them at the first
indication that Mr. North might have illegally transferred funds to the
Nicaraguan rebels.

A Justice Department spokesman, Patrick Korten, would not comment on the reports
but insisted that the department would ''fully and completely investigate any
aspect of the case that comes to light.''

Another Administration official said, however, that Mr. Meese and Justice
Department lawyers ''had done no favors'' for the F.B.I. and Congressional
investigators who might now have to go without critical information that was
contained in National Security Council documents.

Colonel North's lawyer, Brendan V. Sullivan Jr., also would not talk about the
charges that papers had been destroyed. ''We don't confirm it, we don't deny,''
he said.

Others familiar with Colonel North's thinking said that he did not consider
himself a scapegoat in the investigation and that he strongly denied reports
about the financing of the rebel groups, saying that much less than $30 million
had been placed in Swiss banks for the use by the contras. Mr. Meese had said
that $10 million to $30 million may have been placed in the bank accounts.

Incident at White House

In the incident at the White House today, Colonel North called the White House
situation room from a security checkpoint at the southwest entrance and asked
permission to enter, Mr. Mathes of the White House said. Colonel North decided
not to wait, however, when he was approached by reporters who were in the area.

''He was waiting for admission, and the press was hounding him, so he decided to
go,'' the spokesman said.

Mr. Mathes said placement on the do-not-admit list was ''standard procedure for
someone who has been relieved and is under investigation.'' It was unclear, he
said, if Colonel North would eventually have been permitted to enter had he
waited.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Humpty Dumpty's Fall

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 687 words


The refrain is familiar, even haunting: ''The President must act to get this
behind us so we can move ahead,''

But no matter what he did, before his resignation, Richard Nixon never was able
to get Watergate ''behind us.''

The implication of the phrase is that the matter somehow can be closed, if only
Mr. Reagan will take the right steps, and that he and the rest of us then can
''move ahead'' as before- in effect, as if nothing has happened.

But no matter what he does now, things can't be the same for President Reagan,
because he did happen. Either: *Mr. Reagan himself, or high officials appointed
by him and operating with his tacit but ''deniable''blessing, acted ilegally and
under cover in any or all of several possible ways- in which case a massive
cover-up has been launched by the President himself; *Or Mr Reagan has been so
lax in his sworn duties to uphold the laws and to exercise proper control over
his Administration's policies, actions and officials that he did not know what
his own staff and a principal ally were doing in matters directly affecting U.S.
national security- in which case he has been derelict or incompetent or both.

Neither of those possibilities - anyone may judge for him or herself which is
the more culpable - can be put ''behind us'' by any conceivable actions the
President can take.

He already has sacrificed Admiral Poindexter and Colonel North, but that hasn't
quieted the uproar any more than Mr. Nixon was able to put Watergate behind him
by firing Mr. Haldeman and Mr. Ehrlichman. And for Mr. Reagan to get rid of
anyone else , now or later, would only tend to contradict the current line that
only the two banished officials knew about the funds illicitly flowing from Iran
to Nicaraguan rebels.

Attorney General Meese is continuing the Administration's self-investigation,
though he already has tainted it by calling for all Cabinet officials- including
those who might know something relevant?- to stand ''shoulder to shoulder'' with
the President. But even if Mr. Meese conducts th probe in good faith,
Congressional Democrats surely will launch their own (remember the Ervin
hearings?) and properly or politically keep the matter alive beyond anything the
Administration can do.

Mr. Reagan promises an independent investigating board. Aside from the fact that
if he appoints it he can dismiss it, the board's inquiry also will keep the
matter before the public; and from the facts discosed by the Administration
itself, honest findings by the board will have to confirm, probably in greater
detail one of the two possibilities set out above, or perhaps some combination
of them.

Already, as happened when President Johnson was beleaguered about the war in
Vietnam, during Watergate and to some extent when Jimmy Carter was bogged down
in hostage negotiations, cries are being heard that Mr. Reagan isn't the issue,
that instead ''The Presidency'' must be saved- as if that great office could be
separated from the fallible human being who occupies it. This plea usually is an
ostensibly patriotic way of urging that not too many quesitons be asked, not too
many lights be focused on the dark places of the White House.

What finally can't be put behind Mr. Reagan or the rest of us is his loss of
personal command. No matter what results from investigations, what other
transgressions might be discovered, enough has been disclosed already so that
Ronald Reagan won't again win the close votes in Congress by the force of his
personal standing. He won't again lead the public by virtue of its unmarred
trust in him. What achievements remain to his last term will be earned on their
merits, not on his power to charm and persuade. Humpty Dumpty can't be put back
together again.

Get this debacle behind us? Mr. Reagan might as well command that Congress go
home, the Deomcrats disband, the presses stop rolling, television turn out the
lights; he might as well ask Americans to cover their eyes, ears and noses. On
Monday, the President said defiantly: ''I am not firing anybody.'' On Tuesday,
he put that behind him. But everything else remains.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Store Where Intruder Died Is Found Burglarized Again

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 26, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 148 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Nov. 27


A frequently burglarized merchant who caused a furor by killing an intruder with
a booby trap reported today that his store had been burglarized again.

The owner of the general store, Prentice Rasheed, a 43-year-old veteran of the
Vietnam War, today found the store's front window smashed and reported that $200
worth of men's and women's clothing had been taken.

Mr. Rasheed told the police that burglars had broken into his Liberty City store
seven times when he decided to set the booby trap. He rigged a metal grate to a
hole in the roof through which burglars had entered before and attached it to an
electrical outlet. The body of Odell Hicks, 26, was found tangled in the trap
Sept. 30. Clutching a radio from the store, he apparently touched the grate on
his way out.

The trap was removed and a grand jury decided last month not to charge Mr.
Rasheed with manslaughter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 29, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS FROM SERIES HELP PUBLIC TV

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words


Critics often cite television as a prime reason that Americans don't read more,
but public television has given rise to a highly competitive book publishing
business - one complete with auctions, big advances, literary agents and authors
tours.

''When we first started publishing books like this about 10 years ago, public
television executives had trouble appreciating their importance,'' said William
Phillips, a senior editor at Little, Brown. ''Now they know they can make a lot
of money from them, and they have become very smart about selling the rights.''

Little, Brown, which has published many books tied to series on public
television, recently published ''The Africans'' by Ali Mazrui, based on the
nine-part public television series. It bought the book from Robert Lesher, a New
York literary agent, who represented WETA, the Washington public television
station that co-produced the series with the British Broadcasting Corporation.

A Spate of New Arrivals

A number of such books have been published recently, or are about to be. ''The
Frugal Gourmet Cooks With Wine'' (William Morrow) by Jeff Smith, based on the
author's series for WTTW television in Chicago, is No. 3 on The New York Times
best-seller list. ''The Story of English'' (Sifton/Viking) by Robert McCrum,
William Cran and Robert MacNeil, a companion volume to the nine-part public
television series of Mr. MacNeil, is No. 7.

Next month, Harper & Row will publish ''The World: An Illustrated History,''
edited by Geoffrey Parker, a companion to a coming series produced by South
Carolina Educational Television. On Dec. 1, Bantam will publish its paperback
edition of ''Planet Earth'' by Jonathan Weiner, based on the seven-part public
television series of the same name this year, produced by WQED in Pittsburgh. In
January, Viking will publish 'Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years,
1954-1965'' by Juan Williams, a companion volume to a six-part public television
series.

Other major book projects are in the works and many are under discussion. ''We
are talking now about the 500th anniversary of Columbus's discovery of America,
in 1992,'' said Steven Axelrod, a literary agent who represents WGBH in Boston,
which produces many programs for public television.

A Profitable Marriage

Since the television stations usually own the copyright, the literary agents
represent the stations in their dealings with publishers. ''The agent becomes a
bit of a packager, often helping to find writers and photographers,'' said
Donald Cutler of the Sterling Lord Agency, who represents WNET in New York and
WQED in Pittsburgh.

Often stations derive more than one book from a series, as WTTW has done with
the Frugal Gourmet and as WGBH has done with ''Nova'' and ''Crockett's Victory
Garden,'' a series for which Houghton Mifflin recently won an auction for a
children's book.

The reason for all this recent activity, obviously, is that the marriage of
television and books can be very profitable. In addition to the examples cited,
other notable successes include Kenneth Clark's ''Civilisation,'' Alistair
Cook's ''America,'' Jacob Bronowski's ''Ascent of Man,'' David Attenborough's
''Life on Earth,'' Carl Sagan's ''Cosmos,'' Milton and Rose Friedman's ''Free to
Choose'' and Stanley Karnow's ''Vietnam.'' The last series resulted in
hard-cover and paperback best sellers, even though Mr. Karnow broke the
unwritten rule that for a book to become a major success, the author or host
must narrate or appear prominently on camera.

That rule, however, applied only to previously unpublished books. When Evelyn
Waugh's ''Brideshead Revisited'' was shown during 11 weeks in 1982, years after
the book's publication and 16 years after the author's death, the reissued book
became a No. 1 best seller. ''I, Claudius'' and ''Anna Karenina'' also became
best sellers after adaptation on public television.

Rewards and Risks

The size of the advance for television-inspired books is determined by the
number of hours the series will run, the number of episodes, at what time and
whether the series will run on stations in such ''good book'' cities as New
York, Boston, Chicago and San Francisco.

For books in the public domain, published by one or more houses, agents for the
television station try to interest one publisher in a tie-in arrangement - in
return for a royalty of 1 or 2 percent - giving that house the exclusive right
to carry a credit line on its books and use the same poster art as the
television series. ''Silas Marner,'' a book in the public domain, is scheduled
for public television in March. But a tie-in possibility is considered unlikely
because it will be only a single broadcast rather than the three or four that
publishers consider the desirable minimum number.

''There are rewards as well as immense satisfaction involved in this kind of
publishing,'' said Mr. Phillips, ''but there are also risks.''

The biggest risks are that money for the series may not materialize or that the
series may not work out for other reasons.

Some years ago, Little, Brown contracted with Martin Marty, the church
historian, to write a companion volume for a series on the history of religion
in America. The book, ''Pilgrims in Their Own Land,'' received good reviews, but
the series was never made - with the result that sales were respectable but not
strong. Similarly, Little, Brown published Robert Lacey's ''Aristocrats'' in
conjunction with an existing six-hour BBC series. But when money could not be
found to pay for presenting it on American public television, the series ended
up on cable television for a much smaller audience.

'Is It Fully Funded?'

''We foolishly assumed the series would be a natural, but instead we went down
the tubes on the book,'' Mr. Phillips said. These days, he noted, the first
question a publisher asks, when offered a television project, is, ''Is it fully
funded?''

Ironically, the matter of money provoked a controversy over the television
production of ''The Africans.'' Lynne Cheney, chairman of the National Endowment
for the Humanities, which put more than $600,000 into the series, criticized it
as an ''anti-Western diatribe.'' Officials at the Public Broadcasting Service
defended the series on the ground that it reflected the interpretation of
Professor Mazrui, an African scholar who teaches at the University of Michigan.

The book closely parallels the television production. ''Textually it's basically
the same, although bigger,'' said Charles Hobson, the executive producer of the
television series and a senior vice president of WETA. ''Because 'The Africans'
is a telecourse in about 125 colleges, it was important that the chapters in the
book generally follow the programs.''

Little, Brown paid an unspecified advance for the book, which was split between
WETA and Professor Mazrui. If the book earns more than its advance, 50 percent
of subsequent royalties will go to the author, the other 50 percent will be
split among WETA, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and PBS. If the book
fails to earn back its advance, however, Little, Brown will bear the loss.

Unlike the television series, the book seems to have escaped public controversy
- no doubt because no Government money was involved. ''As far as I know,'' Mr.
Phillips said, ''no corporation or foundation underwrites the books that go with
any of the television series. In fact, if the advance is substantial enough,
some public stations use part of that money to help make the TV series.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS;
BUSH PLANS TO END HIS SILENCE ON IRAN

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1137 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


Vice President Bush, who has been all but invisible to the public since the
crisis over arm shipments to Iran erupted, intends to make a public statement on
the situation soon, perhaps next week, according to friends and associates.

''He is not trying to distance himself from the President,'' one friend said
today. ''It would be a very serious error to avoid comment altogether, but it is
only prudent to wait for a bit while the situation resolves itself. Whatever he
says will not only attract a lot of attention now, it will be remembered all
through 1988.''

Mr. Bush's behavior has been closely watched because he formerly headed the
Central Intelligence Agency, which played a role in the arms shipments; because
he and a member of his staff have links to the rebels in Nicaragua, who received
part of the proceeds of the arms sales, and because he is the leading candidate
for the Republican presidential nomination in 1988.

Mr. Bush has said nothing publicly and has made no public appearances since the
Iran affair became a dominant issue in Washington 10 days ago. But his friends
dismiss any idea that he has been hiding as part of a strategy to insulate
himself from the damage the controversy has caused the Administration.

In fact, several Bush supporters said, he had been meeting every day with Mr.
Reagan to discuss the crisis until he left the capital Wednesday to spend the
long Thanksgiving weekend with his family in Kennebunkport, Me. At those
meetings and in telephone conversations, an aide said, the Vice President
offered detailed advice to Mr. Reagan.

''His role has in fact been larger than it might have been,'' the aide added,
''because he is one of the few people close to the President who is in a
position to give a detached opinion.''

Bush's Role vs. Regan's

The aide suggested that Donald T. Regan, the White House chief of staff, was
concerned about his own future and that Mr. Bush was playing an advisory role
that Mr. Regan might otherwise play.

The Vice President's political advisers are divided on the impact that the
crisis has had on his chances in 1988. One group, said to include Lee Atwater,
who will serve as a senior adviser in the campaign, believes that the
controversy has seriously tarnished the Reagan Presidency and thus Mr. Bush,
because his association with Mr. Reagan has heretofore been one of Mr. Bush's
strengths.

Others never believed that the Vice President could run as Mr. Reagan's
political heir; they have always thought he would stand or fall on his ability
to convince voters that he was the most able candidate. So they see the damage
to date as minor.

His Conduct Is Criticial

''Presuming that nothing emerges linking him to any wrongdoing, as we all
presume,'' one aide said, ''then the key thing for the Vice President, perhaps
the single most important thing in his whole 1988 effort, will be how he
conducts himself in the next few months as the Iran controversy unfolds.

''His behavior on all of this will either convince the public of his character
and probity, or it won't. Either way, people will remember.''

Marlin Fitzwater, Mr. Bush's press secretary, argued that historically, vice
presidents have not been hurt by incidents like the Iran arms deal. He said
Richard M. Nixon's career survived the U-2 fiasco in the Eisenhower
Administration and Lyndon B. Johnson overcame the Bay of Pigs disaster in the
Kennedy Administration.

But Hubert H. Humphrey's 1968 Presidential campaign was crippled by the Johnson
Administration's inability to extricate itself from the morass in Vietnam, and
Walter F. Mondale suffered severely in his 1984 campaign from the inability of
the Carter Administration to resolve the Iran hostage crisis.

Some Republican politicians believe that James A. Baker 3d, the Treasury
Secretary, may hold one key to Mr. Bush's future. Mr. Baker is expected to serve
as the Vice President's campaign manager, and many senior Republicans hope Mr.
Reagan will bring him back to the White House to replace Mr. Regan. In that
post, he would be in a position not only to limit the damage to the President
but also, in the process, to shore up Mr. Bush.

No Word on Bush's Role

The Vice President's aides insist that he had nothing to do with the diversion
of profits from the arms sale to Iran, but they are unwilling to spell out his
role in the arms sale itself. It is still not known, for example, whether, in
the early discussions of the project, he supported it.

When he does speak out, political analysts say, Mr. Bush will find himself in a
very difficult position. He has made much of his loyalty to Mr. Reagan, often
supporting the President publicly even when he had private doubts about certain
issues. He will not want to undermine that record now, but he and his advisers
know that there will probably be many more revelations about the arms sales.

''It's hard to know just what to do,'' one friend commented, ''when you don't
really know what's in Ollie's safe'' - a reference to Lieut. Col. Oliver L.
North, a White House aide who was dismissed this week for his still-emerging
role in the affair.

While he remains silent, the Vice President is subject to endless speculation.
Several defendants on trial in Federal court in New York on charges of selling
arms to Iran have said they believed their operations were going to be approved
by the Vice President's office.

It has also been reported that Donald P. Gregg, his national security adviser,
recommended a Cuban-American named Max Gomez to the Salvadoran Air Force as a
counterinsurgency expert.

Mr. Gomez has met at least twice with Mr. Bush in the last year and is now
directing supply operations to the Nicaraguan rebels from an air base in El
Salvador. Mr. Bush calls Mr. Gomez ''a patriot.''

Mr. Gregg declined to return telephone calls seeking comment.

Son Is Also Active

In addition, Mr. Bush's son Jeb, 33 years old, who heads the Republican
organization in Dade County, Florida, has admitted to being involved in sending
supplies to the Nicaraguan rebels. The younger Bush says he has raised money in
the Miami area for ''non-lethal'' aid.

Finally, there have been some suggestions, never confirmed, that the Vice
President's trip to Saudi Arabia last April, at a time when the arms deal with
Iran was getting under way, may have somehow been connected with it. The Saudis
are reported to be one source of money used to keep the Nicaraguan rebels
supplied.

In one way, all of these circumstances help Mr. Bush: They show his commitment
to the Central American cause that is dear to the hearts of the conservative
voters he has been wooing. But in another, aides concede, they are dangerous: If
they led people to believe he had been involved in something illegal, they could
ruin his political career.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BRITONS FETE FULBRIGHT AND HIS PROGRAM

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Nov. 29


Forty years after starting an international program that spawned 156,000
exchange students, J. William Fulbright has hardly returned here to play the
cock-eyed optimist.

Not only is the former United States Senator from Arkansas accusing the Russians
of being brutal and the Americans of being paranoid, but he is also reminding
the British that they once burned the White House.

Much of that was uttered in gentle preamble as the former Senator arrived
Tuesday to be honored for the exchange program that bears his name.

It is the name of a rural Southern boy who became a man of the world by way of a
scholarship stay at Oxford University, a man who, at the age of 81, still
wrestles with the problem of how to make people wary of their own national
prejudices.

''I don't know how to impress people,'' he said, ruing that the process of
education rarely gets the attention that people pay to less important things.
''These words, 'mutual understanding,' seem so syrupy and so fussy.''

'Disarray in Our Government'

Mr. Fulbright arrived with the same amiable tone and Southern grace that made
his liberal critiques as the controversial chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee more difficult for President Johnson to accept during the
Vietnam War.

As he faced questions about more immediate and seemingly critical issues than
his exchange program, he first offered a rhetorical no comment: ''I don't think
it's proper to comment on the disarray in our Government.''

But the practitioner 12 years gone from politics was soon indulging a lifelong
habit of relating history to current events and wishing that more people,
especially Americans, might try the same.

''If they reason based upon the knowledge of a history and culture of a country
like Russia, I don't think they arrive at the conclusion Mr. Reagan has arrived
at,'' Mr. Fulbright said.

''You know, the focus of evil, the evil empire beyond the pale. An exchange
program is designed to overcome that kind of inherent cultural prejudice. We all
grew up with prejudices; we got them in our baby's crib.''

Program Is Going Strong

With the Fulbright program going stronger than ever, aiding 10,000 students each
year with support from 27 countries, its originator is taking care to recall its
basics.

''The program, you know, is based on the assumption that human beings are
capable of reason,'' he said, quickly conceding, ''Not that they always use it,
but they're capable of it, and let's try and get them to use it.''

''The cost of this program from the beginning would not amount to one-third the
cost of a submarine,'' he continued, noting that some people think it is a
foreign aid program when it is actually a matter of ''enlightened
self-interest.''

''It's not the intention to make all the world American. It's to give Americans
primarily an understanding of the rest of the world so that they can bring some
wisdom to America about how the world operates.''

'The Current Distrust'

Time and again apologizing that he was not saying the sensational things that
would bring greater attention to the program, Mr. Fulbright said he had no
illusions that it was ''a solution and panacea to all the ills of the world,''
but rather one device to change attitudes in antagonistic countries.

''There's no hope really to make any progress in arms control as long as you
have the current distrust that afflicts both the Russians and ourselves. Even
Mr. Reagan has noticed this.''

In looking back across 40 years, the former Senator said: ''Much more progress
has been made abroad than has been made at home. But I think that's to a great
extent because we're such a big country, we have been so far from the sources of
trouble.''

'The Trouble About Americans'

''The thing about America is it hasn't been subjected to bombing raids like
England,'' he said. ''Nothing like happened to Germany or the occupation by
hostile forces in nearly all other countries. It's happened time and again with
the Russians. These people are serious about war.

''The great trouble about Americans is they haven't been occupied by a hostile
army, and I don't think we are really serious, really serious about this
problem. They talk a lot about it, but they're not willing to do anything about
it. That's why the exchange program is so important.''

He recalled proposing the program ''just 30 days after we dropped the bombs on
Japan.''

''The immediate impulse was, 'My goodness, we musn't let this happen again.' So
what do you do about it?''

Mr. Fulbright, who was honored at a dinner Wednesday night, added: ''You know
it's a long shot. I don't know the exchange program can do anything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of J. William Fulbright (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS: PROFILE OF THE COLONEL;
FRIENDS SAY OLIVER NORTH IS TAKING IT LIKE A SOLDIER

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 957 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


Oliver L. North, the Marine lieutenant colonel at the center of the crisis
involving arms sales and aid to the Nicaraguan insurgents, was described by
friends this week as being prepared to take the blame like a mixture of martyr
and good soldier.

One acquaintance said Colonel North had reacted to suggestions that he might be
a scapegoat for those higher up by saying he was a soldier and equating his
situation to that of a field commander expected to take all the risks necessary
to achieve an objective.

He was also reported by acquaintances to feel he had done nothing wrong during
his five and a half years on the National Security Council staff, including the
operation revealed by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d to divert profits from
sales of weapons to Iran to a Swiss bank account for use by anti-Sandinista
rebels.

Colonel North, talking about his situation on Thanksgiving Day, declined to
comment directly on whether he was protecting other people, but he appeared
relaxed and confident and insisted he did not feel at all distressed.

In the midst of the conversation at his home in the wooded hills of northern
Virginia, a neighbor's horse came galloping down the road, riderless. The
colonel ran out into the road, blocked the animal's path and guided it into his
own yard, where his children calmed it.

No Plans to Retire Early

Colonel North, 43 years old, said he did not intend to seek disability
retirement from the Marine Corps for his Vietnam War wounds but would serve the
year and a half remaining to him before normal retirement, while also being
available for the various investigations of his White House role.

''Then I intend to find a job and make a lot of money, to send four kids to
college,'' he said as he hugged the 10-year-old daughter he called ''my
sunshine.''

One friend, recalling reports of animosity or jealousy within the armed services
about the Colonel's White House influence, said Colonel North had effectively
sacrificed whatever future he may have had in the Marine Corps ''because he
believed in the President.''

Friends said that although many of them were near tears when they heard
President Reagan's announcement Tuesday that Colonel North had been dismissed
from the National Security Council staff he himself had seemed to take it almost
stoically, or like ''a typical tough marine.''

Outpouring of Support

In the succeeding days, they said, his peace of mind seemed to grow, in part
because of the outpouring of support and sympathy he had received, including
assurances from foundations and wealthy individuals that his legal expenses
would be taken care of.

They said he was also heartened by a telephone call of gratitude from Mr.
Reagan, who, according to one acquaintance, began the conversation by suggesting
that the revelations of recent days would make a great movie.

The working style and habits described by people who have seen the colonel at
close range for the last few years do, indeed, seem to be destined for book or
screen, although he insisted, in an interview last year, that he would never
consider being part of such an undertaking.

For one thing, the sources point out, whenever Colonel North was not engaged in
affairs of state, he was totally absorbed with his wife, Betsy, and their
children, his religious faith and the concerns of the two-acre homestead with
its three horses and three dogs. It is he who takes the children to Roman
Catholic mass on Sundays, they said.

Rustic Country Style

Although the colonel was known for keeping hours until midnight and later in the
Old Executive Office Building next to the White House, the friend said that on
Sundays in Virginia he adapted a rustic country style. He drinks bourbon or
beer, loves cigars and keeps a tin of snuff in the top of his sock, the friend
said.

Those close to him described him as highly intelligent and articulate, a
cheerful workaholic who produces when others delegate, the man who had the
''broadest brief on the N.S.C.,'' and as a spinner of global fantasies that
would have made the Iran-contra connection seem entirely plausible.

He was described as someone who gets passionately involved in causes that
interest him, including the Middle East hostages and, particularly, the
Nicaraguan rebels. Similarly, the sources said, he arouses strong ties of
friendship and loyalty from friends and colleagues.

Various people in the Administration who form and carry out Central American
policy, some who had daily or even hourly contact with Colonel North, said they
had been completely taken by surprise on hearing of the Iran-Nicaragua
connection.

''One of the nicest things Ollie did for his friends was not to tell us about
that,'' one of them said.

'A Brilliant Gambit'

A White House official closely involved in Central American policy said that
''people who ask how a lieutenant colonel could have come up with such a thing
don't know Oliver L. North.''

While saying that his first reaction to the announcement was that ''someone was
pulling my leg,'' the official said his next reaction was that it was a
''hilarious idea, getting the Ayatollah to pay for the contras.''

He added that his guess was that ''Ollie saw a very elegant way to solve both
problems.''

''It was the kind of thing that would appeal to him, a brilliant gambit,'' he
said.

While saying he wished Colonel North had not turned to Iran, the official said
the colonel was motivated by his strong commitment to the Nicaraguan rebels,
whom he saw as dying and suffering while Congress was delaying its expected
decision to aid them.

''People were dying and that really pained him,'' said the source, adding that
''anything he did was motivated by that concern.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRIAL TO HEAR FATAL FILM BLAST'S 'TRIGGER MAN'

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 34, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 529 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 29


A special effects technician is expected to provide key testimony Monday in the
trial of five men for involuntary manslaughter in the filming of ''Twilight
Zone: The Movie.''

James Camomile, the technician, set off the explosions that caused a helicopter
to crash on a mock Vietnamese village in the filming four years ago, killing the
actor Vic Morrow, 53 years old, and two children, Myca Dinh Le, 7, and Renee
Shinn Chen, 6.

Mr. Camomile has granted immunity by the prosecution in Los Angeles Superior
Court in exchange for testimony against the defendants, John Landis, the movie's
director; George Folsey Jr., the associate producer; Dan Allingham, the unit
production manager; Paul Stewart, the special effects coordinator, and Dorcey
Wingo, the helicopter pilot.

The Scene's 'Trigger Man'

Defense attorneys have described Mr. Camomile as the ''trigger man'' in the July
23, 1982, filming in which the helicopter, disabled by blasts, crashed on top of
Mr. Morrow and the children in a Vietnam War scene.

The lawyers said that it was Mr. Camomile's responsibility to make sure the
helicopter was safely away from his position before he set off the blasts and
that he did not look overhead because he was wearing a welder's hood.

Deputy District Attorney Lea Purwin D'Agostino said in court Thursday that Mr.
Camomile would testify that he would not have ''pushed the button'' if Mr.
Landis had told him the helicopter would be flying low and over the explosive
device the technician controlled.

Mrs. D'Agostino said Mr. Camomile would also contradict evidence by defense
attorneys that the helicopter was positioned away from the special effects
explosives by Mr. Landis before the fatal scene.

Earlier Hint of Trouble Ahead

According to testimony so far in the 13-week trial, three hours before the crash
the aircraft encountered excessive heat and turbulence from a special effects
blast in another scene.

Mrs. D'Agostino said that should have put the filmmakers ''on notice.''

The defense says the helicopter was moved away from the explosives in a
rehearsal about 20 minutes before the disaster on location at Indian Dunes
Motorcycle Park, about 40 miles north of Los Angeles.

Mrs. D'Agostino said Mr. Camomile was expected to testify that the helicopter
was not in that position in the flight that crashed.

Stunt Man Recalls Crash

In testimony this week, Kenny Endoso, a stunt man who was in the helicopter,
told of the crash. ''The explosions went off, and I felt the helicopter lifting
and I remember hearing somebody say, 'Oh, ----,' and I said to myself, 'We're
going in,''' Mr. Endoso said.

He said he was operating a special effects machine gun when an explosion
''created some heat on the right side of the helicopter.''

When the aircraft landed that time, Mr. Endoso testified, he told his superior,
Gary McLarty, a stunt coordinator, ''We can't be that low with the helicopter or
the explosions are going to have to be smaller.''

It has been agreed that the helicopter was at an altitude of 24 feet in the
fatal scene. Trial witnesses have said the explosions in that scene were at
least as strong as the earlier ones.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OUR UNEMPLOYMENT QUANDARY

BYLINE: By JAMES C. CONDON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 882 words


They're closing down the textile mill across the railroad tracks Foreman said
these jobs are going boys and they ain't coming back. - Bruce Springsteen THOSE
lyrics, from a song written in 1983, might just as easily have referred to a
steel mill or an automobile assembly line or a chemical plant. As the United
States economy endured the wrenching recession of 1981-82 that wrung inflation
from the system, the jobless rate surged to 10.7 percent, the highest level
since the Great Depression, when a quarter of the work force was idled.

Since the end of 1982, the unemployment rate has declined to around 7 percent.
But the recovery is now four years old: in the 1975-80 expansion, the
unemployment rate fell steadily to below 6 percent. This time, the rate has been
stalled stubbornly for a year.

Perhaps an even more troubling picture that emerges from a graph of the United
States unemployment rate plotted back to 1890 is that the trend line is rising.
The wild swings that characterized the early part of the century are gone, but
the drift since the 1950's is clearly upward.

Most economists point out that the experience of Western Europe is even worse.
Even West Germany, the economic powerhouse of Europe, has an unemployment rate
higher than that of the United States. Britain, which had three percent
unemployment in the 1970's, cannot seem to get its rate below 12 percent today.

Japan's unemployment rate looks lower, but part of that difference is due to
peciliarities in the way Japan counts its unemployed. And recently, even Japan's
rate has begun to creep steadily upward.

''We are now the crack labor market,'' says Orley Ashenfelter, a labor economist
at Princeton University. ''Everyone now turns to the United States to find out
how to manage a labor market. That's a real reversal from the '60's and most of
the '70's when we envied Europe's low unemployment rates.''

Still, it is difficult to take comfort in the greater misfortune of workers in
Western Europe's economies. And the raw number of unemployed in the United
States masks some distressing situations.

For example, nearly 15 percent of the unemployed have been without work for more
than six months, double the rate in 1973 when the economy was at the peak of its
Vietnam war expansion. In addition, people who have lost jobs are still
squeezing the new entrants - people returning to the labor force and young
people seeking first jobs - out of the market.

Another legacy of the 1982 recession appears to be a doubling of the ranks of
workers so discouraged about job prospects that they have ceased looking for
work and have dropped out of the labor market all together. WHY does American
unemployment seem to be stuck at what used to be an unacceptable level? ''There
are plenty of things to point a finger at,'' says Marvin H. Kosters an economist
with the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, ''but there just is no
good way of explaining the rise.''

Unemployment insurance, purportedly a seductive cushion for some unemployed, is
blamed for part of the higher rate of joblessness. Rising participation in the
labor force by women and young people surely is part of the reason. In the last
five years it seems an inesacapable conclusion that some American jobs -
especially in manufacturing - have left these shores permanently as the strong
dollar allowed foreign companies to win a larger share of the United States
market.

Structural changes in the economy, which made it difficult to match jobs and
workers, also may have contributed. And many experts say that the nation is now
more willing to use macroeconomic policies to control inflation rather than
reduce unemployment.

It was widely supposed in the late 1970's that the Phillips curve, which plots
on a graph the trade-off between inflation and unemployment, had been
discredited. Looking at the United States' experience over two and a half
decades, it is easy to see why. During the 1960's the theory seemed to work:
when unemployment fell, inflation rose, though not by much.

Then the relationship seemed to fall apart: In the late 1960's and 1970's, the
economy, overheated by the Vietnam War and rising social spending, experienced
its first postwar bout of accelerating, not simply higher, inflation. The oil-
and food-price shocks of 1973-74, and the severe oil-price increase in 1978-79
only made matters worse. The Phillips curve began to crawl in all sorts of
directions.

The recessions of the early 1980's seem to have restored some validity to the
curve -inflation has been cut to 2 percent and continues there at the price of a
substantial unemployment. Thus policy now seems bound by a familiar constraint:
Is it worth risking an increase in the inflation rate to push the unemployment
rate lower?

Or, as some economists predict, will the demographic changes that contributed to
the problem ultimately provide part of the solution. As women's participation in
the labor-force more closely matches the over-all rate in the United States,
their participation rate should climb more slowly. That slowdown should ease
unemployment as fewer new workers try to find jobs. And, by the turn of the
century, the first of the baby boomers will be preparing for retirement, not for
entry into the work force.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs of the U.S. Jobless RAte from 1890 to 1990, average annual
unemployment rate, unemployed for different business cycles, unemployment by
reason for unemployment and people who have dropped out of the labor foce and
are not looking for work (Bureaue of Labor Statistics)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DELIVERING THE SOUTH

BYLINE: BY R.W. APPLE JR.; R.W. Apple Jr. is chief Washington correspondent of
The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3841 words


FEW THINGS ARE CERTAIN about the 1988 electoral campaign, just a few weeks after
that of 1986 came to a close, but this much we know for sure: the South will be
one of the principal cockpits - quite possibly the principal cockpit - in which
the Republicans and Democrats will struggle for dominance at the start of the
post-Reagan era in American politics.

Richer, less obsessed with race, more urban and less plagued with the political
''clowns or knaves'' whom V. O. Key Jr. denounced in 1950, the South has already
helped to shift the nation toward its own conservative attitudes. Republican and
Democratic Presidential hopefuls know that, and most of them can be expected, in
the months to come, to espouse programs designed to appeal to the region's
patriotism, its fiscal conservatism and its dynamism.

In 1988, Presidential hopefuls in both parties will face a primary election in
eight Southern states on March 8, early enough, perhaps, to have a major impact
on the nominating conventions. And the standard-bearers chosen at the
conventions will find themselves competing furiously in the fall for the
region's trove of 138 electoral votes. If the Democrats cannot somehow manage to
capture a healthy share of those votes, professionals in both parties agree,
they will find it difficult to compete nationally. So the coming battle for the
South will, in a sense, constitute a battle for the entire country.

A rich cast of Southern characters - not as flamboyant, to be sure, as Ma
Ferguson and Cotton Ed Smith and Theodore G. (The Man) Bilbo, but far more
accomplished - will play vital roles in the struggle to come, some as potential
candidates, others as money men and tacticians.

They include Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, the former radio announcer
whose Congressional Club will once again raise millions for Republican
conservatives; John Lewis, the quiet-spoken organizer who led the Student
Non-Violent Coordinating Committee in the 1960's, and who will now play an
important part, as Atlanta's man in the House of Representatives, in mobilizing
the black voters indispensable to Democratic chances in the region; Bob Graham
of Florida and Terry Sanford of North Carolina, two new Democratic Senators, one
50 years old, the other 69, each representative, in his way, of the ''New
South'' that has been aborning since Henry Grady, the great Atlanta editor,
coined the phrase in the 1880's.

The list continues with Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, the perfect model of the
modern, technocratic, nonracist legislator, whom many consider a strong
possibility for the Democratic Vice-Presidential (or even Presidential)
nomination in '88; the Rev. Jesse Jackson, like Mr. Lewis a veteran of the
civil-rights revolution, who will almost certainly seek the Democratic
Presidential nomination, will probably fail to get it, and will then be in a
position to bargain with party leaders for his support, especially in the South,
and the Rev. Pat Robertson, Virginia evangelist, son of a senator, and a
probable contender for the Republican Presidential nomination.

For decades, every Democratic nominee could begin his campaign with confidence
that he would carry the 11 states that made up the Confederacy. But in four of
the last five Presidential elections, the Republicans have clobbered the
Democrats in the South, and for 14 of the last 18 years, the Republicans have
held the White House - in no small part because of the fundamental shift
represented by the Democrats' loss of their traditional base. Since 1964, the
only Democrat to succeed in the region has been Jimmy Carter, and he only in
1976. In 1968, Hubert H. Humphrey carried only Texas; in 1972, George McGovern
was shut out, and in 1980, Mr. Carter carried only his native Georgia. In 1984,
Walter F. Mondale was shut out, with Mr. Reagan pulling 60 percent of the vote
or more in 10 of the 11 Southern states, falling short, with 58 percent, only in
Tennessee.

Unfortunately, from the Democrats' point of view, their decline in the South has
coincided with explosive population growth in the region. The 11 Southern states
now cast almost a quarter of the total electoral votes, so it is not surprising
that the Democrats made an all-out effort in the region in this month's
elections, hoping that they could begin to lay the groundwork for a comeback in
1988.

It is not clear that they succeeded. It is clear that the South is changing,
that the change in some ways benefits the Democrats, that the partisan
realignment for which President Reagan has worked so hard has not taken place.
But in the South, Presidential politics is different from all other politics;
off-year elections are an even more unreliable guide to the future there than
elsewhere. Contrary to what some strategists and analysts have been saying in
recent days, the Democrats still face a struggle south of the Mason-Dixon line
in 1988. EUGENE PATTERSON, CHAIR-man of the board of the St. Petersburg Times,
says this year's results demonstrate that ''the South has become a no-party
region, not a one-party region.'' Lee Atwater, a leading Republican campaign
consultant who comes from South Carolina, puts the same notion in different
words: ''Reagan hoped for realignment, but what he got instead was
dealignment.'' And Senator James R. Sasser, Democrat of Tennessee, says the
returns showed that ''there's been no Republican takeover in the South, and
there isn't ever going to be one.''

What, exactly, happened this year? The Democrats attracted most of the headlines
by ousting four incumbent Republican senators. In North Carolina, Mr. Sanford,
the indomitable former Governor and former president of Duke University, beat
James T. Broyhill, who had been in office for only a few months, having
succeeded the late John P. East, who committed suicide. In Florida, after a
campaign dominated by a contest to see who could talk toughest on drugs, Gov.
Bob Graham defeated Paula Hawkins. In Georgia, Representative Wyche Fowler Jr.,
who had represented a majority black district in Atlanta for nine years, beat
Mack Mattingly, one of the surprise winners of six years ago. And in Alabama,
Representative Richard C. Shelby, a conservative from Tuscaloosa, defeated
Jeremiah Denton, a former Vietnam prisoner of war.

In addition, Representative John B. Breaux of Louisiana upset his Republican
rival, Representative W. Henson Moore, who had been favored to succeed to the
seat of retiring Democratic Senator Russell B. Long. Not a single Southern
Republican was able to win a Senate contest.

An impressive showing it was for the Democrats, who now hold 16 of the 22
Southern seats in the Senate. Even more impressive, one might say, when combined
with other results: in the same 11 states, the Democrats scored a net gain of
four House seats, and now hold 77 to the Republicans' 39, and they maintained
their dominance of state legislatures, with control of both houses by margins of
2-to-1 or better in the majority of states.

Far less attention than warranted has been paid to Republican victories in
gubernatorial contests, which, from the point of view of party-building and
potential, may have been more important than the Democratic senatorial gains.
True, Bob Martinez won in Florida and Guy Hunt won in Alabama largely because of
bitter splits within the Democratic ranks, and William Clements won in Texas
because of the crisis in the oil industry - a local phenomenon with scant
regional significance. But they won, and they will be able to use their
patronage power and their access to the media on behalf of their party in the
future. The Republicans now control the governorships in all three of the
fast-growing states that they consider the foundations of their Sun Belt
strategy: Florida, Texas and California. THE PERPLEXING CROSSCUR-rents now at
work in Southern politics can be seen most vividly in the results in South
Carolina. A Republican, Representative Carroll A. Campbell Jr., was elected
Governor, but with a Democratic Lieutenant Governor. (One usually Republican
House seat - Mr. Campbell's - was taken by the Democrats.) Likewise, North
Carolina now finds itself represented by a pair of Senators at the opposite ends
of the ideological spectrum in Terry Sanford and Jesse Helms.

Mr. Sanford's victory was a stun-ner. He had been humiliated in 1972, when,
seeking the Democratic Presidential nomination, he had failed to carry even
North Carolina. The experts considered him too old and too out of date, and he
was running in a state that only two years ago re-elected Mr. Helms, perhaps the
most vociferously right-wing member of the Senate, after a savage campaign
against James Hunt, then the Governor. But Mr. Fowler's triumph in Georgia was
equally surprising. The conventional political wisdom in the state said he was
too liberal, too urban and too identified with blacks to pull it off. In a
sense, both victories constituted a vindication of the New South of the early
1960's, which was cut short by the Republican surge starting in 1968. As
Governor during the Kennedy era, Mr. Sanford became a symbol of Southern
progressivism, and Mr. Fowler served then as administrative assistant to
Representative Charles L. Weltner, one of only two Southerners to vote for the
Civil Rights Act of 1964.

Robert Squier, perhaps the most successful of Democratic campaign consultants,
worked for Mr. Sanford, Mr. Shelby and Mr. Graham this year, and he considers
their victories a sign that the South is becoming ''more like the rest of the
nation, with fewer and fewer people feeling any real allegiance to party.'' In
that situation, he believes, few ideologues win, especially at the state level
and below. His candidates prevailed, Mr. Squier said, because there were no
national issues this year.

''If we had allowed a national issue to emerge, with Ronald Reagan out there,
we'd have been dead,'' he said. But, Mr. Squier added, in a Presidential
campaign, it is always much harder to run on personality than on issues. For
that reason, he asserted, the Democrats have a chance in 1988 in the South - and
perhaps in the country as a whole - ''only if we can manage to find a candidate
who doesn't spend all his time looking down at his feet to make sure he's
standing in exactly the right spot on the ideological spectrum.'' Most
Democratic candidates would like to fulfill Mr. Squier's prescription, of
course, but none is certain yet just how to do so.

By encouraging the moderate and conservative wings of the party in the South,
national Democrats have shown an awareness of what is needed for victory in that
region. As Roger Stone, a Republican consultant, said not long ago, ''When the
choice is between a liberal Democrat and a conservative Republican, we win; but
when the choice is between a country-club Republican and a more acceptable
Democrat, we have a much tougher race.''

Mr. Patterson of the St. Petersburg Times agrees, arguing that ''only Democrats
who are agile enough to avoid being branded liberals'' have a chance in the
South. (In Florida this year, he says, Mr. Graham was such a man, while the
party's gubernatorial nominee, Steve Pajcic, was not). In fact, unless the
Democrats can redefine the playing field of national politics in a hurry -
undoing much of what Mr. Reagan has done to frame the issues, which seems
unlikely - they may find that the kind of candidate and platform the South wants
is also the party's best chance in most other states. The rest of the country is
becoming more like the South.

In the hope of nominating such a candidate in 1988, Democrats in a number of
Southern states plan to stage their Presidential primaries on the same date.
They are being joined by Republicans, and the result, it is hoped, will be to
give the region a greater say in the nomination process at a potentially
decisive early stage.

Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, Tennessee and
Texas will all vote on March 8, and Arkansas and South Carolina may hold their
caucuses on March 12. (Continued on Page 42) (Independently, nine other states -
including Massachusetts and Hawaii - have scheduled primaries or caucuses in one
or both parties for March 8.) Only the Iowa caucus on Feb. 15, and the primaries
in New Hampshire (Feb. 16), South Dakota (Feb. 23) and Vermont (March 1), are
scheduled to take place earlier.

But quite a few tacticians worry that the South will have no greater impact on
the nominating process in 1988 than it has had in the recent past, which is to
say, not very much. One problem, according to Thomas F. Ellis, a Raleigh, N.C.,
lawyer who is a key strategist for Mr. Helms, is that the winners in Iowa and
New Hampshire, both Republicans and Democrats, will be the beneficiaries of so
much publicity that it will be difficult for candidates who might appeal to more
conservative Southerners to make themselves heard in the region. Any candidate
who thinks he can run poorly in Iowa and New Hampshire, then do well in states
like North Carolina, is ''deluding himself,'' Mr. Ellis said, ''because people
here watch television, too.'' He said he was worried that Vice President Bush
would win in Iowa and New Hampshire and that it would be impossible to ''raise
enough money to fight that winner's image here, even though he has no real
following in the state.''

Thomas E. Donilon, a veteran Democratic strategist, agrees that Iowa and New
Hampshire will be more, not less, important in 1988 than in the past, as a
result of the South's early March primaries. The ''free media'' given the first
two or three finishers in those two states, he said, ''will dominate the process
right through to the day of the Southern primaries,'' not least because it will
be impossible for any candidate to afford the cost of out-shouting the ''free
media'' with television advertising. ''You're talking about buying media markets
from Baltimore to El Paso,'' said Mr. Donilon, who worked for Mr. Mondale in
1984 and will probably work for Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware in 1988.

Nonetheless, many Presidential hopefuls are expected to tailor their programs to
Southern specifications, if only because, as noted earlier, the views of the
South are echoed in many other parts of the country. Also, there will be more
resistance this time to a liberal Democratic nominee than at any time in recent
years - not only because of Mr. Reagan's successes but also because of the
Democratic resurgence in the South this month.

Most of the new senators will add moderate voices to the party leadership, and
Democratic control of the Senate almost certainly means Southern chairmen of
such important and agenda-setting committees as Appropriations (John C. Stennis
of Mississippi), Armed Services (Mr. Nunn, whose name seems to turn up
everywhere in talking about 1988), Budget (Lawton Chiles of Florida), Commerce
(Mr. Hollings) and Finance (Lloyd Bentsen of Texas). The prospective new Speaker
of the House, Representative Jim Wright of Texas, is much less liberal than his
predecessor, Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. of Massachusetts.

The effect of the first contests on the South could be crucial for relatively
little-known potential candidates such as Mr. Biden, Governor Cuomo of New York,
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, and Governor Bruce Babbitt of
Arizona, among the Democrats, and Representative Jack Kemp of New York and
former Governor Pierre S. du Pont 4th of Delaware, among the Republicans. Even
regional figures such as Mr. Robertson, Mr. Nunn and the former Governor Charles
S. Robb 3d of Virginia are probably not well known enough outside their own
states to withstand what one politician calls the ''bow-wave'' of favorable
publicity that will be generated by Iowa and New Hampshire.

So if any of the outsiders wants to do well in the South, he will have to invest
the time and money to give him a chance of making a respectable showing at the
outset, as Mr. Gephardt has already started doing in Iowa. The Missourian is
counting on finishing no worse than third in Iowa and no worse than second in
New Hampshire, then capitalizing in the South on those results, on his generally
moderate reputation and on the friends he has made in the region through his
work as a leader of the centrist Democratic Leadership Council.

There are no signs to date that Mr. Robb and Mr. Nunn have much appetite for
campaigning in Iowa and New Hampshire. Mr. Nunn, in particular, seems fully
preoccupied with what he is doing at the moment: a grandnephew of former
Representative Carl Vinson of Georgia, he has made himself, like Mr. Vinson,
Capitol Hill's leading defense-policy expert. (Mr. Babbitt, for one, sees Mr.
Nunn as a power-broker, not a candidate, in 1988, and has begun to make
overtures to the Senator).

One or the other may, of course, change his mind, but for now, both Mr. Robb and
Mr. Nunn seem most likely to affect the 1988 race as models of the kind of
politician who does well in the South, and as advisers to active candidates.
Some Democrats think that either would lend strength to the Democratic ticket in
the No. 2 spot, but most practiced politicians have strong reservations about
the degree to which a Vice-Presidential nominee can help a party win a tough
state or region.

Mr. Bush and former Senator Gary Hart of Colorado, the current Democratic
front-runner, could theoretically do poorly in the first two tests and then
stage a comeback in the South, because both have run before and enjoy national
recognition. But, in fact, neither is notably strong in the region, and it seems
improbable that they would stumble in more liberal areas and recover in a more
conservative one.

Much will depend on who votes in which primary on Super Tuesday. Eight of the
Southern states have ''open'' primaries, meaning that voters can choose to vote
in either the Republican or Democratic Presidential races. Mr. Atwater, the
Republican campaign consultant, said that, with party loyalties weaker than ever
in the South, ''we can make the Republican primary a conservative test and the
Democratic primary a liberal test, if we do our job right.'' He thinks that
would help Mr. Bush, for whom he will be working; it might also aid Mr. Kemp or
Mr. Robertson.

Another imponderable is the extent to which Mr. Helms, Mr. Robertson and others
will be able to mobilize the religious right in the primaries. The evangelical
ideologues did poorly this year, losing the seat of Representative Bill Cobey in
North Carolina and failing to elect James Butcher in Indiana, whose politics
share certain characteristics with politics in the South. Both were strongly
backed by fundamentalists. More moderate potential candidates such as Senator
Bob Dole of Kansas, the out-going majority leader, and Howard H. Baker Jr., the
former Senator and majority leader, might benefit if followers of right-wing
evangelists stay home, as many apparently did this year.

Still another variable is the candidacy of Mr. Jackson, which his close friends
consider inevitable. Depending on how many Democrats, and of which ideological
coloration, take part in Super Tuesday, Mr. Jackson might well be able to win.
With four or five rivals splitting the bulk of the white vote reasonably evenly,
the eloquent Baptist clergyman, with most of the black votes, might finish first
with as little as 20 percent to 25 percent of the total. That would provide an
ironic denouement to the Democratic Party's participation in Super Tuesday,
because Mr. Jackson is the kind of liberal they want to defeat.

Nor would Mr. Jackson get only black votes, if his strategy pays off. Roger
Wilkins, who has worked with him in past campaigns, said Jackson ''would not
cede Iowa and New Hampshire and would not expect . . . to come away unnoticed
from either state.'' With his credibility established, Mr. Wilkins said,
''people tell me that after Super Tuesday, Jackson will have more delegates than
any other candidate.''

''The South would probably slip back into the Democratic column if the Democrats
could find a good, middle-of-the-road candidate instead of the albatrosses
they've been nominating,'' said Claibourne Darden, a leading Southern
poll-taker. ''But that's going to be very difficult to do. Jesse Jackson could
really mess up the Democrats, the same way Pat Robertson could mess up the
Republicans. If I were the head of the Republican National Committee, I'd run
over with a suitcase full of dollars to try to persuade Jesse to come into Super
Tuesday.''

Whoever the Democratic nominee, he will face a difficult task. To win in the
South, the Democrats must get a big black turnout - hence the importance of
politicians like Representative John Lewis, Mr. Jackson and Mayor Andrew Young
of Atlanta. But they must also avoid alienating white voters, particularly white
males and most particularly white males in the suburbs. As Ferrel Guillory of
the News and Observer in Raleigh notes, the battleground today is in the
suburban and exurban complexes linked by freeway to the old downtown areas of
cities like Baton Rouge and Miami and Dallas. (Both Mr. Fowler and Mr. Mattingly
acknowledged this by locating their campaign headquarters on the outskirts of
Atlanta.) In 1984, according to a New York Times/CBS News exit poll, the
Democrats suffered heavily among white male Southerners, who voted Republican in
House races by a margin of 58 percent to 42 percent. White Southern women also
backed Republicans, but by a much smaller margin. This year, in one of the
party's major breakthroughs, both white male and white female Southerners voted
for Republicans for the House in about the same smaller ratio. But it was the
black vote (86 percent Democratic to 14 percent Republican) and the Hispanic
vote (75 percent Democratic to 25 Republican) that made possible the widespread
Democratic victories.

The Democrats got the balance right this time, helped by weak Republican
candidates in many races - many of them with shallow local roots - and moderate,
thoroughly established candidates of their own. It will be harder to do in a
Presidential year. Robert G. Beckel, who managed Mr. Mondale's campaign in 1984,
one that utterly failed to appeal to the disparate groups the Democrats need,
stated the problem in these rather blunt words to David S. Broder of the
Washington Post recently: ''This year, many of the young white males in the
South didn't vote, and that was a blessing for us. But they will be back in
1988, and we still have to fashion an economic argument for the South that says
to the blacks and the poor, 'We hear you, and we're going to help you,' and at
the same time says to those young whites who are working their way up, 'We're
not going to block you; we're not going to hold you down in order to help
someone else.' ''

Finding such a man, and such an argument, and convincing the national party to
nominate him and adopt it, will require all the political skills the South is
famous for, and a bit of luck, too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Sam Nunn in front of television cameras (Alon
Reininger/Contact); Photos of Dem. Bob Graham, Terry Sanford and John Lewis
(Gerald Davis/Contact; Alon Reininger/Contact; Jonathan Burnette); Photos of
Rev. Jesse Jackson, Jesse Helms, Rep. Pat Robertson (Jean Louis Atlan/Sygma;
Mark Reinstein/Click Chicago/Ben Weaver/Camera 5)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW YORKER UP FOR SAINTHOOD

BYLINE: BY EDWARD TIVNAN; Edward Tivnan has written and produced television
programs on Roman Catholicism. He is the author of the forthcoming book ''The
Lobby: Jewish Political Power and American Foreign Policy.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 46, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3791 words


FOR MORE THAN TWO years now, the letters have been trickling in at a rate of 15
to 20 a week. They report in touching detail about jobs found, problems solved,
illnesses overcome. A few correspondents relate stories of extraordinary cures.
A retired New York City policeman whose son's eyes were severely damaged in a
hockey accident writes that the boy's sight is now almost perfectly restored;
one of the boy's doctors called it ''unexplainable.'' Another man reports that,
although his grandson had battled ''terminal'' leukemia for eight years and
doctors at one point had given the boy only a few days to live, he is now living
the life of a normal teen-ager.

A woman dying of cancer of the intestines, lymph nodes and liver writes that
radiation, chemotherapy and four operations had failed to halt the disease, and
then, suddenly, a CAT scan, liver scan and sonogram all proved negative. ''I
felt this was miraculous,'' she declared. Like all the other correspondents,
some 2,000 of them, she attributes her success to her prayers and the
intercession of Terence Cardinal Cooke, the former Archbishop of New York, who
died of cancer in 1983.

''The cases are piling up,'' says the Rev. Benedict J. Groeschel, a
broad-shouldered, bearded Catholic priest who is also a Capuchin friar. ''But
it's up to the people. We are simply waiting.''

Waiting for a miracle - for at least three miracles, to be precise. The friar,
who wears the coarse woolen habit and sandals of a medieval mendicant monk, is
only one of the late Cardinal's many friends in the church who believe the man
they call Terry Cooke might be a saint. After Cooke's death, these friends began
to urge the archdiocese to initiate formal proceedings to give them the
opportunity to prove it. As a result, Cooke's successor, John Cardinal O'Connor,
appointed Father Groeschel in August 1984, to be ''postulator and promoter of
the cause of canonization of Terence Cardinal Cooke.'' Father Groeschel then
quickly asked another friend of Cooke's, Sister M. Aloysius McBride, a Carmelite
nun and retired head of one of the archdiocese's largest nursing homes, to help
him set up a Cardinal Cooke Guild to promote the Cardinal's canonization, to
pray for his help in people's lives and receive evidence of the effect he has
had - from beyond the grave - on the living. So far, about 10,000 other admirers
of the late Archbishop have contributed their support and money to the guild.

These are the first steps in the complex and rigorous process whereby the Pope
ultimately decides if a man or woman is worthy of the veneration of the members
of the Roman Catholic Church. (Some other Americans under consideration are
described in the box on page 70.) The final verdict on Terence Cooke's sanctity
will probably take at least 50 years; some verdicts have taken 600 years. In the
meantime, his supporters will have to prove that the Cardinal was a person of
''heroic'' virtue. They will also have to show that this has been confirmed by a
series of miracles, proof that God, too, accepts the late Cardinal as a truly
holy and perfect Christian.

That a man so recently alive and at work in New York City may be responsible for
miracles seems incredible to some, even to many Catholics. Saints are legends of
simpler times, almost unthinkable in ours. Besides, does the Catholic church, in
the late 20th century, with some 5,000 saints already in its canon, really need
another? Cynics and critics are inclined to see the cause for Cardinal Cooke as
an effort by the church to give itself a little boost in the media capital of
the world. Even the hardest-boiled among them might be willing to grant saintly
perfection to a remarkable woman like Mother Teresa of Calcutta, whose devotion
to the dying and leprous of India won her the Nobel Prize for Peace in 1979. But
Cardinal Cooke, a tall, round-faced prelate with rimless glasses and buckteeth?
An administrator adept at crunching numbers? Could such a shy maestro of the
chancery really be a saint? Or is the Cooke cause a bit of deft archdiocesan
public relations to set up a man of God as a celebrity role model in an age when
the public seems more attracted to the lives of the stars of ''Dynasty'' and
''Dallas'' than to the lives of the saints?

''P.R.?'' asks Father Groeschel, as he lets loose a giggle of contempt. ''Of
course it's P.R. That's what canonization has always been about. It's a
human-interest story. Someone can be the holiest man in the world, but without
human interest he's not a canonizable saint.''

T IS TRUE THAT, THROUGH THE centuries, one of the Roman Catholic Church's most
effective methods for getting its message to its people has been through the
inspirational life stories of the saints, the best and most visible exemplars of
its teachings. But now, at a time when the church seems to many to resemble a
multinational corporation, when its liberal and conservative thinkers clash on
such contemporary issues as divorce, contraception, abortion and homosexuality,
talk of sanctity seems like a throwback. It is a reminder of the church's
ancient roots, the mysteries of religion that have, from the beginning, been the
attraction for converts - ''Credo quia impossibile est,'' as the early Christian
thinker Tertullian phrased his famous paradox. ''I believe because it is
impossible.'' DURING HIS 38 YEARS AS A PRIEST, TER-ence Cooke seemed an unlikely
candidate for sainthood. The son of an Irish immigrant who worked as a chauffeur
and in the construction trades, the Cardinal always claimed he had ''never
wanted to be anything but a simple priest.'' According to family members, he set
out to become one while he was still in elementary school in the Bronx. Cooke
was ordained in 1945, served briefly in a Bronx parish, took leave to earn a
master's degree in social work and returned to the archdiocese intending to
pursue a career of working with children. Instead, the humble priest with no
political ambitions was soon boosted onto the fast track by Francis Cardinal
Spellman, the legendary Archbishop of New York whose own power, and taste for
it, had earned him the nickname ''the American pope.'' Cardinal Spellman was
always on the lookout for clever young administrators among his priests, and in
young Father Cooke he had hit upon a tireless manager with a phenomenal memory
for figures, one who soon became, as some said, (Continued on Page 68) ''a cash
register whose keys the Cardinal pushed.''

After a stint as a middle-level administrator at the archdiocese's seminary,
Father Cooke was appointed in 1957 to the prestigious and influential post of
personal secretary to Cardinal Spellman. Within months, Father Cooke had become
Monsignor Cooke, and was regularly promoted through a series of chancery
positions until, in 1965, he became vicar general, the No. 2 post in the
archdiocese. ''Spellman depended on him, and so he had an awful lot to do with
the day-to-day running of the archdiocese, the financial operations, the
real-estate dealings,'' recalls Bishop Patrick V. Ahern, now the vicar of Staten
Island, who became a close friend of Terence Cooke's after succeeding him as the
Cardinal's secretary.

When Cardinal Spellman died in 1968 and the self-effacing Bishop Cooke had
become, at 47, the surprise leader of the most visible archiocese in the
Catholic church, liberal priests grumbled that the appointment was Cardinal
Spellman's last act of cronyism. The new Archbishop had got the big job, as one
of Terence Cooke's detractors put it, because ''he poured Spelly's Post Toasties
every morning.'' Seminarians joked that the succession was ''the first soul
transplant on record.''

It was the 1960's; the clergy wanted more democracy. Many opposed the Vietnam
War, which Cardinal Spellman had publicly supported. After three decades of an
autocratic archbishop who seemed to take the honor of ''prince of the church''
too literally, younger priests in the diocese viewed their new boss as the
product of a ''discredited system.''

But the new Archbishop, who received his cardinal's red hat a year after his
appointment, quickly proved he was not his mentor's clone by soliciting opinions
from his staff on every issue. And, in time, he solved the toughest problems.
While bitter liberal-conservative disputes broke out in Philadelphia, St. Louis
and Chicago over how to implement the reforms of the Second Vatican Council,
Cardinal Cooke kept tempers in New York cool by proving himself - friends and
subor-dinates all echo the description - a ''master conciliator.'' Bishops were
shutting down schools and parishes in the inner cities all around the country.
But in New York, by establishing ''interparish financial cooperation,'' the
Cardinal forced the rich parishes to contribute to the survival of the
struggling ones.

''He was a superior administrator and manager,'' says Howard A. Seitz, a retired
senior partner in the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &
Garrison, who headed the Cardinal's task force on care of the elderly. ''But I
never knew him to resolve an issue in terms of the bottom line when there were
other apparent or obvious human and charitable conditions to be met.''

Still, Cardinal Cooke was not perceived as a great leader. His fellow bishops
around the country carped about his reticence. ''He was the perfect number two
man,'' says Msgr. Florence Cohalan, a historian of the archdiocese. ''He was
best at carrying out others' decisions, and, apart from his ultimate rank, he
probably reached his peak as vicar general.''

Then the Cardinal began to die, and opinions changed. The story first broke in
August 1983, when the archdiocese announced that the Cardinal was being treated
for a ''urinary infection'' and would have to curtail his normal activities. A
week later, another press release reported his doctor's discovery that Cardinal
Cooke had ''acute leukemia.'' The prognosis was ''terminal.'' Finally, the full
story was told: the Archbishop's cancer had first been diagnosed almost 20 years
before, before he succeeded Cardinal Spellman. The ''lymphoma'' had gone into
remission until 1974, and, since then, he had been working at full tilt in spite
of secret chemotherapy treatments and blood transfusions for leukemia. The
Cardinal had kept his condition secret from even his closest friends. His
doctors treated him clandestinely at home. During his last year, Cardinal Cooke
attended 200 meetings, even though, for a time, he was working, as his friends
were shocked to learn later, with a painful open wound on his back, the result
of the chemotherapy.

In his final meeting with Cardinal Cooke, Bishop Ahern expressed amazement at
how the Archbishop had managed to maintain that pace. ''I never even saw you
yawn,'' he recalls saying to Cardinal Cooke, and then asked if he had been in
pain and exhausted. ''Always,'' he answered. ''How did you manage?'' asked
Bishop Ahern. ''God did it,'' said Cardinal Cooke, simply and quietly, as he lay
motionless in the Archbishop's residence. ''I had to keep going. If my illness
had been divulged, I would have become a lame-duck archbishop and no one would
have paid attention.''

''It was as if he turned the page, and said what has gone up to now is over,''
recalls Msgr. Edward F. O'Brien, rector of St. Joseph's Seminary, who, as
secretary to Cardinal Cooke, was one of the few outside the medical team to know
how ill he was. With the same concentration that had marked his career, Cardinal
Cooke focused on dying and its meaning.

In a letter to Pope John Paul II, he assured the Pontiff that he accepted his
illness in the spirit of the motto he had chosen as Archbishop - Fiat Voluntas
Tua. ''Let Thy will be done.'' He wrote a letter to President Reagan, asking for
continued economic assistance to the poor of the third world. He wrote another
letter to Irish-Americans, urging them to work for peace in Northern Ireland. On
his deathbed, the Cardinal wrote to his fellow bishops that his illness ''is an
opportunity of grace.'' In another letter read from pulpits throughout the
archdiocese, the Cardinal reflected on how illness, old age, poverty, hunger,
physical handicaps and loneliness actually give one ''a special grace'' to
appreciate ''the gift of life'' even more.

After the Cardinal's death, on Oct. 6, 1983, thousands of people waited in line
outside St. Patrick's Cathedral all day, in eerie silence, to pay their respects
to, as several told reporters at the time, ''a good man.'' Cardinal Cooke's
friend of 30 years, Sister M. Aloysius McBride, remarked at the funeral service
to another friend of the Cardinal's that if this were the early church, the huge
crowd at St. Patrick's would have acclaimed Terence Cooke ''a saint on the
spot.''

But it is the 1980's, a skeptical age, and the leading skeptic in the face of
the efforts to promote the canonization of Cardinal Cooke is likely to be the
Vatican itself. ''The church's skepticism is in its own self-interest,''
explains Father Groeschel. ''The process is best seen as an adversarial
procedure. In the eyes of the Vatican, you are guilty until proven saintly.''

Over the last 800 years, the church has established a long list of regulations
and requirements for canonization, revising and toughening them periodically.
The church's first heroes were simply acclaimed saints by the community. But by
the 12th century, the Vatican had taken over the process to avoid the
embarrassment of an increasing number of people who had, by fraud, gained a
reputation for sanctity. Traditionally, a person whose Christian virtue had been
confirmed by at least two miracles, was first ''beatified'' - presented by the
Vatican as an example for all to imitate. After that, proof of additional
miracles was required for final canonization.

The latest revision in the guidelines, published in 1983, hints that the stage
of beatification may eventually be omitted. But the new regulations impose
stricter standards for reviewing medical miracles, requiring, if possible, the
patient and his doctors to testify in person on the details of the alleged
cures.

A ND DO YOU, FA-ther, think he was a saint?'' Benedict Groeschel was slightly
taken aback by the question. To find out more about the requirements of his new
job as promoter of the cause of Cardinal Cooke, the Capuchin friar had traveled
to Rome in 1984. At the Vatican, he conferred with a monsignor who has performed
the role of the church's official skeptic, traditionally known as the ''devil's
advocate.'' ''He was Cecil B. De Mille's idea of the devil's advocate,'' recalls
Father Groeschel. ''Stern, bald, the heavy Germanic accent. Scared me to
death.'' Father Groeschel informed the monsignor that he had known the Cardinal
very well, and that in his opinion the Archbishop ''could be a saint.'' ''Good,
because if you don't think he's a saint, you endanger your immortal soul by
taking on this job,'' replied the monsignor. ''But if you're convinced he's a
saint, you've taken away my job.'' The Vatican's man advised the American priest
to ''show caution and care and let things follow the way of God.''

Father Groeschel is so far outside most non-Catholics' image of the modern
Catholic priest that he is best described by what he is not. He is not, above
all, a ''gent.'' Among New York City's Catholic clergy, the gent is the
Hollywood version of the priest - smooth, urbane, streetwise and definitely good
looking enough to impress the ladies of the parish and the young ones in Sunday
school. The gent is Pat O'Brien in ''Angels With Dirty Faces'' or Bing Crosby in
''Going My Way.'' Although Father Groeschel moves in the world of the gents, he
tramps up First Avenue in sandals, his friar's robes fluttering in the wind. It
is not unusual for him to be found in the middle of the night bailing someone
out of the drunk tank.

He grew up in an Irish-Jewish neighborhood in Jersey City and joined the
Capuchins, a branch of the Franciscans dedicated to working with the poor, in
1951. He has somehow found the time to earn a doctorate in psychology from
Columbia, teach, do radio and television, and write six books, including ''The
Courage to Be Chaste,'' published last year.

In 1973, Cardinal Cooke asked him to head the archdiocese's new Office for
Spiritual Development at Trinity Retreat House, in Larchmont, N.Y., where
priests go to focus on the spiritual side of their vocations. There, his office
floor is filled with cartons of Cooke memorabilia. More boxes occupy the
Cardinal Cooke Archives at St. Joseph's Seminary in nearby Yonkers, where Father
Groeschel is assisted by the cause's own archivist, the Rev. Terrence L. Weber,
the assistant pastor of a Lutheran church on the North Shore of Long Island who
admired the Cardinal and volunteered to help out.

To confirm the integrity of a candidate's faith, the promoter must collect all
his writings, even letters from childhood. ''If he has written anything contrary
to the Catholic faith,'' Father Groeschel explains, ''the cause is immediately
suspended.''

Father Groeschel's most interesting task will be researching and writing
Cardinal Cooke's ''spiritual biography,'' a major part of the brief for
canonization. ''This will be no traditional hagiography,'' insists Father
Groeschel. ''It is supposed to be honest and critical. In fact, if there are no
chinks in the armor, the Vatican is likely to suspect the cause.'' For the last
two years, he and Pastor Weber have been interviewing Cardinal Cooke's family
and friends, his schoolteachers, even the cop on the St. Patrick's beat during
the Cardinal's last years. The two are trying to assemble all the data on a new
personal computer.

Already, the kinds of uncanny circumstances and prophetic remarks that are the
hallmarks of the lives of the saints are turning up about Cardinal Cooke.
Following an emotional visit with the Cardinal in the hospital in 1965, shortly
after he had learned he had cancer, Bishop Ahern informed Terence Cooke's
closest friend from his seminary days, Father Vincent Kenney, that chances were
good they were going to lose their best friend. ''So help me God,'' says Bishop
Ahern, ''this is what he said to me: 'Terry Cooke is not going to die. The
reason is he is a saint, and God has some special work for him to do. I'm going
to die before him.' '' Cardinal Cooke returned to work and was named a bishop
that fall. Within a year, Father Kenney died.

Then there is the matter of those miracles. ''I've seen a few impressive cases
so far,'' says Father Groeschel, who is quick to add that this does not mean
they are miracles and that, besides, it is not his job to say so. His
correspondents, however, are certain that the Cardinal has interceded on their
behalf. One woman prayed to Cooke to settle a long and bitter dispute within her
family. When tensions eased, she called it a miracle. ''If it isn't good enough
for the Pope, it's good enough for me,'' she wrote.

The most dramatic, and most promising, case so far is that of a 14-year-old boy
who has battled ''fourth-stage lymphoma/leukemia'' for eight years. After
neither radiation nor chemotheraphy had succeeded in halting the cancer, doctors
tried a bone-marrow transplant, a recent medical ''miracle'' that provides a new
immune system. Periodic examinations turned up healthy cells with no sign of
leukemia. The boy seemed cured. But two years later, doctors were shocked to
find new leukemia cells, a rarity. ''This time there was no new medical miracle
to fall back on,'' recalls the boy's grandfather, who cares for him. Worse, the
radiation and chemotherapy that had given him temporary relief before now
damaged his liver, heart and bladder.

''A friend told us about the Cardinal Cooke Guild,'' says the grandfather.
''Soon, guild members were turning up at the hospital to pray and visit.'' The
doctors soon informed the family that the boy had only a few days to live. Last
rites were administered, and the family decided to bring the boy home to die.

The guild did not give up. An old friend of Cardinal Cooke visited the boy's
sickbed and placed the Cardinal's zucchetto, the traditional red skullcap of a
prince of the church, on the boy's stomach; another turned up with Cardinal
Cooke's episcopal cross. Within days, the boy began to improve - ''gradually,''
says his grandfather. A few weeks later, the teen-ager walked into the Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center for a checkup - to the amazement of his doctors,
who concluded that the cancer was apparently, and inexplicably, in remission. A
year and a half later, he is doing fine. ''I'm not sure what happened, though my
wife is absolutely certain his life was saved by the intercession of the
Cardinal,'' says the boy's grandfather. ''And as time goes on, I must admit that
I'm inclined to agree.''

For Father Groeschel, it is part of ''a beginning,'' the end of which, he points
out with some relief, ''is likely to come long after my own death.'' Even if the
effort to canonize Cardinal Cooke ultimately fails, Father Groeschel believes it
will have succeeded. ''We live in a world not only of unbelief, but of
disedification,'' he explains. ''We are surrounded by scandal and bad example.
These efforts on behalf of the Cardinal might bring hope to some people in an
otherwise ugly world.'' Father Groeschel also points out that modern medical
advances will assure that an increasing number of us will die the kind of
lingering death from cancer that Cardinal Cooke suffered. ''His example is an
inspiring one,'' says the friar.

Saints, by the Vatican's definition, are persons of ''heroic virtue.'' If, in
our time and place, astronauts, rock stars or 20-year-olds blessed with the
ability to throw a baseball 95 m.p.h. qualify for heroic stature, why not the
inspiring example of a virtuous life and death? The American church has been
modest about its successes; although there are 52 million Catholics in the
United States, only three saints have been United States citizens: John N.
Neumann, a 19th-century bishop of Philadelphia; Elizabeth Ann Seton, a socialite
who became a nun, founded the American Sisters of Charity in 1809 and initiated
the nation's parochial school system; and Frances Xavier Cabrini, the patron
saint of the nation's immigrants, with whom she worked at the turn of the
century. Terence Cardinal Cooke can be seen as the icon of a later stage in the
history of American Catholicism. ''He's one of us,'' explains Father Groeschel,
referring to the millions of descendants of Catholic immigrants. ''He's a kid
from the city with a New York accent - proof, perhaps, that a saint can grow up
playing stickball in the streets of New York and shopping at Korvettes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Rev. Terrence L. Weber and memorabilia at St. Joseph's
Seminary in Yonkers (Jeanne Strongin)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: NOVEMBER 30, 1986

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 906 words


Fiction
            Weeks
This   Last    On
Week   Week  List
1         1     4 WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.)
                  Iran during the month following the Shah's
                  departure.
2         2    12 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.)
                  Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman who
                  grew up in a small Maine town.
3         3    18 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.)
                  Without using nuclear weapons, the West staves off
                  the Russians in World War III.
4         5     5 A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $18.95.)
                  Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a brutal
                  double murder.
5         4     7 HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon
                  & Schuster, $18.95.) A top New York model
                  encounters three of Los Angeles's most dynamic men.
6         6     9 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton
                  Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family relationships in
                  South Carolina's low country and New York City.
7         8     5 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                  Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                  Vietnam.
8         7     7 FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,
                  $16.95.) The hero of the ''Foundation'' series
                  searches for the lost planet Earth.
9        14    13 THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random
                  House, $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and
                  greed mark a young woman's life in 18th-century
                  England and France.
10        9     8 THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) Continuing the saga of a
                  turn-of-the-century New York family begun in
                  ''Evergreen.''
11 *     10     5 PERFUME, by Patrick Suskind. (Knopf, $16.95.)
                  An olfactory vampire kills people to steal their
                  scents.
12       12    20 WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $17.95.)
                  A rich orphan comes of age while she travels the
                  world.
13       11    10 THE BEET QUEEN, by Louise Erdrich. (Holt,
                  $16.95.) Forty years in a small North Dakota town
                  near an Indian reservation.
14        5     2 THE MIRROR OF HER DREAMS, by Stephen R. Donaldson.
                  (Del Rey/Ballantine, $19.95.) First of two novels
                  about Mordant, a strange land where reality is
                  intertwined with illusion.
15             21 LAST OF THE BREED, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam,
                  $17.95.) The adventures of a United States Air
                  Force major in Siberia.

                  Nonfiction
1         2     4 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                  Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                  recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.
2         3    30 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                  Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from
                  the television star and father of five.
3         1     8 HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.)
                  From Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized
                  biography of Frank Sinatra.
4         5    10 MCMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi.
                  (Warner, $16.95.) The autobiography of the
                  quarterback for the Chicago Bears.
5         4     8 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow,
                  $19.95.) The crisis in the American automobile
                  industry and Japan's role in it.
6         9     5 ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Random
                  House, $18.95.) The comedian's autobiography,
                  beginning with her impoverished childhood.
7         6     5 DREAMGIRL, by Mary Wilson with Patricia Romanowski
                  and Ahrgus Juilliard. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) An
                  ex-Supreme remembers.
8        10    28 JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot.
                  (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire
                  veterinarian about his favorite animal.
9 *       7     8 THE STORY OF ENGLISH, by Robert McCrum, William
                  Cran and Robert MacNeil. (Sifton/Viking, $24.95.)
                  Companion volume to the PBS series about the
                  world's most widely used language.
10        8    38 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random
                  House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic
                  in pictures and rhyme.
11              1 PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon
                  Eisenhower. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The life of
                  the wife of the 37th President, by her daughter.
12       15     2 WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Putnam,
                  $14.95; $16.95 after Dec. 25.) Columns by the
                  journalist and television personality.
13       13    10 ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden with
                  Dave Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations on
                  football.
14       12     5 DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland with
                  Greg Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The ballerina
                  recalls her checkered career.
15 *     11    31 NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst. (Simon &
                  Schuster, $17.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
                  author argues, and we must confront them to grow.
16 *            1 LIFE: The First Fifty Years, 1936-1986. (Little,
                  Brown, $50.) The past half-century as seen in the
                  magazine's photographs.

                  Advice, How-to and
                  Miscellaneous
1         1    11 MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM,
                  by Susan Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.)
                  How to cope with overbearing men.
2         3     5 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff
                  Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at
                  moderate cost.
3         2    28 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton,
                  $15.95.) A regimen based on the Vanderbilt
                  University Weight Management Program.
4               5 BE HAPPY YOU ARE LOVED, by Robert H. Schuller.
                  (Nelson, $15.95.) Inspiration from a California
                  clergyman.
5         5    67 FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn
                  Diamond. (Warner, $17.50.) A diet for weight loss
                  and physical fitness.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DRIVEN TO MARTYRDOM

BYLINE: BY HOWELL RAINES; Howell Raines, the author of ''My Soul Is Rested,'' an
oral history of the civil rights movement, is deputy Washington editor of The
New York Times

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2993 words


BEARING THE CROSS Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference. By David J. Garrow. 800 pp. New York: William Morrow & Company.
$19.95.

ONE Sunday morning in 1957, Martin Luther King Jr., a young preacher who still
had the open, unformed face of a boy, found an unexploded dynamite bomb on his
front porch in Montgomery, Ala. Within hours he was in his pulpit saying, ''I'm
not afraid of anybody this morning. Tell Montgomery they can keep shooting and
I'm going to stand up to them; tell Montgomery they can keep bombing and I'm
going to stand up to them. If I had to die tomorrow morning I would die happy
because I've been to the mountaintop and I've seen the promised land and it's
going to be here in Montgomery.''

The language, of course, anticipates that of the more famous speech King gave in
1968 in Memphis on the eve of his assassination, and the similarity underscores
the central miracle and mystery of his life. Early and late, this man was able
to summon a moral and physical courage that was, let us not forget, a new force
on the stage of Southern history.

In the period marked by his two ''mountaintop'' speeches, King led the movement
that ended the segregation of public facilities in the South, secured the
franchise for black voters and changed profoundly the unwritten protocols and
daily practice of social custom in the region. While some veterans of the civil
rights movement are quick to point out that these victories were not the
achievement of King alone, ''Bearing the Cross'' reminds us anew that his
leadership was the indispensable ingredient.

David Garrow, an associate professor of history at City College and the author
of ''The FBI and Martin Luther King, Jr.,'' has given this biography the
informal subtitle ''A Personal Portrait,'' and that is apt. More thoroughly than
any King scholar to date, he has explored what we might call the sacred and
profane aspects of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s life. Along with the
civil rights achievements, he documents the inner torments King suffered because
of his compulsive sexual adventuring and because of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation's conscienceless campaign to use this weakness to destroy him. But
Mr. Garrow does not let the sensational side of his story distract him from the
central task of any King biographer, which is to explain the wellsprings of
King's courage and of his genius for inspiring poor, powerless people to acts of
bravery and defiance. Like most people of both races who grew up in the Deep
South in his day, Martin Luther King believed anyone who truly challenged racial
segregation would be killed. On the facts of his life, King seemed an unlikely
candidate to make such a challenge. He had been sheltered and spoiled by
domineering parents as a child, and he was often undisciplined and hedonistic as
an adult. Where, then, did King acquire the ability to look death in the eye and
wring from the experience an unflinching poetry of sacrifice and redemption?

For an answer, Mr. Garrow points us to a single night, Jan. 27, 1956. King, at
26, was on his way to national celebrity as the leader of the Montgomery bus
boycott. But the telephoned death threats had weakened his resolve. Unable to
sleep, he sat at the kitchen table and reflected on the fact that he had
inherited the ministerial profession from his father and had mastered the
philosophy of religion at seminary and graduate school, yet he himself had no
sustaining faith. Then King heard an ''inner voice'' that he identified as that
of Jesus Christ. ''I heard the voice of Jesus saying still to fight on. He
promised never to leave me, never to leave me alone. No never alone. No never
alone. He promised never to leave me, never to leave me alone.'' OTHER
biographers have noted this episode, but Mr. Garrow asks us to regard it as the
transforming moment, ''the most important night of his life, the one he always
would think back to in future years when the pressures again seemed to be too
great.''

The temptation is to assume that the author is placing too much emphasis on this
epiphany. But he shows how King returned again and again in his own thinking and
speeches to that ''vision in the kitchen.'' In the end, I think that Mr. Garrow
makes the evidentiary case for Bayard Rustin's observation that King must be
understood as a ''spiritual intellectual'' - that is, as a leader who combined a
trained academic mind with a childlike faith that God would deliver him a
transcending, albeit personally expensive victory.

Without the disciplined, analytical side of King's nature, the education that
went so far beyond that of most preachers in the South, King could not have
managed the rambunctious team that put together the brilliant tactical plans for
Birmingham and Selma. But it was the childlike faith that spoke from the
mountaintop moments of his career and sustained him in his final despair, when
he realized that ''the cross is something that you bear and ultimately that you
die on.''

In its account of King's career and the history of his organization, the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference, ''Bearing the Cross'' is a foundation
document. Through tireless interviewing, through skillful use of the Freedom of
Information Act and, not least, through his principled refusal to submit to
F.B.I. entreaties to suppress details of the bureau's spying on King, Mr. Garrow
has provided the fundament of fact on which future King biographies must rest,
both in regard to King's public and private lives. TAKEN together, this book and
''The FBI and Martin Luther King, Jr.'' demonstrate that only with an
examination of King's private life can we understand the ''profound sadness''
that gripped him after 1966. The F.B.I., with the approval of Robert F. Kennedy,
first began eavesdropping on King for information about his relationship with
Stanley D. Levison, a New York lawyer and alleged Communist. Mr. Garrow offers
firm evidence that Levison was an ''inactive party member'' with deeper
Communist involvement than King realized. But he also disproves a segregationist
canard that has wormed its way into some historical accounts - that Levison was
a behind-the-scenes manipulator who really ran King and the movement.

In the course of monitoring King and Levison, the F.B.I. discovered something
that would have greater impact on King's life than the subversion issue. King
practiced a ''compulsive sexual athleticism'' that he explained to one friend as
''a form of anxiety reduction.''

From 1965, when the Federal Bureau of Investigation mailed to S.C.L.C.
headquarters a tape recording of sexual encounters in King's hotel rooms, King
understood what the F.B.I. had and how they meant to use it. ''They are out to
break me. They are out to get me, harass me, break my spirit,'' he said in a
telephone conversation that was, fittingly, tapped by the F.B.I. Shortly after
this awareness struck him, King's closest associates began to remark on the
''spiritual depression,'' insomnia, exhaustion and morbid preoccupation with
death that gripped King. For the final three years of his life, King would be
tormented by a ''death wish'' that seemed to have its roots, at least in part,
in a fear of exposure that would undermine his moral authority.

While making the case for such a linkage, Mr. Garrow does not fully explore its
implications, and Continued on next page his preference for amassing facts
rather than analyzing them is a bothersome flaw in this otherwise admirable
book. Mr. Garrow presents the reader with the most complete dossier yet
published on the life King led in hotel rooms and in his hideaway apartment in
Atlanta. Yet he seems reluctant to integrate this material into a deeper
understanding of why King continued his libertine pursuits even when it became
clear they might be used to destroy him. PART of the answer for King's behavior,
Mr. Garrow writes, could be found in the ''serious marital differences'' between
King and his wife, Coretta - differences over money and their conflicting
visions of the wife's role. But a deeper motivation for this philandering was
apparently a profound sexual hunger rather than the petty reasons that triggered
domestic squabbles. ''Outweighing them all,'' Mr. Garrow concludes on these
points of conflict, ''was the fact that there were some things Martin King badly
needed that he could not find at home.''

The number of King's affairs would suggest some of these needs were purely
physical. But he also had a long-term relationship with a female colleague,
which became the ''emotional centerpiece of King's life,'' and the need to
sustain this romance may have contributed to his recklessness. Whatever the
cause, it was precisely during this period of deepening anxiety over F.B.I.
prying into his sex life that King's political activities increased his
vulnerability to the bureau's threat of public-image blackmail. He was
challenging the Government on the Vietnam War and became increasingly open in
calling for ''a radical redistribution of economic and political power.''

Still he did not alter his behavior. Indeed, the vacations without his wife in
the Bahamas, Miami and California became more frequent. He began to drink more
heavily. Finally, what this author has documented is a portrait of a man
unwilling to chasten his private behavior, unwilling to abandon his principled
opposition to injustice and war and increasingly convinced that the F.B.I. or
other forces would use the private information to discredit and destroy him. In
the end, he fell back on the lion-heartedness that had come to him after the
''vision in the kitchen'' over a decade earlier in Montgomery.

''I'd rather be dead than afraid,'' King told his staff when they warned him
against the dangers of marching in Memphis. A few hours earlier, King gave his
final speech, citing the same thought in a public way. ''Well, I don't know what
will happen now. We've got some difficult days ahead. But it really doesn't
matter with me now, because I've been to the mountaintop. And I don't mind. . .
. I'm not worried about anything. I'm not fearing any man.'' In the end, Mr.
Garrow's presentation and his choice of title invite us to see King acting out a
sacrificial drama in which death loomed as a release from the irreconcilable
cross-pressures of principle, public role and private desire.

On this point, however, I wish Mr. Garrow had been more forthcoming, even more
speculative in helping the reader interpret material that, at this point, he
knows better than anyone in the country. Instead, he has been careful, perhaps
overly so, to avoid the pitfalls of psychohistory and of the F.B.I. voyeurism
that he documents in his books. Even so, there are important issues of
biographical scholarship and public policy that cannot be avoided and that beg
for deeper analysis. On the policy level, we are not likely to encounter a more
chilling or more convincingly documented case of the Government's attempt to
control an individual's political behavior by intruding into his private life.
President Nixon's offenses in this regard -most notably the burgling of the
office of Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist - have been vigorously denounced. But
one leaves this book feeling that John F. Kennedy, Robert F. Kennedy and Lyndon
B. Johnson have got too little blame for their roles in creating the conditions
that led to the surveillance and harassment of civil rights and antiwar
activists. They had the authority to restrain J. Edgar Hoover's campaign to
discredit King; they cannot escape the responsibility for failing to use it, no
matter how politic their reasons.

On the personal side, King's associates have feared for years that full
disclosure of his private life would dim the aura of his memory. But this
impulse to sanctify King, to put a veil over his personal life and to sanitize
the increasingly radical politics of his final years, is misguided. Books like
this one are needed for an understanding of the dramatic scope of an important
American life. We see King in the full dimensions of his humanity, struggling
not only against the external evil of segregation, but also persevering against
private assaults and inner demons that even now cannot be fully explained. It is
a story with the symmetry of classic tragedy.

Like any great tragedy, this one has a conundrum at the center. Why, after 1965,
did King seem to acquiesce in his own psychic destruction? Why did he not simply
end the escapades that opened him to the threats of the F.B.I.? Was it a simple
lack of self-discipline, some deeper sexual obsession, a romantic love before
which he was powerless? Was it a yearning for what he called the ''glowing,
epic-making days in Alabama and Mississippi'' before he became entangled in the
seemingly insoluble problems of war, economic justice and what he saw as a
deeper, intractable racism that lay beyond the reach of civil rights laws?

Mr. Garrow seems to think it is some combination of these forces that led King
to prepare himself, at the zenith of his life, for death on the cross he had
chosen as a young man. This book will endure as the starting point and
inspiration for more fully analytical works that wrestle with the questions that
have been opened before us by David Garrow's meticulous investigative
scholarship.

Having wished for more interpretation at some points, I should add in fairness
that this biography aims to establish its authority not with stylish writing or
analysis but with the depth and detail of its scholarship. In this regard, Mr.
Garrow must be given his due fully. No student of the Southern movement will
leave ''Bearing the Cross'' feeling shortchanged on facts, and especially
knowledgeable students are likely to be impressed by Mr. Garrow's willingness to
tackle the hardest problems of research. For example, there is the moldy old
legend of the mysterious ''well-dressed Negro man'' who bailed King out of jail
in Albany, Ga., when King preferred to remain in the lockup to spur
demonstrations there. At last, we learn beyond doubt that Mayor Asa D. Kelley
and his canny police chief, Laurie Pritchett, threw King out of jail to break
the emotional momentum of the protests and invented the mystery bondsman as a
cover story. IN writing about Albany, Selma and Birmingham, Mr. Garrow guides us
to an appreciation of the intuitive talent for crisismanagement that fired the
civil rights movement in its early days. Even while under pressure from state
and Federal authorities and his own staff, King had a sense of when to pull the
grand, confrontational gesture that defied prudence, such as sending the
children into the streets in Birmingham. ''Please don't be too soft,'' he
exhorted Andrew Young at a critical moment in Selma. ''In a crisis, we must have
a sense of drama.'' Here, the accretion of detail upon detail works well to
produce a kind of battlefield portrait of King at the height of his powers in
the years between Montgomery and Selma when his inspirational and tactical
skills merged in an almost magical way.

Fortunately, we seem to be entering a period of intensifying scholarly study of
the Southern civil rights movement. For, as it happens, we are already caught in
a time when there is an attitude of denigration and forgetfulness toward the
struggles of the 50's and 60's. Three years ago, free-associating before
reporters at a news conference, President Reagan gave new life to the old charge
that King was a Communist. Twice in recent months I have run across articles and
books recycling Bear Bryant's flippant observation that a black running back did
more to promote integration in Alabama than Martin Luther King Jr. Such comments
are worse than misguided. In the environment of current opinion, they amount to
an invitation to forget that no one was more in the tradition of American
democratic protest and that no one did more than Martin Luther King to promote
integration and progress and prosperity in his native region. That is how he
earned his historical place - in the grandeur of his courage and the frailty of
his humanity - as the greatest leader to emerge from the American South in this
century.

PEOPLE WERE EAGER TO TALK ABOUT KING Seven hundred interviews are at the heart
of ''Bearing the Cross,'' David J. Garrow's biography of the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. Mr. Garrow, an associate professor of political science at City
College, did nearly 200 himself; others are from archives. Most people, he
found, were eager to talk about the slain civil rights leader, even the sheriffs
and other white Southerners who opposed King. ''They saw me as a
conventional-looking white boy,'' the 33-year-old author said recently, amid
stacks of newspaper clippings on the floor of the study in his Manhattan
brownstone, to whom they could tell ''the real story of Martin Luther King.''

What helped sustain him, he said, in the seven years it took to write the book,
was his appreciation of King's religious faith. ''Realizing how deep a faith
motivation he had really gave me a much deeper understanding of what this man
was about and made him a more fundamentally powerful and moving figure for me.''


Taking the long view, the

King biography came about because Wesleyan University, where Mr. Garrow earned
his bachelor's degree, required an undergraduate honors thesis. His dealt with
King and was published as ''Protest at Selma.'' His second book was ''The F.B.I.
and Martin Luther King, Jr.'' Two years later, in 1985, he made headlines when
he obtained transcripts of conversations of King that the Federal Bureau of
Investigation had wiretapped.

Mr. Garrow is at work on a study of the F.B.I. under J. Edgar Hoover. ''I feel a
little guilty moving on to the F.B.I. thing,'' he said. ''My whole focus so far
has been on the civil rights movement. I don't want to dilute that.''     -
Michael Molyneux

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Martin Luther King Jr. during 1966 march (Black Starr/Bob
Fitch)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE TRILLION-DOLLAR PAPER TIGER

BYLINE: BY ALAN TONELSON; Alan Tonelson is an associate editor of Foreign
Policy.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1624 words


TO ARM A NATION Rebuilding America's Endangered Defenses. By Richard Halloran.
396 pp. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $21.95.

RICHARD HALLORAN is too modest in billing ''To Arm a Nation'' as primarily a
layman's guide to the decline of the American military.

The New York Times military correspondent also broaches inescapable truths too
often forgotten by the Government officials and private experts who dominate the
national defense debate. The rebuilding of the United States military forces
needs to be guided by a realistic set of missions, and these in turn require a
realistic set of foreign policy goals. Without a sensible idea of what America's
armed forces should be doing, the vital tasks of straightening out military
command structures, rationalizing the defense budget, cleaning up the defense
industry and even improving readiness will add up to so much wheel spinning.

This sounds like an impossibly naive or tall order given the magnitude of the
problem. Mr. Halloran joins a group of knowledgeable observers who have warned
that despite the trillion-dollar buildup of the Reagan years, the American
military - meaning primarily the country's nonnuclear forces - can't fight very
well.

The author charges that the United States armed forces ''are incapable of
applying more than minimal military power with conventional arms in pursuit of
American national interests.'' The United States can beat up on the Grenadas and
Libyas of the world, but cannot ''engage in combat on the level of Korea or
Vietnam in, for instance, Central America or the Persian Gulf.'' And in Europe,
still an area of much greater importance to American security and prosperity,
NATO forces are so weak that Western strategy aims not at defeating or even
stalemating Warsaw Pact invaders, but at not crumbling too quickly - and
ultimately it rests on the problematic threat to use nuclear weapons.

Mr. Halloran explains that the difficulty is not with the American fighting man.
Indeed, he shows how two military pay raises pushed by this Administration (the
most productive elements of the Reagan buildup) have helped to bring back
discipline and make respectable the educational levels of enlisted men and women
as well as officers after the lean years of the 1970's. The armed forces even
turned people away in 1984, the services' best recruiting year since 1945.

Instead, the author blames a defense establishment that oscillates ''between
chaos and paralysis.'' Composed of the executive branch, Congress, the top
military leadership and the defense industry, this establishment long ago
fractured into a gaggle of feudal domains. Their obsession with
self-aggrandizement not only breeds untold waste, but prevents the kind of
coordinated and sound planning needed for victory in battle.

The resultant dangers, scandals and absurdities evidently lose something when
reported piecemeal -compiled and recounted by Mr. Halloran, they are the stuff
of which Senate inquiries are made. After defense budgets adding up to $1
trillion, American forces are capable of fighting a global conventional war for
little more than a month before running out of supplies; industry will need an
estimated six months before it is able to replace ammunition, fuel and other
essentials faster than they can be used by the soldiers. The NATO commander,
Gen. Bernard W. Rogers, has warned that in the event of war these shortages
could force him to request nuclear escalation in Europe ''in a matter of days.''
In 1985 the Pentagon's chief medical officer testified that only 30 percent of
the estimated casualties from a ''full-scale conventional conflict overseas''
could be treated by military hospitals and on-the-field corpsmen. The other 70
percent would have to be left on the battlefield. As of 1985, 45 of the
country's largest defense contractors were being investigated by the Pentagon
for possible criminal transgressions, including the paying of kickbacks and
overcharging. And not even Joseph Heller could have dreamed up a bureaucracy
that has issued 200 pages of regulations governing the baking of Christmas
cakes. There is one bright spot: America's nuclear weapons will probably work
well enough to bring on Armageddon.

The author also recounts some eye-opening history (such as America's first late
delivery of a weapon, by the 18th-century inventor Eli Whitney) and exposes in
minute detail one of the most mysterious aspects of American society - the daily
routines of military life.

Mr. Halloran's remedies are appropriately sweeping. He would finally give the
Secretary of Defense firm control over the Pentagon by abolishing the
Departments of the Army, Navy and Air Force, and dividing the Defense Department
into a small number of functional bureaus. To minimize dangerous and wasteful
interservice rivalries, he would realign the armed forces into a ground force
combining the Army and the Marines; a navy; a tactical air force made up of all
current Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps fighter craft; a new strategic nuclear
force of long-range bombers and missiles, including the present Navy's
missile-firing submarines; and a central military support service to handle all
logistics, transport and communications.

Like many analysts, Mr. Halloran views the current Joint Chiefs of Staff system
as a formula for deadlock and confusion that saddles America's military forces
with five coequal masters. Unlike others, however, he would scrap this setup
completely in favor of a single chief of military staff in charge of all
operations and planning. And Mr. Halloran convincingly rebuts those who worry
that such centralization could endanger American democracy by creating a
powerful, Prussian-style general staff. The author's remaining proposals include
adopting military budgets for two years at a time, freezing defense spending for
five years to force the military to eliminate waste and regulating the defense
industry like a public utility, monitored by an independent agency resembling
the Securities and Exchange Commission.

But Mr. Halloran also pauses to look up from the flow charts. His most
revolutionary and important ideas are those that could bring big changes in
America's world role: declaring that the United States may not defend allies who
do not shoulder their share of the West's defense burden, and withdrawing most
American troops from overseas and turning them into a domestically based,
cheaper and more flexible ''strategic reserve for the free world.'' Persuading
the defense establishment's feudal barons to surrender their fiefdoms will be a
cakewalk compared with persuading American political leaders and opinion makers
of all stripes to consider such retrenchment.

The author himself seems to believe that the wide gap between America's
unlimited foreign policy interests and its limited resources can be closed with
the money saved by his internal reforms, and by foisting major defense
responsibilities on the allies. He loses sight of what America's free-riding
partners know all too well: the impulses that drive the United States to label
every corner of the world a vital interest also prevent it from credibly
threatening to cut its allies loose. THE international fallout of American
retrenchment is beyond the scope of this book. But America's foreign policy
professionals and the taxpayers whose money they so freely spend in the pursuit
of such nebulous goals as ''power projection'' and ''world order'' cannot be
reminded often enough of the costs of global activism. Even after Vietnam the
United States still has military obligations to some 60 foreign countries, and
the list has been expanding in recent years. In addition, the Reagan
Administration has pledged unwavering, and in theory unlimited, support for
anti-Communist insurgents in the third world. And Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger has outlined a long-range military strategy that the Joint Chiefs of
Staff have estimated will cost some $2.25 trillion - a sum more than twice that
of the Administration's record defense budgets to date, and more than half of
the country's total economic output for 1985. At the end of this road lies
national ruin.

''To Arm a Nation'' adds significantly to the case that among America's greatest
enemies in the world today is the pretension of omnipotence to which its leaders
continue to cling.

Don't Blame the Troops
  In standing watch, in training, and under fire, American soldiers, sailors,
marines, and airmen do well today, as they almost always have in the past.
Americans in garrison sometimes lack discipline, perhaps a reflection of the
permissive nature of American society about which Tocqueville wrote a century
and a half ago. But in adversity, the American GI has no equal; his shortcomings
in garrison become virtues in the field or at sea or at a forward air base when
the going gets rough. He is unsurpassed in taking initiative and at getting
things done with ingenuity. . . . The American in the armed forces responds to
good leadership; the teamwork he learned on the high school playing field
translates into a cohesion with others in his infantry platoon, his shipboard
watch, his section on the flight line. . . . But there is a discouraging
contrast between the forces in the field and the high command around the
flagpole in Washington. The soldiers and sergeants and combatant commanders who
lead battalions and ships and air squadrons guard the nation well. The same
cannot be said for those who plan and finance the forces, who are responsible
for arming and equipping them, and who dispatch the forces to far corners of the
world where they put their lives on the line every day.   - From ''To Arm a
Nation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICIAN'S WIFE, TOUGHING IT OUT

BYLINE: BY JUDY WOODRUFF; Judy Woodruff is chief Washington correspondent for
''The MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour'' and anchor for ''Frontline,'' the PBS
documentary series.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1162 words


PAT NIXON The Untold Story. By Julie Nixon Eisenhower. Illustrated. 480 pp. New
York: Simon & Schuster. $19.95.

''FROM the first days I knew you, you were destined to be a great lady. . . . It
is our job to go forth together and accomplish great ends and we shall do it
too. And, Dear One, through the years, whatever happens I shall always be with
you - loving you more every hour and attempting to let you feel that love in
your heart and life.''

Those words, written by an ambitious young California lawyer a month before he
was to marry a bright, attractive schoolteacher in June 1940, held the promise
of a long, happy, successful life together. But this was to be a marriage
strained unceasingly by the public pressures and private idiosyncrasies of one
of the most controversial political careers in our history.

The young lawyer was Richard M. Nixon, who, even today, a dozen years after
resigning as President in disgrace, remains an object of extraordinary
curiosity. And, as always, far in the background is that young schoolteacher,
the former Patricia Ryan. That we learn so much more about this very private
woman in ''Pat Nixon: The Untold Story'' by her daughter Julie Nixon Eisenhower
is a vivid reminder of how submerged Pat Nixon was during the many traumas she
endured with her husband.

The author is the feisty daughter who defended her father to the end during
Watergate; Barry Goldwater once complained the one thing he never understood
about Nixon was how he could have lied to Julie. This book isn't an important
literary or historical work, but that same buoyant spirit, coupled with some
impressive research, provides fresh insights into a much maligned and
misunderstood woman.

Mrs. Eisenhower's continued defense of her father is personally admirable, but
it's the weakest part of this work. On Watergate she defends the ''enemies
list'' as nothing out of the ordinary and writes off the illegal bugging and
wiretapping and the infamous ''plumbers'' with the unpersuasive canard that
everybody did it -the only difference was that Mr. Nixon was caught.
Consequently, it's unfortunate that she spends almost as much time defending her
father as telling us about her mother.

More believable is the portrait of Patricia Ryan Nixon, who survived a difficult
childhood and, through sheer grit, finished college with honors. That toughness
was tested early and often during the three decades of the Nixons' political
life. In 1946 she was at the hospital beginning what her doctor said would be a
long labor with her first child when her husband, a Congressional candidate,
left to attend a campaign strategy session some 30 miles away. Many other
painful ordeals followed: the surfacing of the secret slush fund in the 1952
Vice-Presidential campaign, the loss to John F. Kennedy in 1960, the
''humiliating defeat'' for Governor of California in 1962, Vietnam and, of
course, Watergate.

There is so much pain and sadness that one wonders why and how Pat Nixon put up
with it. Mrs. Eisenhower has a simple explanation: her mother's ''idealistic,
unshakable view of her husband as a man with unique talents'' and belief that he
''was making tremendous contributions to his country.''

But what also emerges is that Pat Nixon had some very clear views of her own on
some of these ''contributions.'' Mrs. Eisenhower informs us that her mother had
reservations about the stridency of Spiro Agnew's attack on the television
networks, almost instantly suspected Henry Kissinger's loyalty to her husband,
felt ''keenly disappointed'' when Mr. Nixon failed to name a woman to the
Supreme Court in 1971, was persistently unhappy with White House Chief of Staff
H. R. Haldeman and the way the 1972 Nixon re-election campaign was conducted and
thought her husband should have destroyed the tapes of the White House
conversations that ultimately brought him down. But Mr. Nixon rarely solicited
his wife's views on such matters - that wasn't her role. This was especially
painful during Watergate. By the spring of 1973, seeing an unusually withdrawn
Richard Nixon, Pat Nixon had ''come to understand that [her husband] did not
want his family to be involved in his political decisions.'' Incredibly, Mrs.
Eisenhower reveals, ''In fact, we never sat down as a family to talk about
Watergate.''

All this underlines Richard Nixon's personal as well as political peculiarities.
He plainly adored his mother, yet confidants tell of the time he brought aides
and reporters with him for a visit on her 80th birthday; he greeted her by
shaking hands. And as early as Mr. Nixon's first Congressional race, his
daughter writes, it was clear that he viewed politics as ''a harsh, even hurtful
battle, a man's world, and he had difficulty thinking of women making political
strategy and decisions.'' For the next 28 years Pat Nixon was seldom consulted.

It's striking to compare

Mrs. Nixon's political role with that of more recent First Ladies, especially
Nancy Reagan. Not only does Ronald Reagan listen to his wife's political and
personnel instincts but Mrs. Reagan's image and role is a preoccupation of this
White House. In the early days of the Reagan Presidency, the public knew Mrs.
Reagan as a First Lady who spent her time with society types, wore $5,000 gowns
and ordered expensive china while her husband was cutting programs for the poor.
The White House public relations apparatus cranked up, and the public now sees
the First Lady in flattering TV documentaries and news magazine stories,
portrayed as a sensitive counselor to children on drugs and an important
influence on the President. In a few years, as Fred Barnes noted in The New
Republic, Mrs. Reagan was ''transformed from a frivolous clotheshorse and chum
of the idle rich - the least popular President's wife in decades - into a
compassionate friend of the troubled young and a trusted adviser to her
husband.''

Pat Nixon never got such attention from the Nixon image makers, and her daughter
corrects some of the misimpressions that came from her ''plastic Pat'' image.
She is convincing in dismissing charges that her mother drank heavily during the
closing months of the Nixon Presidency. More important, she paints a picture of
an intelligent and sensitive woman who lived a miserable life during her
husband's political career. This sad portrait brightens only with recent years,
as Pat Nixon finally became free to worry less about her husband's travails and
politics and focus more on her daughters and grandchildren.

Our history is full of disappointing offspring of famous political figures. Few
families suffer the agonies of the Nixons, and as a result, messed up children
would not have been surprising. But this spirited and at times captivating, if
somewhat flawed, book is a reminder that somehow Julie Eisenhower, remarkably,
escaped the fate of many other politicians' children. That says something nice
about Pat Nixon - and probably her husband too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Pat, Richard and Julie Nixon in 1973 (AP)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND OPINION;
RABBITS AND WHAT THEY TELL US

BYLINE: By JIM MURPHY; Jim Murphy has been spotting rabbits in Remsenburg for
nine years.

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 44, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


I KNOW more rabbits than people in Remsenburg.

I leave for work most mornings of the year before dawn, and I return home after
dusk. I know which rabbits live on which lawns, but I would be hard pressed to
identify the owners of those lawns.

Not long ago, while riding my bicycle the one and one-quarter miles from my
house to the Speonk train station, I spotted 14 rabbits. It was a personal best
that erased my old record of 12 rabbits, set in mid-July.

In the summer I usually catch the 6:23 A.M. diesel, which leaves Montauk an hour
earlier. This puts me on the road around 5:45 A.M., prime rabbit-spotting time
in July when I set my original record.

I believe, but I'm not certain, that the rabbits convene on the lawns of
Remsenburg at dusk and remain active through the night. I do know that they are
out in force at ''false dawn.''

''False dawn'' is a term I first and only heard nearly 20 years ago in Vietnam,
when I was standing guard duty overnight. The first night I stood watch I
sensed, and then saw, a brightness to the east.

''Hey, Sarge,'' I said. ''The sun's coming up. We'll be off duty soon.''

He said, ''That's false dawn, you jerk. We've got an hour to go.''

In such ways, over a lifetime, are the vagaries of nature unraveled much as I'm
managing to decode the mysteries of rabbit behavior: by sheer luck.

The rabbits of Remsenburg are there for my observation when I wheel my bike down
the driveway at 5:30 A.M. I see one on the lawn of the house across the street,
and he or she sees me.

I see one on the north edge of my property/south edge of the property next door.

For many years now, I cannot see a rabbit without thinking of Richard Adams's
novel, ''Watership Down.''

I've read the book twice over a span of five years. In ''Watership Down''
rabbits go ''tharn'' as people who are frightened seem to freeze. Tharn
describes the state that enfolds a rabbit at times of great stress, which for a
rabbit - as I have observed every day on my bike - is any time at all.

Tharn is why, though I've come to love the little animals, I've killed two of
them with my car, and almost totaled another with my bike.

One of the rabbits I hit and killed as I was driving my car in Remsenburg early
one Saturday morning. It darted right in front of my tires. I stood on the
brakes at just about the same time the rabbit decided he didn't have the right
of way.

The rabbit turned tail as I heaved a sigh of relief and reaccelerated.

The rabbit then chose to do an about-face and get crushed under my right rear
wheel.

There may have been mitigating circumstances - a cat in pursuit, or some
frightening natural phenomenon of which I was unaware that propelled the rabbit
to his reckless doom.

I can't be sure because I must wonder, too, what sort of animal it is that spies
a portly man approaching on a bike at save-neck speed, freezes (or, if you will,
goes tharn), and almost gets himself run over. By a bicyle.

They're prolific, fortunately, for were they not, their species would surely be
extinct.

The rural rabbits of Remsenburg, and the rabbits of the plains of the world,
live in constant terror, forever one noise or one flash of light away from
complete nervous collapse. They look as if they know they're about to expire -
if not from the hawk in the sky, then from the Cutlass on the ground. Rabbits
never have a nice day, I suspect.

It is therefore a rare thing to come upon a brown, rural rabbit in repose. In
all of my rabbit-spotting and counting in Remsenburg I've only once seen a
rabbit in repose, stretched out like a family dog in front of the fireplace on a
winter's day - forelegs extended and back legs tucked under for maximum comfort.

The rabbit in repose so stunned me, sprawled on the grass near a fence, only a
few feet from the macadam surface of Nidzyn Avenue in Speonk, that I assumed it
was permanently reposing. Moments later the rabbit got wind of my bike, came out
of tharn like a booster rocket and was gone.

The older I get, the more I observe the rabbits, and the more rabbits I observe,
I find I know the less about the world. Questions to which I thought I knew the
answers 20 years ago begin to baffle me.

It is possible to live one's entire life on Long Island without ever once
noticing the rabbits that live in our midst. Were I not out at such odd hours,
alone, I might never have given the rabbits a second thought.

I wonder, as I ride my bike, how many other things I'm missing on this
miraculous planet.

And I try not to go tharn.qm

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Ken Kalfus

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 283 words


SERVICE FOR THE DEAD. By Robert A. Anderson. (Arbor House, $16.95.) Robert A.
Anderson, a Vietnam veteran whose previous novel, ''Cooks and Bakers,'' was also
about the war, competently depicts combat situations, especially when he is
patrolling a landscape of booby traps and snipers. However, the personnel he has
drafted to fight these battles are hardly substantial. Arriving in the war zone,
the Marine infantryman Mike Allison joins a platoon of soldiers defined by their
nick=names: C.C. (Candid Camera), an amateur photographer; Motor, a car-happy
brute from Detroit; and the Professor, a Yale philosophy major who decided it
was unethical to accept a student deferment. Crazy Mike's chief trait is a
fondness for exclamation marks: ''Mike remembered how scared he had been that
day on his helicopter flight out, how self-conscious in front of the other
marines when he landed. So much had happened =since then!'' Needlessly
complicating his novel, Mr. Anderson tells the story in a series of flashbacks
as Mike, after he is badly wounded, is brought home from a Virginia hospital by
his squabbling, self-involved parents. The author emphasizes the pointlessness
of the elder Allisons' conversation - and, by implication, the soldier's
alienation from an ungrateful America - by transcribing it at enormous length.
Lucky Mike: he can tune out, but the reader must crawl through a free-fire zone
of trite dialogue. While ''Service for the Dead'' describes numerous instances
of United States brutality against Vietnamese civilians, its politics are
ambiguous enough to fit within the current public consensus that the war was
simply a ''tragedy'' whose principal victims were American.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ENVIRONMENT

BYLINE: By Leo H. Carney

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 38, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1066 words


THE National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has received
approval to begin a long-awaited study of the medical histories of workers
exposed to dioxin at the former Diamond Alkali plant in Newark during the 1950's
and 60's.

Marilyn Fingerhut, who oversees the Federal research institute's dioxin studies,
said that the agency planned to begin interviewing an initial group of 80
workers from the plant in March.

If the first phase of the study goes according to plan, she expects to receive
approval to study all 400 former Diamond Alkali workers.

Environmental officials discovered dioxin on and around the plant grounds in
1983. Former workers sued the company, now known as Diamond Shamrock, and the
state, seeking a cleanup of the site and the surrounding neighborhood, as well
as health screening and compensation for injured persons.

Last year, a Superior Court judge ruled that the state must pay for a health
study of the former workers unless they could be included in a Federal study.
The state has appealed that ruling, arguing that the courts cannot force the
Executive Branch to spend monies unless they have been appropriated by the
Legislature.

The Legislature is considering a bill to study the effects of exposure to
dioxin, but that measure would focus on Vietnam veterans exposed to the
herbicide Agent Orange, according to its sponsor, Senator Richard Van Wagner,
Democrat of the 13th District (parts of Monmouth and Middlesex Counties).

The Federal Office of Management and Budget, which has the power to review such
matters under the Paperwork Reduction Act, blocked the study at first, but later
allowed it to proceed so long as a small sample of the workers was tested first
to check the methodology of the study.

Money for the study was included in the 1987 budget.

The study is a follow-up to a NIOSH examination of the mortality rate of some
7,000 workers exposed to dioxin at 14 plants around the country. The new study
will look at the medical histories of workers at the Diamond Alkali plant in
Newark and at a chemical plant in Missouri.

Researchers will look for high incidences of numerous health effects that have
been attributed to dioxin exposure, ranging from skin disorders such as
chloracne to cancer, Dr. Fingerhut said.

Some of the workers are suing Diamond Shamrock, along with the company doctor
who treated them at the time, for compensation for various medical problems they
say were caused by exposure to dioxin, according to Michael Gordon, their
attorney.

Lead in Drinking Water

State officials say they do not believe that New Jerseyans face a serious danger
from lead in their drinking water, despite recent Federal actions to protect
drinkers from the hazardous metal.

The Federal Environmental Protection Agency has issued new regulations lowering
the permissible lead level in drinking water from 50 to 20 parts per million and
banning the use of the metal in water supply systems and plumbing.

The state's Drinking Water Quality Institute is developing standards for
contaminants in drinking water, including lead, and expects to release its first
findings sometime next spring, according to Raymond Barg, a section chief in the
Department of Environmental Protection's Bureau of Safe Drinking Water.

The major source of lead in drinking water is found inside the home,
specifically in the solder used to hold plumbing together. But not all solder
contains lead, Mr. Barg noted, and so not all homes are affected.

Even plumbing that contains lead solder is not necessarily a problem, he added.
The amount of lead that gets into the water depends on how corrosive the water
is.

Corrosiveness varies greatly from water supply to water supply, Mr. Barg said,
and many water companies have taken steps to make their water less corrosive.

Over time, an oxide film tends to cover the insides of pipes, further reducing
the contact between lead and water, he noted.

Concerned homeowners can have their water tested commercially, and in most cases
there is a simple remedy if high lead levels are a problem: run the water before
using it.

Lead levels will be highest in water that has remained in pipes for a long time,
and so people should run their water briefly before using it, especially in the
morning, Mr. Barg said.

Operation Flight Path

The New Jersey Audubon Society says it is winning broad support in its campaign
to protect the habitats used by migratory birds.

An ''Open Letter to the Citizens of New Jersey,'' appearing in the fall issue of
NJ Audobon, the society's magazine, calls for greater awareness of the state's
important role as part of the migratory path of many species.

It carries 63 signatures, including those of Governor Kean and numerous
legislators, D.E.P. officials and naturalists.

The magazine also contains a ''white paper'' on migratory birds, part of the
organization's Operation Flight Path, a campaign begun last spring to protect
areas where more than 300 migratory species stop on their journeys north or
south.

The past year has been a good one for migratory birds. The first sister reserve
for shorebirds was established along Delaware Bay, and Governor Kean has
proclaimed the Garden State Parkway a ''migratory bird corridor.''

The society has found 258 species of birds along the highway's green coastal
swath. However, it hopes to accomplish much more, including better education of
the public and public officials about the requirements of migratory birds.

''Even people who are really concerned about the environment don't really
understand the magnitude of migration in New Jersey,'' said Jane Tanaskovic, the
society's director of development.

The white paper identifies 18 areas that serve as stopping grounds or breeding
areas for birds, including a wide variety of habitats ranging from the
Kittatinny Ridge to the marshlands of Cumberland County and Delaware Bay.

The paper calls for better planning and land-use management to protect those
regions from overdevelopment, and singles out wetlands areas for special
consideration.

Calendar

Tuesday - The Department of Environmental Protection holds a hearing on a
waterfront development permit for the Newport City Development Corporation,
which wants to rehabilitate a waterfront warehouse in Jersey City. At the
Municipal Building, 280 Grove Street, Jersey City, 10:30 A.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of environmental investigators in Newark (NYT/Edward Hausner)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS: 'WE TRIED A NUMBER OF THINGS';
PEROT SAYS NORTH GOT HIM TO PUT UP RANSOM MONEY

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 1


H. Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire, said tonight that for the last five years
he had put up ransom money in secret efforts with Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North to
try to obtain release of various Americans held hostage abroad.

Mr. Perot, in a telephone interview from Dallas, said that in at least three or
four cases since 1982 he agreed to pay as much as $2 million ransom to free
hostages, but that the efforts failed.

''These things have a high risk rate,'' he said. ''We tried a number of things.
All I do is respond to requests. It's not as though I go do anything. I
certainly don't go around looking for these kinds of problems, but if I get a
call I try to be responsive.''

Mr. Perot, founder of the Dallas-based software company Electronic Data Systems,
said that in all of the attempts he was first approached by - and dealed most
directly with - Colonel North.

The Marine officer worked on the National Security Council staff until he was
dismissed last week. Reagan Administration officials say he was the only
Government official with full knowledge of the diversion of up to $30 million
from the sale of arms to Iran to the rebels in Nicaragua.

'The Action Guy'

''My sense was that he was the action guy,'' Mr. Perot said of Colonel North.
''Based on my personal dealings with him, he was very dedicated. very bright,
very able, and just seemed very committed to trying to get his work done. That's
my impression.''

Mr. Perot, who today was ousted from the board of General Motors and removed as
chairman of Electronic Data Systems, said he had no knowledge of Colonel North's
involvement with the arms sales to Iran or the diversion of funds to the
Nicaraguan rebels, or contras.

''I don't have any idea of what his involvement with the contras is,'' he said.
''He and I never discussed it.'' He would not comment on the operation to divert
funds to Iran.

''I'm not sure I understand it all,'' he said. ''I'm still confused. It's easy
to throw darts. I'd first like to understand how it really happened, who
controlled it.''

The disclosure of Mr. Perot's attempt to ransom hostages comes at a time when
President Reagan has emphasized on many occasions that he would not negotiate
with or pay ransom to those responsible for abducting or holding hostages.

Daniel Howard, a White House spokesman, said tonight that ''the National
Security Council says that they knew nothing about any such arrangement''
involving Mr. Perot. He added, ''If it happened, it was certainly
unauthorized.'' $2 Million to Cyprus Mr. Perot said he most recently spoke to
Colonel North last spring in an effort to gain release of five hostages in
Lebanon. Mr. Perot said that at Colonel North's request, he delivered $2 million
by courier to Cyprus. The money was supposed to be exchanged for the hostages,
but the deal was unsuccessful.

Mr. Perot said the $2 million ''was kept in the possession of one of my people
at Colonel North's request.''

''He was always very careful with money,'' Mr. Perot said. ''He specifically
wanted one of my people to control the money with the exchange and make a pick
up at sea.''

Mr. Perot said he did not know, nor did he ask Colonel North, why the deal fell
through.

Mr. Perot said he first met Colonel North after he joined the President's
Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board in early 1982.

Mr. Perot said his first request from Colonel North came soon after they met in
1982. He said the colonel and a senior general at the Pentagon, whose name he
could not remember, communicated with him about trying to obtain the release of
Army Brig. Gen. James L. Dozier, who was abducted in Rome by Red Brigade
terrorists.

''He told me they had a problem and asked me if I could help,'' Mr. Perot
recalled of his first phone call from Colonel North. ''I indicated that I would
be happy to try and time went by and I distinctly remember getting a call at 2
or 3 in the morning.''

He said that next call was probably from the Pentagon general.

Dozier Was Later Rescued

''They needed some funds immediately - I think half a million in lire,'' Mr.
Perot said, adding that the money was wired in time but not used. General Dozier
was later rescued by a squad of special Italian police.

As for the Beirut hostages, Mr. Perot said he agreed to provide $1 to $2 million
ransom to win the release of William Buckley, who was taken hostage in March
1984. The effort failed and Mr. Buckley died after about 15 months in captivity.

''Buckley was in a very sensitive position,'' Mr. Perot said. ''Unfortunately
they killed him.''

Mr. Perot also agreed to supply ransom money for the release of Jeremy Levin, an
American correspondent for Cable News Network. Mr. Levin escaped from eastern
Lebanon in early 1985 after being held by his captors for 11 months.

Mr. Perot said he did not lose any money in his efforts to pay ransom. In all
the cases, he said, he offered to put up the money but never agreed to release
it unless hostages would be exchanged.

''All these things are collect on delivery,'' he said. ''You don't throw money
out there unless you produce a man.''

Mr. Perot's activities to win release of hostages in the last five years are not
his only efforts for the Government. He said his behind-the-scenes activities
began in 1969, when he worked for the Nixon Administration to try to improve the
treatment of prosoners of war in Vietnam.

Ten years later, when two employees of his company were held captive in Iran,
Mr. Perot hired a team to release them, an effort that was chronicled in Ken
Follett's book, ''On Wings of Eagles.''

The disclosure today of his most recent acitivities will likely put an end to
his secret ransom offers, according to Mr. Perot. ''With all this publicity,
it's probably not worth trying anymore,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Books: Like Wolves

BYLINE: By Drew Middleton

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 526 words


RETAKING THE PHILIPPINES: America's Return to Corregidor and Bataan; October
1944-March 1945. By William B. Breuer. Illustrated. 284 pages.

St. Martin's. $18.95.

EXCEPT for those who were there, one generation has forgotten what it was like.

And later generations, despite Vietnam and Korea, have no conception of the
savage struggle to recover the Philippines from the Japanese, whose desperate
courage and willingness to die for their Emperor marked one of the bloodiest
pages in the history of war.

William B. Breuer has brought it back. He sets the background adroitly but
without too much heavy strategic thinking. The fencing between Douglas MacArthur
and the Navy is related crisply and fairly. But the great virtue of this book is
that it gives the reader the taste and texture of those encounters for Bataan,
Corregidor and Manila. That was, as Kipling said of another war in another
place, ''savage, wolves fighting.''

One question the author does not answer - perhaps neither he nor anyone else can
- is whether this campaign, enormous by any standards, was really necessary to
victory in the Pacific. Or was it only a response to MacArthur's blinding desire
to fulfill his promise to the people of the Philippines, ''I shall return''?

By the standards of that war, including Stalingrad and Normandy, no more furious
battles were fought than those brilliantly described in this book. The reader
need only follow the adventures of the airborne troops who landed on the
relatively limited area of Corregidor to learn what Americans can do against
fanatical opposition.

Followers of the naval war will learn just how destructive the Japanese kamikaze
or Special Attack Corps aircraft were in their attacks on the Navy. And how well
the officers and men of those ships responded.

But it was on what the British call the P.B.I., the poor bloody infantry, that
the heaviest task fell. Mr. Breuer has selected from hundreds of actions those
that depict the grim horror of that war. For example, Japanese set afire and
running out of their position in a cave with bloody and wounded Americans
shouting, ''Fry!''

No, these are not pretty pictures. But this is what war is. The campaign
produced no glamorous generals. MacArthur planned and directed it and on
numerous occasions demonstrated his contempt for enemy fire. It did produce
hundreds of average Americans hauled out of civilian life who, when the moment
came, acted with courage and enterprise.

The author also provides what is, for me, a rare picture of the intelligence and
resistance network that had been established in the Philippines after
MacArthur's departure and the fall of Bataan and Corregidor. The resistance,
largely Philippine but including a few Americans, was one reason why, once the
Americans were ashore, the conquest of the islands proceeded so well.

What was the campaign's ultimate impact on the Pacific war? Mr. Breuer records
Japan lost 100,000 veteran troops and an additional 280,000 were scattered
through the Philippines unable to participate in the defense of the homeland.
The operation did not win the war. But it was a long step toward victory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William Breuer (Steve Hooper)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
PESKY ENTREPRENEUR: HENRY ROSS PEROT

BYLINE: By N. R. KLEINFIELD

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1493 words


He has never been able to keep quiet. Perhaps that should have warned everyone
that the maverick and the auto giant were not going to make it together.

Even yesterday, as General Motors announced that H. Ross Perot was leaving its
board and selling back his G.M. stock, Mr. Perot stole the show from the auto
maker with his own news conference in Dallas, where he twitted G.M. for paying
him such an outlandish amount of money when workers were being laid off.

Ross Perot, 5 feet 6 inches tall, has long been the pint-sized billionaire with
the Texas-sized mouth. He calls himself an irritant. ''I stir things up,'' he
likes to say.

Even as his own computer-services company, the Electronic Data Systems
Corporation, grew and prospered, and even as it was absorbed by one of the
world's most bureaucratic companies, the brassy 56-year-old Texan with the jug
ears and the crooked nose said he kept believing he could get things done his
way.

Soon after Mr. Perot startled many of his longtime colleagues by selling his
company in October 1984, there was a lot of wondering about whether G.M. would
change Mr. Perot. ''I knew Ross wouldn't change,'' said Tom Marquez, who was Mr.
Perot's first employee. ''Ross is Ross. He never changes.''

And thus it was probably inevitable that Roger Smith, the head of General
Motors, would tire of the pesky Mr. Perot and bring about a showdown. The messy
denouement yesterday even required Mr. Perot to relinquish his title of chairman
of E.D.S.

Being stripped of his title, according to Mr. Perot, is a meaningless gesture
demanded by General Motors. G.M. said that Mr. Perot would retain only the
ceremonial title of founder, but he said he plans to stay at E.D.S., doing the
same things. ''I don't need any title down here,'' he said. ''I'll be helping
with the huge sales and marketing efforts and make sure we're doing the best
possible job of hiring the right people.'' He added, ''If I'm not here, it will
cost E.D.S. a lot of business.''

A Chance to Reconsider

Perhaps he was being his frisky self by refusing to accept immediately the $700
million that G.M. offered him for his stock. He deemed it a foolish use of money
at a time when G.M. is laying off workers, so he said he was giving the auto
maker until Dec. 15 to reconsider. ''I just can't conceive that they would spend
this much money this way,'' he said.

In a telephone interview yesterday from Dallas, where E.D.S. still has its
headquarters, Mr. Perot was predictably tart but good-humored. Discussing the
huge payment G.M. had offered him, he said, ''One of the guys around here today
came up to me and said, 'Perot, is this some new form of greenmail?' and another
E.D.S. person who was with me said, 'No, it's a form of hush-mail.' ''

To a large extent, the G.M. showdown resulted from a collision of discordant
styles. Whereas Mr. Smith has been a prototypical corporate man, Mr. Perot has
never shed his prickly, entrepreneurial nature. Tact is not his strong point. He
has long grumbled about the unchecked greed of big corporations. ''There's too
much of looking out for No. 1,'' he said not long ago. ''I think companies
should be creating jobs and not ego-tripping.''

Mr. Perot said yesterday that there were two ''stress points'' - the feuding
over G.M.'s refusal to give E.D.S. contracts for its work and Mr. Perot's
stinging public criticism of the company. ''I found that, not being effective
internally, I had to take public positions about the need to get competitive,''
he said. ''I understood that they didn't like it, but I tried to make it clear
that none of it was personal. One of the G.M. guys said to me once, 'Why are you
so intense?' I said, 'If you had the investment I had, you'd be intense too.' ''

As a novel part of the agreement struck yesterday, Mr. Perot can be fined, up to
a cap of $7.5 million, for criticizing General Motors. ''That shows that they're
very sensitive to criticism,'' he said. He added that he planned to cease
offering his opinions on G.M. but warned that if he felt strongly, he might
speak out again.

'Umbrella Over the E.D.S. People'

His agreement specifies that he could start a nonprofit computer services
company at once or a for-profit company after three years. Mr. Perot said he
would be interested in starting a company only if large numbers of his former
employees left G.M. and needed jobs. ''I want to be in a position to keep an
umbrella over the E.D.S. people,'' he explained.

Nothing about Mr. Perot meshed with G.M's upper echelons. Though fabulously
wealthy, Mr. Perot likes simplicity. He returns his own phone calls, buys his
suits off the rack (sometimes from Sears), drives his own car. His salary has
remained at the same $68,000 that he was paid when E.D.S. went public in 1968.
He said he presumed it would continue at that level even though he has lost his
title as chairman. ''I didn't even ask,'' he said. ''I may be on food stamps.''

Mr. Smith, in a recent interview, carped about the poshness of Mr. Perot's
E.D.S. office, which overflows with Frederic Remington bronzes and other costly
works. ''My office has all my stuff in it that I bought personally,' Mr. Perot
said about the gibe. ''The people at E.D.S. love that story, because they all
know that the stuff is here because my wife doesn't like cowboys and Indians.''

Clearly, though, Mr. Perot also wanted things changed at G.M. that Mr. Smith did
not. Mr. Perot disliked the heated garages for G.M. executives' cars, and he
felt that the top brass was too isolated from the work force. He was against
shutting down plants, and he had opposed the expensive Hughes Aircraft
acquisition.

From the beginning, he did things differently. A perk of G.M. directors is that
they get a new car every three months or 3,000 miles. Once he heard that these
machines got special inspections, Mr. Perot started buying his car at a dealer.
During spare moments, he would don raggedy clothing and visit G.M. dealerships
incognito to try to assess service. ''I just had to be me,'' he said.

Born in Texarkana

Henry Ross Perot, whose father was a cotton broker and horse trader, was born in
Texarkana, in east Texas, on June 27, 1930. He held sundry jobs as a child,
including stringing barbed-wire fences and delivering The Texarkana Gazette by
horseback. He entered the United States Naval Academy in 1949 and while a
midshipman, he met his future wife, Margot Birmingham. He also met a visiting
dignitary from the International Business Machines Corporation, who told Mr.
Perot to look him up one day; after naval service Mr. Perot did and was hired as
a salesman in Dallas.

He sold so much so fast that he became bored. He quit and on June 27, 1962,
wrote a check for $1,000 to found E.D.S. His idea was that lots of computer
users didn't know what to do with the computers. E.D.S. would design, install
and operate them. The company grew on the strength of state contracts to
administer Medicare and Medicaid programs.

Though he has styled himself as a businessman whose principal function in life
is to create jobs, Mr. Perot has often managed to get involved in quixotic
situations.

In 1969, he tried, unsuccessfully, to deliver 26 tons of Christmas packages to
American prisoners of war in North Vietnam. In 1974, he took over two faltering
Wall Street firms, but failed to save them, causing Mr. Perot to complain that
he was ''suckered.'' In 1979, he sent a former Vietnam commando and a band of
E.D.S. executives to rescue two employees imprisoned in Teheran, Iran. The
successful mission was recounted by Ken Follett in the 1983 best seller ''On
Wings of Eagles.''

A War on Drugs

More recently, he spearheaded a war on drugs in Texas that has brought about
harsh drug laws in the state. He followed that with a year-and-a-half-long
battle for educational reform in Texas.

Forbes magazine, in its most recent examination of American wealth, placed Mr.
Perot third, with an estimated worth of more than $2 billion. Aside from the
G.M. stock, his interests consist of gas and oil exploration enterprises, real
estate, fixed-income securities and some venture-capital projects. The handling
of these has been entrusted to Merv Stauffer, a longtime associate, and Mr.
Perot's 27-year-old son, Ross Jr. Nancy, his 25-year-old daughter, also does
investment analysis for her father. Another daughter is in college.

Mr. Perot's longtime desire has been to give away the bulk of his fortune to
worthy causes, though he says that he is often frustrated at the lack of ably
managed charities. The disbursement of money is presided over by Mr. Perot's
sister, Bette Perot. Since March 1969, Mr. Perot has handed out more than $100
million.

If G.M. does not rescind the $700 million offer to him, what will Mr. Perot do
with the new dollars? ''Put it to work,'' he said. ''I'll create jobs in other
ways. If I have a lot in life, and I'm not sure I do, it's to create jobs.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of H. Ross Perot (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 3, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
Of Names, Zeal and Appetite

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 739 words


Importance of Names:

What shall we call it? A scandal? An affair? A mess? Perhaps a disgrace? Names
are vital at times like this, yet this business about Iran, Nicaragua, Israel,
Lieut. Col. Oliver North, the National Security Council, hostage trades and
plenty more still has no name.

Most suggestions rework the trite -gate suffix. As for all -gate names, enough
already! ''Watergate'' was fine, but it's out. ''Northgate,'' which has been
proposed, is feeble; the issue isn't Colonel North, who seems likely to emerge
as just another fall guy, a Gordon Liddy in Marine greens.

''Basementgate'' is also in the air, based (basemented?) on the supposition that
weird schemes were hatched in the White House basement where the
national-security cerebrators hang out. Basementgate is silly, like naming a boy
Fortescue.

There have been wonderful names in the past that did not need -gate endings.
England had the dandy ''Profumo scandal,'' (sex among the Tories), President
Eisenhower suffered the ''vicuna coat affair,'' sometimes called ''the Sherman
Adams problem'' (White House biggie accepts free coat from finagler) and
Republicans afflicted President Truman with ''the White House mess''
(Presidential pals grant small-bore boons to small bores).

It's too bad Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter resigned as national security adviser
so early in the proceedings, because naming it ''the Poindexter affair'' would
have made it seem uncommonly elegant, rather like a case for Sherlock Holmes.

Surtout, pas du zele!

Colonel North's apparently impetuous conduct as a minor officer of the White
House tends now to be praised and excused as the result of admirable patriotic
zeal. This tendency illustrates the absence of wisdom among people in charge at
the White House; the wise have always been wary of the zealous.

''Above all, no zeal!'' counseled Talleyrand.

Justice Brandeis in Olmstead v. United States, 1928: ''The greatest dangers to
liberty lurk in insidious encroachment by men of zeal, well-meaning but without
understanding.''

Thomas Fuller in ''Gnomologia,'' 1732: ''Zeal is fit only for wise men, but is
found mostly in fools.''

Colonel North may now say with the Psalmist (CXIX, 139), ''My zeal hath consumed
me.''

And if President Reagan would pause in his attacks on the press long enough to
browse in J.C.F. Schiller's ''Wallenstein's Death, III,'' published in 1799, he
would surely smile in recognition upon reading, ''The zeal of friends it is that
knocks me down, and not the hate of enemies.''

''The Butler Did It''

Sooner rather than later in events that disturb the serenity of the governing
class, the unvarying source of all the trouble is invariably identified and
denounced by the disturbed party. This source is the media, almost always
denounced in the illiterate singular, as in, ''It is the media that did it.''

President Reagan has just done his ''media did it'' number in an interview with
Time. At this writing the media hasn't (having started illiterate, let's brave
it out) yet snarled, ''Yer talkin' through yer hat, shamus! At the time of the
crime I was putting the boot into Ivan Boesky and I got witnesses to prove it.''

The media will, though. The media is (sorry again) famously thin skinned and
always denies it did it. It denied losing the Vietnam war, it denied being the
culprit in Watergate, it denied destroying President Carter. Now it will deny it
is making the present trouble.

The charges against it, however, are almost always true. News people always deny
them because they don't realize what is meant by that singularly illiterate
''media.''

The old word for it was ''publicity.'' Once upon a time publicity was different
from news. The publicity man was a salesman for those who wanted to become rich
or get on in the world. Then politicians mastered the sleazy arts of exploiting
the news business's frailties, especially television's, first to turn news into
publicity and, then, to turn publicity into news.

Once news and publicity became interchangeable, we had the ''media,''
illiterately singular. Now we have news reporting how publicity experts use
''photo opportunities'' and ''spin control'' to reduce the news to publicity.
When you turn the news into publicity, you must be careful to stay in charge.
Mr. Reagan got careless. Live by publicity, you'll probably die by publicity.
Publicity - media, if you prefer - has a voracious appetite.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 3, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WITNESS SAYS HE APPROVED EXPLOSION IN FILM

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 431 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 2


The special effects technician who set off the explosions that led to the fatal
helicopter crash on the set of ''Twilight Zone: The Movie'' testified today that
he had final responsibility to make sure the filming sequence was safe.

Defense attorneys said that the technician, James Camomile, provided some of the
most important testimony for their clients thus far in their trial on charges of
involuntary manslaughter, now in its 13th week.

''He exonerated all five defendants,'' one attorney, Arnold Klein, who is
representing a defendant, Paul Stewart, the special effects coordinator, told
reporters afterwards.

The actor Vic Morrow, 53 years old, and two children, Myca Dinh Le, 7, and Renee
Shinn Chen, 6, were killed July 23, 1982, when the special effects blasts
detonated by Mr. Camomile disabled the helicopter, sending the aircraft spinning
to the ground on top of the actors in the filming of a Vietnam War scene at
Indian Dunes Motorcycle Park, about 40 miles north of Los Angeles.

On trial in Los Angeles Superior Court in connection with the deaths are John
Landis, the movie's director; George Folsey Jr., the associate producer; Dan
Allingham, the unit production manager; Dorcey Wingo, the helicopter pilot, and
Mr. Stewart.

In his second day of testimony, Mr. Camomile, in cross-examination by Mr. Klein,
said he bore final responsiblity for for detonating the explosives.

When asked by Mr. Klein whether the operator of the special effects firing board
had final say, Mr. Camomile replied, ''That's correct.''

''It is your responsibility to make sure everything is safe?'' the lawyer
continued. ''Yes sir,'' Mr. Camomile answered. ''You had final duty to abort if
you thought it was unsafe?'' Mr. Klein asked again.

''That's correct,'' Mr. Camomile said.

''And if you felt it was unsafe, you would have stopped firing?'' Mr. Klein
asked. ''Yes sir,'' Mr. Camomile testified.  Mr. Camomile said he had not looked
overhead to see if the helicopter had cleared his firing area because his
attention was focused on Mr. Morrow and the two children, who were crossing the
Santa Clara River at the time of the crash.

Deputy District Attorney Lea Purwin D'Agostino said ''there has never been an
issue'' whether Mr. Camomile had the last say on the firing board. But she added
that Mr. Camomile ''had no way of knowing John Landis would position the
helicopter'' above the explosions controlled by the special effects technician.

''He wasn't told the helicopter would be in a zone of danger,'' Mrs. D'Agostino
told reporters in the hallway outside of court.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SAFETY OF ACTORS CITED BY WITNESS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 429 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 3


The special effects technician who detonated the explosions that caused the
fatal helicopter crash on the set of''Twilight Zone: The Movie'' testified today
that because of his concern for the safety of the actors on the ground he never
looked up to see the aircraft before he set off the explosives.

''My attention was focused on Vic and the children because of the possibility
the children might break free and run back to the village where my explosives
were,'' James Camomile testified.

He was speaking of the actor Vic Morrow and the two children, Myca Dinh Le, 7
years old, and Renee Shinn Chen, 6, who were killed while crossing a river in
the filming of a Vietnam War scene when the explosions controlled by Mr.
Comomile disabled a helicopter hovering overhead and sent it into an
uncontrollable spin to the ground.

Facing involuntary manslaughter charges for the July 23, 1982, filming deaths
are John Landis, the film's director, George Folsey Jr.; the associate producer,
Dan Allingham; the production manager, Paul Stewart; the special effects
coordinator, and Dorcey Wingo, the helicopter pilot.

A Los Angeles Deputy District Attorney, Lea Purwin D'Agostino, questioned Mr.
Camomile today on redirect examination, and when Mrs. D'Agostino asked him if
there was any reason that he did not look into the air Mr. Camomile testified
that his attention was focused on Mr. Morrow and the children .

Mrs. D'Agostino then asked Mr. Camomile if he was ever told that the helicopter
would be brought into the fatal filming sequence at an altitude of 24 feet, to
which the special effects technician answered, ''I don't believe so.''

When asked if he had been told that the helicopter would be hovering 24 feet off
the ground, would that have affected his decision to place the bombs where he
did, Mr. Camomile testified, ''Yes, it would.'' He added that he would not have
planted the explosives in the locations where they were detonated had he known
the flight path that the helicopter followed.

Mr. Camomile has given conflicting testimony for the past three days over the
position of the helicopter in the fatal scene compared to its location in a
rehearsal flight 20 minutes before the crash.

Mr. D'Agostino contends that Mr Landis ordered the aircraft to fly lower and
closer to the explosions and did not tell Mr. Camomile thatthe helicopter would
be closer to the ground.

Defense lawyers say the crash was an unforseeable accident the result of the
melting of trhe helicopter's rear rotary blade caused by the intense heat given
off by the explosion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS: PORTRAIT OF A MARINE;
Colonel North's Career: Decorations for Combat

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1138 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 3


Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, who was dismissed from his National Security
Council staff job last week but later praised by President Reagan as a
''national hero,'' had a relatively orthodox, modestly successful career as a
Marine Corps officer.

Those who knew him well at the Naval Academy and in the Marines Corps said they
found such harsh recent descriptions as a ''bull elephant gone amok,'' and
''loose cannon'' hard to reconcile with the professional, diligent performance
they saw during the colonel's 13 years of active duty.

During the Vietnam War, then Second Lieutenant North was once swept from the
deck of a tank by its revolving turret. But, according to a battle citation, he
grabbed a grenade launcher, climbed back onto the tank and led an attack that
killed seven North Vietnamese soldiers. On another occasion during his 11-month
tour he led three assaults on an enemy position until it finally fell.

He was decorated for such actions, but not highly decorated. He was regularly
promoted, but not rapidly promoted. He took a serious, studious interest in such
subjects as revolutionary warfare and military history, but one friend remarked
that ''anyone who tells you Ollie North is a military intellectual is crazy.''

No Critics to Be Found

A half dozen fellow marines and other acquaintences spoke warmly and admiringly
of Colonel North, but said he also had critics and people who just did not like
him. In fact, though, no critics were found. About the worst anyone interviewed
said was that he was a ''mild maverick'' who was often ''impatient with the
system'' but by no means insubordinate.

Colonel North early on showed a strong desire for action. William Corson, a
retired Marine and noted counterinsurgency expert who was one of Colonel North's
teachers at Annapolis, recalled the midshipman was ''disconsolate'' when a
serious automobile accident caused him to be held back a year. Mr. Corson said
his student was upset that he might miss the Vietnam War.

''I told him not to get a 'Mr. Roberts' syndrome,'' said Mr. Corson, referring
to the novel about a naval officer who chafed aboard a supply ship in World War
II and finally met his death after getting his wish to serve on a destroyer.

Lieut. Col. Jack Holly, a 1968 Annapolis classmate, recalled that in the months
before midshipmen were to choose their future careers photographs of recently
killed academy graduates were regularly posted in Memorial Hall. ''There were a
lot of aviators but also a lot of marines,'' said Colonel Holly. ''Going Marine
was not a popular option.'' Only about 70 midshipmen volunteered for more than
100 marine openings.

Course on Communism

Colonel North took Mr. Corson's popular course on Communism and revolutionary
war and was one of several midshipmen who would gather informally at the
instructor's knee after hours for more discussion.

Col. Pat Collins, an expert in terrorism and a longtime friend of Colonel
North's who is slightly older, said: ''Ollie has always been interested in what
is now called 'low intensity conflict.' '' Several friends say this early
interest may have been stimulated by his work with the anti-Sandinista
Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras.

But friends differed on how subtle Colonel North's appreciation was of the
political aspects of revolution and counterrevolution.

''The United States casts a bright sun, but also a dark shadow in the third
world,'' said one marine. Another friend said he once told Colonel North of the
contras that ''anybody can cut a man's throat, but these guys can't even read a
map.''

Silver and Bronze Stars

Colonel North earned the Silver Star, the nation's third-highest decoration for
gallantry, and the Bronze Star, with a ''V'' for valor, the fourth-highest
combat medal, in Vietnam in 1969, while serving as a platoon leader with the
rank of second lieutenant.

He was with K Company of the Third Battalion, Third Marine Regiment, Third
Division from Dec. 3, 1968, to Aug. 21, 1969. He then served as a junior officer
on the operations staff of division headquarters until Nov. 23, 1969, when he
returned to the United States.

He won his Bronze Star on Feb. 22, 1969, and the Silver Star on May 25 of the
same year. Both battles took place in Quang Tri, the northernmost province of
South Vietnam near the demilitarized zone separating North and South Vietnam.

The official citation for the Silver Star said that when another Marine platoon
was pinned down by the North Vietnamese, Lieutenant North rapidly moved his own
platoon into position and ''personally initiated an aggressive assault against
the North Vietnamese Army emplacement,'' forcing ''the stunned hostile soldiers
to withdraw to another hill.''

The citation said Lieutenant North then ''assumed the foremost assault position,
and seemingly oblivious to the intense machinegun fire impacting around him, led
his men against the hostile position.''

Action Called Inspiring

The citation says he stopped his attacks only for a new supply of ammunition and
a supporting air strike and then ''calmly braving the intense fire of the
tenacious hostile soldiers'' made a final assault that ''enabled his men to
seize the objective'' and ''inspired all who observed him.''

He received the Bronze Star for his action on the tank, in which the citation
said, he ''completely disregarded his own safety as he boldly remained in his
dangerously exposed position on top the tank to deploy his men.''

He also received two Purple Hearts for battle wounds. No descriptive records are
kept for these awards.

Colonel North's primary skills as a soldier were apparently high. In 1974 he
commanded a training area on Okinawa in which Marine companies underwent jungle
and rough-terrain training and survival schools.

'I Adore Ollie North'

''I adore Ollie North,'' said Maj. Gil Macklin, one of the colonel's
subordinates at that time.

''He was not the corporate management type of officer, but an inspirational
leader,'' said Major Macklin. ''You never got chewed out for taking an
initiative, even if you made a mistake.''

Mr. Corson, who served as a military adviser in the Eisenhower and Kennedy
Administrations, said he once told Colonel North that in the White House ''you
got to have your values straight because it is hard to tell the President of the
United States his fly is open.''

''Certainly,'' Mr. Corson said, ''there are myopic people on the White House
staff who lose their values, but I can't say that about Ollie. He was very loyal
to Reagan.''

Several friends of Colonel North said he had consciously harmed his future in
the Marine Corps long before the present crisis by choosing to stay so long on
the White House staff rather than return to active duty to command a battalion,
the usual path to higher rank.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Beware That Mandate

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


The Greeks had a word for it, which can be loosely translated as ''wanton . . .
arrogance resulting from excessive pride.'' In our more scientific time, it
might be called the Mandate Syndrome, and Ronald Reagan has become the fourth
President of the modern era to be felled by it.

Presidents elected by overwhelming margins, that is, slip easily into the belief
that the public supports them so strongly that it will accept any policy or
approach they may espouse; and that if questions arise, a few calming words will
set things right.

Presidents, moreover, are surrounded by staff assistants eager for Presidential
favor and happy to encourage the syndrome - which also means greater
Presidential receptivity to these aides' own schemes, crack-brained or
otherwise. Thus, one White House assistant happily claimed at the time that
Ronald Reagan had been ''liberated'' by his 1984 landslide. From what, the aide
neglected to say; but now he knows what history could have taught him:

* Franklin Roosevelt carried every state but Maine and Vermont in 1936, but his
triumph caused him to believe that he could get away with the Supreme Court
''packing'' plan that nearly wrecked his second term.

* Lyndon Johnson won what was in 1964 a record percentage of the vote, and
fantasized as a result not only that the public would support both an enlarged
war in Vietnam and the Great Society, but that neither would require a tax
increase.

* Richard Nixon whipped George McGovern by an even greater mar-gin in 1972, and
so was able to view his mandate as more than sufficient to justify
''stonewalling'' a ''third-rate burglary'' at the Watergate.

The Iran-Nicaragua fiasco seems just as certainly a consequence of the 1984
landslide and of Mr. Reagan's phenomenal scores since then on the popularity
charts. How could such a leader be brought down, no matter what chance he took?
Who was there to tell him no?

Mr. Reagan's punishment may not be so harsh as Mr. Nixon's, though the misdeeds
inherent in the current scandal - flirting as they do with real national
security - seem considerably more serious than most of the Watergate offenses.
But with two years to go in his second term, the consequences for the Reagan
Administration will be severe.

Even before the fall, even before the Democrats took over the Senate, Mr.
Reagan's military buildup had come to a probable end, owing to the Federal
deficit and to public resistance to military spending at the expense of domestic
programs.

Nor can he hope to muster now -when he couldn't before - the necessary
Congressional support for such cherished goals as a constitutional amendment to
force a balanced budget, or one to permit prayer in the schools, or a line-item
veto, or school vouchers. And if the economy turns down, as seems possible, he
may no longer have the capacity to persuade the public that he bears no
responsibility.

In foreign policy, Mr. Reagan's heedless fling into covert action seems sure to
be equally punished. Any chance he may have had to oust the Sandinistas and
install a hand-picked regime in Managua, without the use of U.S. forces, is gone
with Colonel North. And what becomes now of the vaunted ''Reagan Doctrine'' of
assisting so-called ''freedom fighters'' around the world? What possibility is
there now that he can have useful influence in South Africa?

In the Middle East, where the Administration started out boldly with Al Haig's
vision of a ''strategic consensus,'' the situation is even more muddled than it
was after Mr. Reagan pulled the Marines out of Lebanon - his most serious, if
often overlooked, previous setback. Even the Israelis seem baffled and not a
little miffed at what passes for U.S. policy in this crucial area, which now
offers virtually no hope for diplomatic achievement.

As for arms control, the subject that even after the Iceland summit meeting
seemed to offer Mr. Reagan the best hope of accomplishment, the Russians may now
consider him too weakened for the possibility of a major agreement. If
sufficiently humbled, however, by the ill effects of the Mandate Syndrome, the
President might be able to scale down his arms control approach to the level of
a small but useful agreement - a tenuous prospect, but worth discussing in
another article.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE: SHIPPING CONTRA ARMS BY THE SEAT OF THE PANTS;
Aid to Contras: High Risk, Low Budget

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1150 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Dec. 4


The first flight to El Salvador had to jettison $50,000 worth of cargo over the
countryside and nearly crash-landed last January.

Later, planes limped back from a dozen secret arms drops inside Nicaragua on one
engine, with smoke and oil spewing behind. Then the crews would hit the bars of
San Salvador, where they reminisced on their latest good luck and all the other
near-misses they had had flying over Vietnam, Laos, the Congo, in other tropical
wars.

Such moments were typical of the high-risk, low-budget covert operation to
supply Nicaraguan rebels that, according to six former American crew members,
for 10 months mixed Keystone Kops missteps with the deadly serious business of
arming a guerrilla war. The project finally ended with the death of two pilots
in Nicaragua.

''I've landed planes in North Vietnam and I've hijacked drug-dealers airplanes
in foreign countries,'' said one crew member on the flights. ''But this is by
far the craziest and most dangerous thing I have ever done.'' #3 C.I.A.
Operatives Cited That someone in Washington, perhaps in the White House, was
apparently willing to organize and support such a politically risky venture
continues to surprise and intrigue the dozen or so Special Forces veterans and
former Central Intelligence Agency Air America crew members who were hired to
get the rebel arms supply flights - reportedly financed by arms sales to Iran -
off the ground.

The Reagan Administration has denied that the Government was responsible for the
flights.

The fliers' work in El Salvador was supported by three former Cuban-American
Central Intelligence Agency operatives, they say, men whose code names were Max
Gomez, Ramon Medina and Ralph, the most mysterious and least-known of the three.

Telephone records indicate that Mr. Medina was almost certainly Luis Posada
Carriles, who is wanted in Venezuela for blowing up a Cuban airliner. Several
members of the American crews who worked out of El Salvador and Honduras between
January and October say it was a miracle they did not crash or get shot down
inside Nicaragua much sooner, blowing their cover and perhaps the
Administration's secret plans months ago.

Plane's Cargo Was Dumped

Their first two planes were rusting C-7 Caribous from Canada, crew members say.
When the first one was flown from Canada in January it developed engine trouble,
forcing the crew to kick out a $40,000 spare engine, a new refrigerator and
crates of other gear to keep airborne long enough to find a landing place. The
incident badly embarrassed the Salvadoran army, which had to clean up the mess.

The apparent paymasters for the operation, who worked for Stanford Technology
Inc. and the American National Management Corporation in Virginia, made it clear
they were worried about Americans flying weapons over Nicaragua, the former crew
members say. In typically ill-planned fashion, they add, three Rhodesians were
then sent to El Salvador to pilot the flights over Nicaragua.

But the Rhodesians did not know how to fly the planes the American crews were
using. They also drank and chased women every night, and beat up Salvadorans,
the crew members say, eventually leading the American embassy to demand that the
Rhodesians be sent packing.

At first, crew members say, they had a small operation, shuttling a few weapons
to rebel bases as well as nonlethal equipment provided by the State Department.
But by April, new money was coming in and a secret airstrip known as the
''ranch'' was finished in Costa Rica. Two more supply planes - larger C-123's -
were bought in the next few months, allowing the covert weapons flights inside
Nicaragua to begin in earnest.

Flights 'Fairly Impressive'

But the planes were slow and poorly maintained, had navigation instruments that
worked fitfully and lacked radar detection and missile-evasion gear. As a
consequence, the pilots flew into the night as carefully as they could, but they
said they knew they would be out of luck if anything went wrong.

And yet, through it all, the American crews managed to deliver hundreds of
thousands of pounds of weapons and other supplies to rebel bases and combat
units, keeping the war alive at a time when Congress had cut off military aid
and when the rebels themselves were hard-pressed to survive inside Nicaragua,
according to crew members and American officials who monitored the operation.

''When you consider how little support these guys got, it's fairly impressive
how much they were able to do,'' said one of the American officials.

According to three of the Americans who flew the planes, the lack of support
purposely included no parachutes, an obvious gesture intended to leave no
survivors if there was a crash.

The clannish American crews were hired with what one termed ''a wink and a
nod,'' by other retired military officers. Those officers made it clear that
what they were doing was supported at the highest level of the Reagan
Administration. 'Pursuing Policies' of the U.S.  ''We didn't ask a lot of
questions but we knew we were pursuing the policies of our country,'' said one
American who worked on the flights. That impression was supported, crew members
say, when they were issued Salvadoran Air Force identity cards describing them
as United States Government military advisers.

Five of the former crew members said they regularly bumped into Central
Intelligence Agency and American military men during their work in El Salvador
and Honduras, and that they knew that United States embassies were well aware of
their work, a conclusion supported by American officials in the region who say
they carefully tracked the covert operation.

''Our main concern was that they were buying trash and flying trash and that one
would go down,'' said one of the American officials who watched the weapons
program for the Nicarguan rebels, known as the contras.

None of the American officials tried to stop the flights supplying the contras,
further confirmation, several crew members say, that their efforts were quietly
backed by the Administration.

Downed Pilot Was Careless

And yet the crew members say they were told not to trust American embassy
officials. ''They were people who refused to aid American policy in the ways
that were not allowed - like what we were doing,'' said one flier.

The former fliers say they were saddened but not surprised when one of their
planes was finally shot down over Nicaragua two months ago. They say the plane's
pilot, William J. Cooper, had become careless and that he took off on his last
mission on a clear blue day when nobody should have been flying weapons over
Nicaragua.

But several crew members said that if given the chance they would do it all
again. ''We had lousy equipment, lousy weather and ancient planes,'' said one
man who flew guns for months. ''But we'd do it again because it was fun and we
believed in it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: PENTAGON;
G.I. BILL, ONCE A REWARD, IS NOW A LURE TO SIGN UP

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 32, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 949 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 4


At the end of World War II, Congress voted the first G.I. Bill of educational
benefits to help transition back to civilian life for those who had served.
Later the bill was extended to those who served in Korea and Vietnam.

Since the end of the draft and the advent of all-volunteer services in 1973,
however, the purpose of the G.I. Bill has fundamentally changed. It has become
become less a reward and more an incentive to attract young recruits to all the
services.

Today, halfway through a three-year test of a new version of the G.I. Bill, the
Army has found in a survey that the prospect of money for college is now the
leading reason young men and women enlist, replacing a negative motivation:
inability to get a civilian job. The next reason given is to learn a skill.

Big Rise in Participation

Army officers also say that 85 percent of new recruits today sign up for the new
bill - they must commit to it at the beginning of their service - as against 38
percent under the old Veterans Educational Assistance Program, which ran from
1977 to 1985.

Perhaps most important, the officers report, the new bill has been a key reason
that more than 90 percent of those enlisting today are high school graduates,
who drill sergeants say make better soldiers than nongraduates.

''From the Army's standpoint,'' said Maj. Gen. William G. O'Leksy, director of
military personnel manage-ment, ''the test has been eminently successful.''

But there are costs. The Government's contribution to benefits under the new
bill is higher than it was under the Educational Assistance Program, although
less than it was under the still earlier G.I. Bill. For a three year stint in
the Vietnam War, the Government paid the veteran $16,128 in benefits; under the
1977-85 program, that dropped to $5,400; the new G.I. Bill costs the Government
$9,600.

The new bill costs little now because few young people have served long enough
to begin drawing benefits. For this fiscal year, the outlay will be only
$400,000. By 1993, according to Army projections, it will have jumped to $400
million a year.

Less Than Civilian Grants

As against Government aid to education for civilians, however, that is a
relatively small sum. The Department of Education's budget last year for Pell
Grants cost the taxpayers $3.9 billion.

Another cost of the G.I. Bill over the long run is that it does not help, and
many hinder, efforts to retain experienced soldiers. The prospect of a large sum
of money to help pay for college gives bright young people an incentive to
leave.

But Army officers argue that their service, unlike the Navy and Air Force, which
need many technicians, wants large numbers of ''grunts,'' or combat soldiers,
for a relatively short period. Only a small portion need be retained as
sergeants. In addition, the Army offers bonuses for young men and women who
enlist for four years and learn a needed skill. They can earn another bonus by
re-enlisting.

Finally, General O'Leksy contends, men and women who leave the Army for school
could become walking recruiting posters. ''When the soldier goes to college and
talks to the nonveteran,'' he said, ''he will have a positive view of his time
in service.''

Burden Is Now Shared

Until 1977, all educational benefits under the G.I. Bill were paid by the
Government. After that, each soldier, sailor, air force member or marine elected
to contribute from $25 to $100 a month while in the service. The Government
matched that, $2 for each $1 contribution, for a maximum benefit of $8,100.

But that program did little to overcome a military pay scale that lagged behind
the civilian sector. Barely half of the Army's recruits in the late 1970's were
high school graduates and the service met quotas only by enlisting people who
passed the armed forces entrance tests with the lowest acceptable scores.

Then Congress in 1979 authorized the Army, but not the other services, to offer
extra payments, known in the miltary as ''kickers,'' to attract high school
graduates and those who could score well. The added benefits were $8,000 for a
two-year tour of service and $12,000 for three years.

The kickers, along with substantial raises in the early 1980's, improved
recruiting. But many in Congress were still dissatisfied. That led to the new
G.I. Bill, which became effective in July 1985, with a test to run until June
1988.

Benefits Paid for 3 Years

Today, a young person entering the Army or any of the other services must choose
the G.I. Bill the day he or she joins and agree to contribute $100 a month of
the $573 base pay for the first 12 months of service. After two years, the
soldier's benefit is $9,000; for three years, $10,800. In either case, the
benefits are paid monthly for 36 months while the ex-soldier is an accredited
college.

If the soldier decides later not to use the educational benefits, the $1,200 is
forfeit. ''That's quite a bet on his part,'' General O'Leksy said, ''but it's a
good bet.''

On top of the G.I. Bill is the Army's College Fund, the kicker a recruit may
earn for enlisting in the combat arms, such as infantry, armor or artillery, for
which only men are eligible. But men and women both may earn kickers by agreeing
to train for a specialty the Army needs, including tank mechanic, electronic
warfare specialist and parachute rigger. A soldier who serves for four years can
leave with $25,200 in benefits.

The Army also began in 1985 to offer benefits to men and women who completed two
years of college. They may enlist for two years in a specialty the army needs,
then return to college in the Reserve Officers Training Corps for two years with
a benefit worth $21,000.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: CLINT EASTWOOD IN 'HEARTBREAK RIDGE'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 776 words


''HEARTBREAK RIDGE,'' which stars Clint Eastwood, who also directed and produced
it, is about Sgt. Tom Highway of the United States Marine Corps, a character
made to Mr. Eastwood's impressive measurements as a man, an actor and an icon of
the popular cinema.

By 1983, when the film begins, Tom Highway has been on active duty in the
Marines longer than most of the men serving with him have been alive. He won the
Medal of Honor at Heartbreak Ridge in Korea and fought with valor in Vietnam,
another war that wasn't won. His wife has long since divorced him. He drinks too
much, gets into too many barroom fights, and is as baffled by his new recruits
as they are infuriated by his ideas of discipline, which include calling them
''ladies'' and questioning their sexual preferences.

Says his much younger superior officer, ''You're an anachronism. You ought to be
in a glass case with a sign saying, 'Open only in case of war.' ''

In ''Heartbreak Ridge,'' which opens today at the Warner Twin and other
theaters, Tom Highway finally gets his war and the chance to test his men in
serious battle, where the bullets are real, men die and glory is won. In the
thick of it he even finds the opportunity to shout, ''All right, you devil dogs,
let's take that . . . hill!'' The war? Grenada.  To describe ''Heartbreak
Ridge'' as a ''Green Berets'' for the 1980's is to overstate the obvious. It's
also to underrate the informed economy and humor of Mr. Eastwood as a film maker
and an actor. ''Heartbreak Ridge,'' a movie at war with itself, has the same
effect on the viewer. It requires a certain crazy vision to transform the
American invasion of Grenada into the equivalent of Iwo Jima.

Chief among the good things in the film is the character of Tom Highway, a
comparatively complex variation on a cliche. He's a man who, having been
''married'' to the corps for over 30 years, late in life starts reading Harper's
Bazaar and Cosmopolitan, surreptitiously seeking to discover something of the
nature of women in the writings of prophets like Helen Gurley Brown.

As the gritty, raspy-voiced sergeant, Mr. Eastwood's performance is one of the
richest he's ever given. It's funny, laid-back, seemingly effortless, the sort
that separates actors who are run-of-the-mill from those who have earned the
right to be identified as stars.

Also entertaining is the dialogue in James Carabatsos's screenplay, much of
which is so rudely, inventively, hilariously obscene that it apparently prompted
the image-conscious Marine Corps to withdraw the support it had given the film
during production.

The supporting cast is headed by Marsha Mason (as the sergeant's exhausted
ex-wife), Mario Van Peebles (as the most outspoken member of the sergeant's
rebellious platoon) and Eileen Heckart (in a small role as a barmaid). They're
all first-rate, but especially successful is Mr. Eastwood's direction of the
actors and of the entire film, at least up to the military operation that
provides what is meant to be a rousing climax.

The Grenada invasion is treated more or less as it was reported in official
communiques - quick, clean, efficient. The only Grenadians we see cheer
rapturously, and the only enemies are Cubans. Unintentional sight-gags abound.
Even the dimmest moviegoer is likely to find that the aircraft carrier
transporting the marines to their objective looks bigger than Grenada itself,
which diminishes both the suspense and valor factors.

''Heartbreak Ridge'' is no ''Rambo.'' It isn't aggressively muddle-headed - the
low body count probably has something to do with this. Instead, ''Heartbreak
Ridge'' is almost wistful. Though it may not realize it, it seems as sadly
out-of-date as its aging, Cosmo-reading Sergeant Highway.

LEATHERNECK

 HEARTBREAK RIDGE, directed and produced by Clint Eastwood; written by James
Carabatsos; director of photography, Jack N. Green; edited by Joel Cox; music by
Lennie Niehaus; released by Warner Brothers. At Warner Twin, Broadway and 47th
Street; Manhattan Twin, 59th Street and Third Avenue; 23d Street West Triplex,
at Eighth Avenue; 86th Street Twin, at Lexington Avenue; Movie Center Five, 235
West 125th Street. Running time: 128 minutes. This film is rated R. Tom
Highway...Clint Eastwood; Aggie...Marsha Mason; Stitch Jones...Mario Van
Peebles; Little Mary...Eileen Heckart ; Roy Jennings...Bo Svenson ;
Aponte...Ramon Franco; Lieutenant Ring...Boyd Gaines; Quinones...Mike Gomez;
Collins...Rodney Hill; Fragetti...Vincent Irizarry; Johanson...Peter Koch;
Profile...Tom Villard; Master Sergeant Choozoo...Arlen Dean Snyder; Sergeant
Webster...Moses Gunn; Major Powers...Everett McGill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 6, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS: THE FATE OF THE HOSTAGES;
EX-GENERAL PROVIDED ARMS CHANNEL The following dispatch is based on reporting by
Fox Butterfield, Jeff Gerth and Bernard E. Trainor and was written by Mr.
Butterfield.

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1789 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 5


Unable to rely fully on conventional Government channels, Lieut. Col. Oliver L.
North apparently turned to a network of former intelligence agents and arms
dealers run by Richard V. Secord, a retired major general, and his Iranian
business partner to help manage the Administration's arms deal with Iran and the
diversion of funds to the Nicaraguan rebels.

A senior intelligence official said today it was this informal network, not the
Central Intelligence Agency, that arranged the diversion of millions of dollars
to the Nicaraguan rebels. He insisted that the C.I.A.'s role was limited to the
delivery of arms to Iran, a role approved by President Reagan.

Congressional investigators, in an effort to test this claim, are closely
examining the activities of Mr. Secord and his partner, Albert Hakim, an Iranian
arms dealer.

According to Congressional investigators and associates of Mr. Secord and his
partner, Mr. Hakim, the two men were able to provide Colonel North with a
ready-made framework for international arms shipments and counterinsurgency
warfare outside normal Government channels.

Colonel North first met Mr. Secord in 1981 when Mr. Secord was a Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense with a special interest in the Middle East and
helped the Reagan Administration lobby for the disputed sale of Awacs planes to
Saudia Arabia.

'Had Open Line to Ollie'

It is not known what arrangements were made between Colonel North and Mr. Secord
in the Iranian arms and contra supply operation.

But a former business partner of Mr. Secord's, who also helped ship supplies to
the contras, said today that ''Secord had an open line to Ollie North when he
wanted it.''

As pieced together from interviews with former colleagues, the investigators and
military and intelligence officers, Mr. Secord and Mr. Hakim, an Iranian arms
dealer, each emerge as key figures who provided important parts of the unusual
network.

What Mr. Secord provided, these sources say, were extensive contacts in the
C.I.A., the Defense Department and the National Security Council as well as in
the Middle East and indirectly in Latin America. Mr. Secord's ties date back to
the late 1960's when as an Air Force pilot he was secretly attached to the
C.I.A. mission in Laos running the clandestine war there against the North
Vietnamese, friends say. It was here he developed friendships with men who would
go on to become senior intelligence officials. Last year these colleagues, who
had also had experience in Latin America, evidently helped him draw on an
informal brotherhood of former employees of Air America, the shadowy C.I.A.
owned airline in Indochina, to help staff the supply operation against the
contras, the sources report.

Introduced by Wilson

The pairing of Mr. Secord and Mr. Hakim resulted from one of those contacts as
well. In the mid-1970's, Edwin P. Wilson, a C.I.A. contract employee who would
later be convicted of selling weapons to Libya, introduced the two, according to
one of Mr. Hakim's business associates. The meeting took place in Teheran when
Mr. Secord had risen to be chief of the Air Force military assistance group to
Iran. In Mr. Wilson's trial, Mr. Secord acknowledged he had known him for about
a decade, and though Mr. Secord was never indicted in the case, he resigned
abruptly from the Air Force in 1983 after suspicions were raised about their
relationship.

Mr. Hakim, a dealer in arms and related equipment, contributed a familiarity
with Secret swiss bank accounts and the commercial arms community. He has also
admitted making payoffs to Iranian military officers. An Iranian who is now a
naturalized American citizen, Mr. Hakim was the founder of Stanford Technology
Trading Group International Inc. Mr. Secord became president of the concern
after his retirement from the Air Force.

There is new evidence tieing Stanford Technology to the Iran-Contra operation.
One company document obtained by The New York Times shows that the firm's Swiss
address in 1984 was the same as that of the Swiss financial company that has
been widely reported as the conduit for transferring profits from Iranian arms
sales to the Contras in Nicaragua.

Earlier Indications Confirmed

These findings tend to confirm earlier indications linking Mr. Secord and
Stanford Technology to the supply operation for the contras. This evidence
includes records of more than two dozen telephone calls from rebel safe houses
in El Salvador to Stanford Technology's office in northern Virginia. In
addition, two former members of the air crews that carried out the secret supply
runs, both veterans of Air America in Laos, say they were told Mr. Secord was
the main figure behind their recruitment.

Mr. Secord, a graduate of West Point, could not be reached for comment. A
secretary at Stanford Technology's office in suburban Washington said she had
been instructed not to comment on anything, including giving the name of the
firm.

Richard N. Janis, a Washington lawyer who has represented Mr. Hakim, did not
return phone calls to his office.

A former colleague of Mr. Secord's in the Air Force said he had spent almost all
of his career in covert operations and that he had a shadowy, secret side. ''He
always seemed to be working some hidden agenda,'' the officer said.

West Point Graduate

Mr. Secord graduated in the bottom half of his class at West Point, where his
company commander was Alexander M. Haig Jr. A fellow officer said when Mr.
Secord was sent to Vietnam in 1962, as part of the First Air Commando Wing, a
special operations unit, he distinguished himself as a pilot flying T-28
fighters against the Vietcong. ''He was a heck of a good pilot,'' the officer
said, and ''a darn fine Air Force officer, a dedicated patriot who took on the
tough jobs.''

Mr. Secord served in Indochina again from 1966 to 1968, when he was officially
stationed at Udorn Air Force Base in Thailand but was actually working with the
C.I.A. in Laos, fellow officers say. It was here he also met Thomas Clines, a
career C.I.A. agent, Mr. Secord later acknowledged in the trial of Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Clines, a big, bluff man, had previously been stationed in Miami after the
Bay of Pigs fiasco. There he was the ''control'' officer for a group of Cuban
exiles and tried to carry out sabotage raids inside Cuba, according to Peter
Maas, in his book ''Manhunt,'' about the Wilson arms scandal and the C.I.A.

Friend of Shackley's

Through Mr. Clines, Mr. Secord also became friends with Theodore G. Shackley,
the C.I.A. station chief in Vientiane, associates say. Mr. Shackley had
previously been station chief in Miami, and would go on to be station chief in
Saigon in the early 1970's before rising to be deputy director of operations in
the agency, or head of clandestine operations.

It was Mr. Clines, according to several associates, who earlier this year helped
recruit a team of dozen pilots, technicians and cargo handlers from former
employees of Air America to staff the contra supply operation. Whether Mr.
Shackley had any role is unclear, but associates say the two men have remained
close friends and had numerous business dealings both in Europe and the United
States.

Mr. Secord's other interest from his early days was Iran. He was posted there
intermittently from 1963 to 1965 and again in the late 1970's when he headed the
Air Force advisory group. In 1980 he was deputy head of a planned mission to
rescue the American hostages in Iran that was never carried out.

It was during his time as head of the Air Force advisory group in Teheran that
Mr. Secord met Mr. Hakim. Mr. Hakim then represented American and other Western
companies in Iran through his concern, Multi-Corp International Ltd. In 1974 he
had also set up Stanford Technology in Geneva with an office in California. The
company, according to a brochure, sold security, intelligence and electronic
warfare equipment.

Testified in Connecticut

In 1983 Mr. Hakim testified in a civil case in Connecticut about payoffs he had
made in Iran in the 1970's to both senior and lower level military officers when
he represented the Olin Corporation and its Winchester ammunition unit, The Wall
Street Journal has reported. Mr. Hakim said the payoffs were part of some $6
million in commissions he received from the American company.

Among Mr. Hakim's associates was Mr. Wilson, who is now serving a lengthy
Federal prison sentence. ''Albert was enamored with the C.I.A.,'' said one of
his former business associates.

Mr. Hakim lent money to Mr. Wilson. And though the two men eventually had a
falling out, Mr. Wilson introduced Mr. Hakim to Mr. Secord, who had just been
made a Brigadier General and headed the military assistance group in Iran, the
source said.

In 1984, Stanford Technology was liquidated in Switzerland, though in the
meantime Mr. Hakim had set up a related company, Stanford Technology Trading
Group International, with offices in northern Virginia, San Jose, Calif., and
Geneva.

A 1984 letter by Mr. Secord, using the stationary of Stanford Technology
Trading, listed the company's Geneva address at 3 Thury. That address, a squat
one-story building, is also the location of Compagnie de Services Fiduciaires,
or C.S.F., a Swiss concern that has been linked to the diverted Iranian arms
funds as well as supplies for the contras.

In Cayman Islands Account

The Times of London, quoting sources familiar with the transactions, said $18
million from the Iran arms sales was paid into the Swiss company's account in
the Cayman Islands.

The chairman of C.S.F., Jean de Senarclens, a Geneva lawyer, has denied any
wrongdoing, but declined to discuss the activities of the company other than to
say Mr. Hakim was a client.

The original shareholders of Stanford Technology Trading, according to documents
and Mr. Hakim's associates, were Mr. Hakim, Mr. Secord and a former Iranian air
force officer.

There have been several pieces of evidence linking Mr. Secord to the contras. In
addition to the logs of telephone calls from the rebel safe houses in El
Salvador to Stanford Technology's Virginia office, in 1984 and 1985, under Mr.
Secord's direction, a number of short-takeoff-and-landing airplanes, called
Maules, were purchased from Maule Air in Georgia and sent to the contras,
documents show.

The hiring of the crew for these and other planes was carried out by William J.
Cooper, a former Air America pilot, who was killed in the crash of a C-123 last
October inside Nicaragua. Another member of the team, Daniel Gamelin, a former
Green Beret in Vietnam who worked for Air America in Laos from 1968 to 1973,
said he had readily accepted the job after being contacted by Mr. Cooper.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard V. Secord, retired Air Force major general (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 6, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

28 DIE AS COLOMBIAN GOES ON A RAMPAGE WITH KNIFE AND GUN

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 348 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Dec. 5


A man killed 28 people, including his mother and 20 diners at a restaurant,
Thursday night in a rampage that ended when he was shot to death by the police,
the authorities said today.

The police, who said they had determined no motive for the shootings, gave this
account:

The assailant, Campos Elias Delgado, 52 years old, went to the apartment of an
acquaintance, 34-year-old Norta Becerra, and repeatedly knifed her and her
14-year-old daughter, Claudia, killing them.

He then returned to his apartment, where he shot his mother at the apartment
they shared, wrapped her body in newspapers and clothing and set it afire. He
went to other apartments in the building and fatally shot five women who
answered knocks on their doors.

And then Mr. Delgado visited an acquaintance, who said later that he had
appeared calm, and then went to a restaurant where he ate dinner and had eight
drinks before pulling out a .38-caliber revolver.

The killer strolled through the restaurant shooting people, most of them in the
head from five or six feet. He paused to reload several times from the supply of
400 cartridges he had brought along in an ammunition belt and briefcase.

A diner, Juan Guillermo Gomez, said the police surrounded the restaurant and
ordered Mr. Delgado to surrender. However, he continued shooting and the police
stormed in, killing him with several shots in the head.

''He was a madman - he kept shooting and shooting,'' Mr. Gomez said. ''At first,
we thought the shots were firecrackers. Then we realized it was a madman at the
bar, shooting at all of us.''

Saul Serrato, a friend, said Mr. Delgado had been a crewman on a plane in
Vietnam and fought with United States troops there.

''His experience in the war in Vietnam seems to have been very negative because
he hated violence,'' Mr. Serrato said in an interview with the Caracol radio
chain.

In Washington, Pentagon officials said that they were unable to find any records
indicating Mr. Delgado had served with the United States military in Vietnam,
but that they could not rule out that possibility.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 6, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHANGES IN SENIOR STAFF ARE MADE BY THE TIMES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 960 words


Appointments to senior positions in the news department of The New York Times
were announced yesterday by Max Frankel, the executive editor.

The appointments will take effect between now and Jan. 1.

Craig R. Whitney was named Washington editor and will head The Times's 65-member
staff in the capital. His deputies will be R. W. Apple Jr., who is chief
Washington correspondent, and Judith Miller, now a Paris correspondent, who will
become the bureau's news editor. Mr. Whitney succeeds Bill Kovach, who left The
Times last month to become editor of The Atlanta Journal and The Atlanta
Constitution.

Warren Hoge, currently foreign editor of The Times, will succeed Mr. Whitney as
assistant managing editor in charge of personnel and administration.

Joseph Lelyveld, the London bureau chief, will succeed Mr. Hoge as foreign
editor. Howell Raines, who has been deputy Washington editor, will succeed Mr.
Lelyveld in London.

John Darnton, now deputy foreign editor, was named metropolitan editor, in
charge of coverage of the New York region. He succeeds John Vinocur, whose
appointment as executive editor of The International Herald Tribune was
announced in Paris yesterday.

New Positions

Mr. Frankel also announced the creation of two positions in The Times's news
department. To the post of business manager, he named James Terrill, formerly
group controller of the Times Company's Western regional newspaper group. The
post of senior editor - responsible for news staff recruitment, development and
training - will be filled by William G. Connolly, who has been deputy editor of
The Week in Review.

Mr. Whitney, who is 43 years old, joined The Times in June 1965 as a clerk in
the Washington bureau. He was a correspondent in Saigon, Bonn and Moscow before
becoming deputy foreign editor in 1980. He later served as foreign editor and,
after September 1983, as an assistant managing editor. A graduate of Harvard, he
served as a Navy officer in Washington and Saigon from 1966 to 1969.

Mr. Hoge, 45, joined The Times in 1976 as a reporter on the metropolitan staff,
and was deputy metropolitan editor from May 1977 until January 1979, when he
went to Rio de Janeiro as bureau chief responsible for coverage throughout much
of South and Central America. He became foreign editor in October 1983. He is a
graduate of Yale University, and has done graduate work at George Washington
University.

Pulitzer Winners

Mr. Lelyveld, 49, has been with The Times since January 1962. He has been a
correspondent in the Congo, India, Hong Kong, Washington and London, and had two
assignments to South Africa - one in 1965 and another from 1980 to 1983. His
book on South Africa, ''Move Your Shadow'' (Times Books), won a Pulitzer Prize
this year. Mr. Lelyveld has also worked as a national correspondent and was
deputy foreign editor of The Times from 1977 to 1980. He holds bachelor of arts
and master of arts degrees from Harvard and graduated from Columbia University's
Graduate School of Journalism.

Mr. Darnton, 45, is the son of a Times correspondent, Byron Darnton, who died in
New Guinea in 1942 while covering World War II. John Darnton joined The Times in
September 1966 and worked on the metropolitan staff in a variety of assignments,
moving to the foreign news staff as a correspondent in West Africa in 1976. He
later worked for three years in Kenya and moved in 1980 to Poland. He won the
1982 Pulitzer Prize for foreign correspondence for his coverage of the
suppression of the Solidarity movement. He is a graduate of the University of
Wisconsin in Madison.

Mr. Raines, 43, joined The Times in Atlanta as a national correspondent in 1978,
and the next year became bureau chief there. He moved to the Washington bureau
in 1981 as White House correspondent, became national political correspondent,
and has been deputy Washington editor since March 1985. He is the author of a
novel, ''Whiskey Man'' (Viking), and an oral history of the civil rights
movement, ''My Soul Is Rested'' (Putnam), both published in 1977. He graduated
from Birmingham-Southern College in Birmingham, Ala., in 1964 and holds a
master's degree in English from the University of Alabama.

Ms. Miller, 38, joined The Times in 1977 and was a reporter in the Washington
bureau until she became bureau chief in Cairo in June 1983. She moved to the
Paris bureau in October 1985. She holds a B.A. degree from Barnard College and a
master's degree in public affairs from Princeton University.

Mr. Apple, 52, has headed Times bureaus in Albany, Saigon, Africa, Moscow and
London since joining the paper in 1963. He served as national political
correspondent from 1970 to 1976, and since September 1985 has been chief
Washington correspondent. He attended Princeton University and graduated from
Columbia in 1961. His book, ''Apple's Europe'' (Atheneum), was published this
year.

Mr. Terrill, 40, came to The Times Company in January 1977 as a controller for
educational enrichment materials. He became group controller for information
services in the corporate controller's office in 1980 and since August of last
year has been group controller of the company's West Coast newspaper operations.
He holds a B.S. degree in accounting from the University of New Hampshire.

Mr. Connolly, 49, first came to The New York Times as a copy boy from 1961 to
1963, returning as a copy editor in 1966. He left again in June 1979 to become
managing editor of The Virginian-Pilot in Norfolk, returning to the Times in
1984 as assistant editor on the national desk. He became deputy editor of The
Week in Review in September 1985. He holds a bachelor of science degree from the
University of Scranton in Pennsylvania and a master's in journalism from
Columbia University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 6, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 779 words


RECALLING 1941 Tomorrow is the 45th anniversary of that day when Japanese planes
attacked the United States Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor. Half a world away, in
New York Harbor, this anniversary will be marked aboard a Navy aircraft carrier,
the Intrepid, a ship that was being built at that time.

For four years, the 900-foot-long carrier has been known as the Intrepid
Sea-Air-Space Museum. She is tethered to the Hudson River pier at West 46th
Street, at 12th Avenue, where her decks and interior have been converted for
peaceful remembrance of her life and times, times that included service in World
War II, Vietnam and as a recovery ship for astronauts.

Tomorrow, two new exhibits will be added to the museum. One, ''Remember Pearl
Harbor,'' consists of memorabilia, photographs and films depicting the period
leading up to the attack. Included in this assortment is a periscope of a
Japanese submarine and personal effects of people who were there. In addition,
videotapes will replay pertinent installments of the historical television
series ''Victory at Sea.''

The second exhibit, ''The Year 1941,'' projects a sense of what life in America
was like in that fateful year. There are vintage automobiles, a 1941 Piper Cub
airplane christened by Mayor La Guardia, pop music emanating from a jukebox and
fashions of the period, among other items. Both new exhibits will remain through
March 1987.

At noontime, an hourlong ceremony in honor of the day will include a cannon
salute, the playing of ''Taps'' and, finally, the casting of a wreath from the
Intrepid flight deck.

Open 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Wednesdays through Sundays. Admission: $4.75; the
elderly, $4; children 6 to 12 years old, $2.50. Information: 489-6900.

COLE PORTER RETURNS

As nearly as can be determined, there has not been a New York revival of Cole
Porter's hit musical, ''Leave It To Me!'' since the show played on Broadway in
1938 - that is, until now. It is being brought back to life by the Medicine
Show, a theater company with a penchant for Porter pieces.

''Leave It To Me!,'' with a book by Samuel and Bella Spewack, is about a
reporter trying to get the new American ambassador to the Soviet Union recalled
so the reporter's boss can get the post. This was the show that made a star of
Mary Martin, who sang ''My Heart Belongs to Daddy.'' Other leading lights who
have performed in the play include William Gaxton, Victor Moore and Sophie
Tucker.

The Medicine Show's production is the eighth in a series of revivals of
neglected musicals and the sixth Porter show it has done. The company was
founded in 1970 as a collective of theater people who wanted to create
collaborative works as well as revivals of standard pieces. Barbara Vann, an
Obie award winner, will direct a cast of more than a dozen, accompanied by
clarinet and piano.

Through Jan. 3 at 6 West 18th Street (255-4991); 8 P.M. Thursdays to Saturdays,
3 P.M. Sundays (no shows on Christmas or New Year's Day). Admission: $8 on
Thursdays, $10 at other times.

KEEPING THE 'PIRATES' SCORE

The Village Light Opera Group has been a volunteer company for 52 seasons now,
doing two productions a year, all on a large scale and with professional
musicians in the pit.

This weekend and next, the company will present ''The Pirates of Penzance,''
Gilbert and Sullivan's hardy perennial that has retained blue-chip status even
into recent times, as with its popular staging by the New York Shakespeare
Festival. In this latest presentation, ''Pirates'' will offer something new that
is, in fact, very old: the company of 30 performers and 20 musicians will be
working from the original score, to better represent the creators' perceptions.

''Pirates'' will be presented at the Haft Memorial Theater of the Fashion
Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street at 8 P.M. tonight and next
Thursday through Saturday, and at 2 P.M. tomorrow and next Sunday. Admission:
$9, $12, $16. Reservations: 279-4200.

EAST MOVES WEST

China Books and Periodicals (627-4044), one of New York's best-stocked
specialists in books from or about China, has moved from the east side of Fifth
Avenue to new premises at 136 West 18th Street. Today from 2 to 4 P.M., this
transfer of the store will be celebrated not with a reading but with a musicale.

The performer will be Tang Liaxing, a virtuoso of the pipa, a popular Chinese
flute. Mr. Tang has been soloist with the Shanghai Philharmonic and the Shanghai
Folk Orchestra. Browsers may stroll through the thousands of books in English
and Chinese on display while traditional Chinese music provides atmosphere.

Admission is free. Store hours, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. except Sundays.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 6, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK;
MIKHAIL GORBACHEV LOOKS EAST

BYLINE: By Geneva Overholser

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 528 words


Mikhail Gorbachev's India visit highlights a spate of Soviet diplomacy in Asia
and the Pacific that the West has been watching intently. All the activity has
been interesting but hasn't much affected the balance of power in a part of the
world still more subject to American influence.

Indian-Soviet relations have been close for years. In a speech in July in
Vladivostok, however, Mr. Gorbachev announced a much-broader Asian push, calling
for stronger relations with China and Japan, joint economic ventures with
members of the Association of South East Asian Nations and an all-Asian peace
conference. Why, with all the problems he has at home, would Mr. Gorbachev reach
out toward the East?

For one thing, a quarter of the Asian land mass lies within the Soviet Union;
yet recent Soviet leaders' bipolar bent virtually ignored the continent.
Self-respect and superpower standing no doubt push Mr. Gorbachev to respond to
U.S. prominence in the region. Moreover, tapping into Asian economic growth
would serve his hopes for reform at home.

Opportunity has presented itself. The Russians have eagerly exploited
anti-nuclear sentiment in the area, including the fuss in New Zealand over U.S.
nuclear warships. To take advantage of this, Moscow recently announced it was
prepared to sign three protocols of the nuclear-free zone treaty proposed by
nations in the Pacific region. It has also exploited disputes over trade and
fishing rights.

The diplomatic push has seen Soviet officials scurry all over the Pacific, with
some interesting responses. Mr. Gorbachev and Prime Minister Nakasone of Japan
have talked of a Gorbachev visit to Tokyo next year. Deng Xiaoping of China,
acknowledging the beginnings of Soviet concessions on Afghanistan and on Soviet
troops on the Chinese border, has said that only one obstacle remains to his
visiting Moscow: a sign that the Russians are trying to persuade Vietnam to
withdraw from Cambodia.

The United States has responded to Soviet diplomatic approaches to islands in
the region by urging Japan to increase its foreign aid to these islands. And the
Pentagon has pointed to the Soviet military buildup in the region to gain
support for an American buildup in response.

But the Asian Pacific is an obstinate puzzle for the Russians. Mr. Gorbachev
will have an awkward time pushing Hanoi to square China's remaining demand
regarding Vietnam and still protect his own vital interest in retaining access
to Vietnam's Cam Ranh Bay. However much he succeeds in toning down tensions with
China, the damage of 30 years of cold war won't be easily undone.

As for Japan, its distrust of the Soviet Union is far stronger than its interest
in Siberian markets, especially as long as the Russians remain unwilling even to
discuss a compromise of the territorial dispute over the Kurile Islands, taken
from Japan after World War II. And Asia's thriving economies do not look to the
troubled Russians but to Japan, the United States and the West.

Mr. Gorbachev's energetic Asian thrust warrants the West's interest more than
its fear. Given U.S. assets and Soviet debits in the region, it looks as if he
will have an uphill push.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 6, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HONG KONG MUST CLOSE VIETNAMESE CAMPS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 417 words


To the Editor:

There is a sentence, terrible in its implications, in your news story on
Vietnamese refugees in Hong Kong detention camps (Oct. 27). Speaking of the
camps, to which all Vietnamese refugees who entered Hong Kong after July 1982
have been confined, you say, ''There is no reprieve from these camps, except by
resettlement abroad or death.''

Refugees are not a popular issue anywhere today. But one would expect better
from Hong Kong, two-thirds of whose 5.5 million residents are refugees or
descendants of refugees and whose prosperity was created by refugee hands. For
some time, the closed-camp policy did reduce the number of boat people coming
in. But the first 10 months this year, 1,790 boat people asked for asylum in
Hong Kong, double the number for 1985. It is difficult to believe that decision
makers in London will insist that Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong continue
to live and die as prisoners up to 1997, when China takes control of the
colony's borders.

Since 1975, the number of Vietnam refugees who have come to Hong Kong has
roughly equaled the number offered permanent resettlement in free-world
countries. Perhaps more Vietnamese would be accepted if the prison camps were
disbanded. Perhaps the number will not increase. In any event, Hong Kong would
be none the worse if it permitted a few thousand refugees to live in relative
freedom, go to work and establish an approximation of family life. Letting them
do so would be more humane and less expensive than keeping them in prisons.

Population pressures will decrease as 1997 approaches. Already Hong Kong imports
domestics from the Philippines. There is no oversupply of labor, many are
leaving or preparing to leave, like the camp warden of Bowring in your story,
who ''does not intend to be around in 1997'' to find out what will happen to
refugee camps that ''still may be full.''

There has never been a decent justification for putting people in search of
freedom behind barbed wire. If the closed-camp policy is to be abolished, it
will no longer be necessary to force Vietnamese boat people arriving in Hong
Kong to choose between going to prison camps or pushing back to the sea for
other destinations after they have been resupplied with food and water. Several
thousand have chosen to move on. Nobody seems to know where they arrived, if
anywhere. What's worse, nobody seems to care.

ROBERT P. DEVECCHI
  Executive Director
International Rescue Committee
New York, Nov. 25, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POL POT MYSTERY: ILLNESS AND CONFLICT

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 918 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 6


Thai military officials and some Cambodian exiles are saying that Pol Pot, the
Khmer Rouge leader, is terminally ill in China, but that a power struggle within
his organization may be holding up statements about his condition.

According to the Thai reports, Mr. Pol Pot, who is 58 years old, was evacuated
to Beijing from the Thai-Cambodian border area in September.

The Khmer Rouge, the Communist movement that ruled Cambodia from April 1975 to
January 1979, denies that Mr. Pol Pot is gravely ill. No one has reported seeing
the former Cambodian leader in China.

But Cambodian exiles close to the resistance coalition to which the Khmer Rouge
now belong, say Mr. Pol Pot's organization is split between the followers of Son
Sen, who is now the group's military leader, and Ta Mok, a notorious former
regional commander thought to be responsible for many of the deaths that took
place under the Khmer Rouge regime.

Resistance fighters say the dispute between the two groups has turned to armed
combat on several recent occasions. They say the Chinese, who have backed the
Khmer Rouge because of Mr. Pol Pot's willingness to battle the Vietnamese, will
have to sort out the organization's leadership crisis before any announcements
can be made about its future.

Reports about Mr. Pol Pot's health have circulated on several other occasions in
recent years. But the new information is drawing more attention because it comes
at a time of considerable diplomatic activity, raising questions about whether
some movement may be about to take place in the long-stalled issue of how to end
the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

The future of Mr. Pol Pot would be central to any settlement of the
eight-year-old war between Hanoi's troops and Cambodian nationalist guerrillas.

The Chinese have been under pressure from non-Communist Southeast Asians to
remove him from active involvement in Cambodian affairs. His announced
''resignation'' in 1985 may have been a step in that direction.

On Chinese Contacts

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who leads a three-part Cambodian resistance coalition
that includes the Khmer Rouge, said earlier this year in Bangkok that increasing
Chinese contacts with the West have made Beijing more aware of the repugnance
with which Pol Pot is regarded abroad.

But officials say China has persisted in believing that only a sustained Khmer
Rouge threat could force the Vietnamese to negotiate. In opposition, Pol Pot has
continued to be a potent force inside Cambodia, despite the presence of about
140,000 Vietnamese troops. Hanoi's army has been unable to defeat the Khmer
Rouge guerrillas in eight years of war. Two noncommunist armies are also
growing.

Now, however, seemingly disparate events in Communist Indochina as well as in
Moscow, Bejing and possibly even Washington may be coming together to change
attitudes on the Cambodia issue, some Southeast Asian officials suggest.

Vietnam, which has occupied Cambodia since 1979, when Hanoi overthrew the Pol
Pot regime after failing to exert any control over it, is preparing for an
important Communist Party congress Dec. 15.

The country is in very serious economic trouble, and there have been strong
hints in recent speeches by its leaders that Moscow, which gives Hanoi nearly a
billion dollars a year in support for its economy and its war in Cambodia, is
not happy with its ally's performance on either front.

China has steped in to offer Vietnam aid, but only in return for a withdrawal
from Cambodia.

At the same time, the Soviet Union, seeking to improve its relations not only
with Southeast Asia and the Pacific, but also with China, has been told in
almost every regional capital that Moscow will first have to stop backing the
Vietnamese in Cambodia.

With little fanfare, Hanoi recently proposed to Prince Sihanouk through an
Austrian intermediary, a meeting of the various Cambodian factions, both
resistance groups and the leadership in Phnom Penh.

On Pol Pot Influence

The Vietnamese-installed Government there is led by Heng Samrin, the Communist
party leader, and the increasingly powerful Prime Minister, Hun Sen, a former
Khmer Rouge official. In meeting foreign guests, Mr. Hun Sen makes a point of
saying that only the ''Pol Pot'' clique must be ''eliminated.'' Other Khmer
Rouge cadres are welcome to return.

As the dry season along the Thai-Cambodian border begins - the months when the
Vietnamese normally attack the Cambodian resistance forces that strike from the
frontier -there has been an unusual amount of diplomatic activity between
Thailand and the Indochinese nations.

A high-level Thai delegation has just returned from talks with Laotian leaders
about bettering the atmosphere between these two culturally similar nations.
Laos, where there are 40,000 Vietnamese troops, has also said it is preparing to
open talks with China. Thailand has now removed a ban on the sale of strategic
goods, including explosives and combat aircraft, to Laos.

Thai military leaders have been playing down fears of Vietnamese intrusions
along on the border with Cambodia, and Thai Government negotiators have agreed
to pay Vietnam about $400,000 in fines and expenses to free Thai fishermen who
were caught in Vietnamese waters.

Hanoi, for its part, has just sent to Bangkok as Ambassador one of its most
experienced diplomats, Le Mai. The new Ambassador was a member of Hanoi's team
in Paris during the negotiations that led to the withdrawal of the United States
from the Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of voters casting ballots in Taiwan (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
James Woods: More Than A Villain

BYLINE: By STEPHEN FARBER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1284 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


In 15 years of working in television and films, James Woods has specialized in
portraying eccentric, troubled, obsessed and sometimes sinister characters.
Among the more memorable have been the embittered Jewish artist in the NBC
mini-series ''Holocaust'' and, in feature films, the remorseless murderer in
''The Onion Field,'' the crafty gangster in ''Once Upon a Time in America'' and
the sleazy, opportunistic journalist in ''Salvador.'' Without resorting to
sentimentality, he has managed to uncover the humanity and the weaselly charm of
these ''off center'' characters, as the 39-year-old actor calls them.

Now, Mr. Woods takes on another demanding role in a Hallmark Hall of Fame drama
called ''Promise,'' to be shown on CBS next Sunday night at 9. In it, he
portrays a schizophrenic who comes to live with his carefree brother, played by
James Garner, after their mother dies.

Mr. Woods made his television debut 15 years ago in another Hallmark
presentation, ''All the Way Home,'' a production of Tad Mosel's dramatization of
James Agee's novel ''A Death in the Family.'' But in recent years he has
concentrated on feature films, and he has won increasing recognition for his
performances. Earlier this year, ''Salvador,'' though not a box-office success,
earned Mr. Woods glowing notices. His agent was fielding a number of screen
offers when he received the script for ''Promise.''

Mr. Woods recalls: ''My agent said, 'It's a TV movie. Can we pass on this?' And
I said, 'O.K.' Then I said, 'Wait a minute. I remember a period not that many
years ago when I sat in Malibu and my phone rang twice in 11 months. Maybe I can
find two hours to read this script.' I read it, called my agent that afternoon
and said, 'Cancel your plans. You're going to be reading something tonight.' He
read it, and we made the deal the next day.

''The quality of the writing in the script was extraordinary,'' Mr. Woods says.
''The voices of the characters were so unique and so universal at the same time.
I'll give you an example of a little moment that struck me. My character, D. J.,
has no self-esteem because he's been brutalized by life. At one point his
brother says to him, 'You were always a better fisherman than I was.' And D. J.
says, 'I was?' It was so poignant to think that somebody's life could be so
bereft of hope that such a simple statement could be like winning an Academy
Award would be for someone else.''

In preparing for the TV film, Mr. Woods visited a clinic for schizophrenics in
Santa Monica, Calif., and interviewed psychiatrists who specialize in working
with schizophrenic patients. It is estimated that two or three million Americans
are afflicted with the condition.

''I had all the misconceptions,'' Mr. Woods says. ''I thought all schizophrenics
believed they were Napoleon or Beethoven. One of the patients I met said to me,
'You can't imagine what it's like to hear a voice or to see a person and you
know they're not there, but they are as tangible and as real as the person next
to you.' That's what schizophrenia is. You not only have the day-to-day reality
of the disease. You also have the dread burden of knowing even when you're well
that you can lose control at any time. It's like being an emotional epileptic,
like having a seizure of your soul or your mind.''

Many actors complain about the rapid pace and the carelessness of so much
television production, but Mr. Woods praises CBS and Hallmark for the
painstaking attention to detail in ''Promise.'' ''We had some fights about it,''
he says. ''I wanted them to re-dye my character's shirts to make them a little
grayer, to capture the colorless quality of this man's life. In the end, they
indulged me.''

His experience on ''Promise,'' he says, convinced him that nowadays more
substantive, challenging scripts are available in television than in feature
films. ''Promise'' was written by Richard Friedenberg, who previously wrote
''Bitter Harvest,'' a critically praised drama about the plight of migrant farm
workers. Immediately after completing ''Promise,'' Mr. Woods went to work on
another television movie, ''In Love and War,'' which will be shown on NBC early
next year. In that project he plays Cmdr. James Stockdale, a prisoner of war in
Vietnam for seven years, who tried to keep up the morale of his fellow American
POW's, while his wife (played by Jane Alexander) was organizing the POW wives at
home.

Mr. Woods admits that one of the attractions of ''In Love and War'' was the
chance to play ''a heroic leading man.'' It is the kind of role that feature
films have rarely offered him. Mr. Woods's gaunt, severe face has frequently led
him to be typecast as a villain or a crackpot; indeed, his next feature film,
also due out early next year, is a suspense thriller called ''Best Seller,'' in
which he plays an elegant but ruthless killer.

''I'm not too bad in this one,'' he jokes. ''I think I shoot 14 people. It is my
farewell to villany. I play a bad guy who ends up redeeming himself. And it's me
saying sayonara to bad guys forever.''

Mr. Woods has tried to say sayonara to villainy before now, so one should not
take his declaration as irreversible. He admits that the challenge of playing
evil characters can be tempting. ''When you're an actor,'' he muses, ''maybe
you're a little bit of an artist, but you're also a craftsman and a technician.
Sometimes it's great to do something that has a technical virtuosity to it. I'm
as far from Gregory Powell, the killer in 'The Onion Field,' as you could
imagine, and yet it's one of the high points of my career. I'm proud that people
can come up to me and say, 'I think of you as so scary.' That shows I have some
technical virtuosity. But a film like 'Promise' is more than technical
virtuosity. It's a glimpse into my heart and soul.''

He suggests that changes in his personal life have led him to seek out gentler,
more sympathetic roles at this stage in his career. ''When you're an actor,'' he
notes, ''your equipment is your heart and soul and mind. And if significant
changes take place in your personal life, that has an effect on the kinds of
roles you want to play. I happen to be in love with a wonderful woman right now.
She has values that are important to me - she's honest, she's supportive, she'd
rather go to Sequoia National Park than to Rodeo Drive. I'm in a good mood these
days, so I want to play some nice people. Back when I was snarling, I was being
kicked around by a lot of women. I was angry all the time, so I wanted to play
bad guys.''

If Mr. Woods is mellowing, he insists that he has not abandoned his quest for a
broad diversity of roles. He does not crave superstardom; indeed, as he sees it,
actors who are too successful lose the opportunity to play some of the richest
parts. He recalls that when he was working on ''Joshua Then and Now,'' a
low-budget Canadian film based on a novel by Mordecai Richler, he asked the
producers who their first choice for the part of the Jewish intellectual had
been.

''They said it was Dustin Hoffman,'' he reports. ''But Dustin Hoffman now costs
$6 million or something like that, and so the film would have ended up costing
$15 million or $20 million. A small film like that can never earn back that much
money.

''I'm so overpaid as it is, it's sickening. I plan to be more overpaid in the
future, by the way. I want that on the record, just in case anybody has
delusions about my big heart. But I don't wear any diamond rings. I don't wear a
Rolex. I don't need a lot of money. So, I don't feel deprived of anything. I'm
happy to slink around on the underbelly of the industry and find these little
nuggets of gold lying underneath the sleepy bear.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of James Woods and James Gardner in ''Promise''

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT WENT WRONG?

BYLINE: BY LEON WIESELTEIR; Leon Wieseltier is the author of ''Nuclear War,
Nuclear Peace.'' He writes regularly for The New Republic, where he serves as
literary editor, and has contributed to Foreign Affairs, The New York Review of
Books and Harper's, among other publications.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 43, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4297 words


AFTER THE INTRIGUE with Iran, and the desertion of principle that it represents,
Ronald Reagan is finally failing to escape his own effects. He is being held
accountable. However much the President knew, however much the President didn't
know, those 18 months of engagement with Iran were not merely hypocrisy in high
places; they made a mockery of one of the Administration's finest articles of
faith, that terrorists and their taskmasters not be appeased.

The politicians and the pundits of Washington immediately concluded that the
crisis in American foreign policy could be resolved by the dismissal of the
individuals responsible for it. Washington proceeded in its parochial way,
mistaking gossip for analysis and information for ideas, speculating about the
guilt of men rather than about the logic of things, recoiling from any
explanation that failed to hold within it the promise of a quick fix. Finally,
Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, the national security adviser, along with Lieut.
Col. Oliver L. North, who conducted the operation at the White House, were
''relieved'' of their duties.

But what besets the foreign policy of the United States will not be banished by
the redirection of a few careers. The clandestine relationship with Iran, and
its sordid link to Central America, must be considered against the climate of
unreality in which President Reagan's foreign policy has been conceived for
years; it must be understood in terms of the idiom of impeccability in which its
makers themselves understand it.

The Iranian imbroglio is only the most vivid instance of the Reagan style in
international affairs. It came only a month after the imbroglio in Reykjavik,
only two months after the Libya disinformation scandal, only two and a half
months after the Nicholas Daniloff affair, and during the trial in Managua of
the American mercenary Eugene Hasenfus - all deeply troubling instances of the
same Reagan style. Still earlier, most notably in Grenada and in Lebanon, the
same style on the part of the President and his men produced errors in action
and errors in its extenuation. The style may be summarized as: pure hearts and
dirty hands.

It would be hard to exaggerate the purity of heart that the Reagan
Administration feels. Its recent disasters owe much to the weakening of judgment
that accompanies such a feeling. To the President and most of his policy makers,
reasons are more vivid than reality. They behave as if respect for reality is
unworthy of a great and good power. At all times they are absolutely certain of
their own rightness. It is never in need of a proof; it is, rather, taken as a
premise. The merit of their actions is established by their motives: they can
make mistakes, but they cannot be wrong. And when their actions turn out to be
mistakes, when the world refuses to accept the shape that they have chosen for
it, they merely lose more of their respect for the world. They are like the
philosopher who concluded that if the facts do not fit the theory, so much the
worse for the facts.

Mr. Reagan first attempted to disguise his infidelity to principle with an
Orwellian oration on television. ''We did not, repeat, did not trade weapons or
anything else for hostages - nor will we.'' This was an exercise in what is
known in Washington as ''spin control,'' which consists in the statement that
what really happened is precisely the opposite of what everybody knows to have
happened. Having ransomed American hostages with American arms, the President
must act offended at the suggestion that he ransomed American hostages with
American arms. Having traded a Soviet spy for an American journalist, the
President must seem shocked at the suggestion that he traded a Soviet spy for an
American journalist. Having proposed to take apart the structure of Western
security in a room in Iceland, the President must appear appalled at the thought
that he did any such thing. Having circumvented the opposition of Congress and
arranged an informal American participation in the Nicaraguan war, the President
must. . . .

For the White House, the truth is a problem to be solved. Since the
Administration is always already right, since its confidence in its correctness
is never shaken by events, it has become invulnerable to facts. The facts are
there to be arranged, altered and assembled into a picture of the world that
will never challenge, but always confirm. There is no binding truth. There are
only different stories. If one story fails to please, another story must be
loosed. The story told at the end of the day is true.

According to the President's account, the intrigue with Iran was not extortion,
it was geopolitics. ''Iran encompasses some of the most critical geography in
the world,'' the President patiently explained. ''It lies between the Soviet
Union and access to the warm waters of the Indian Ocean.'' The national interest
forbids the absence of the United States from such a flashpoint.

Mr. Reagan's geopolitics are flawless. With the exception of the collapse of
Mexico, no danger looms strategically larger for the United States than the
integration of Iran into the orbit of the Soviet Union. Moreover, the popular
and occasionally anti-Muslim suggestion that there are no moderates in Iran is
ridiculous. Of course there are those in Iran who would wish to end the war with
Iraq, to re-establish the economy, to calm the society, to stay clear of the
Kremlin. The struggle for the Iranian succession has already begun; and Mr.
Reagan's provision for an American role in that struggle is absolutely apposite.

It is also almost impossible to credit. The objectives may be legitimate, but
the instruments are not. How will the sale of missiles to Iran strengthen the
hand of Iranian moderates? How will it persuade the Iranian theocracy to slacken
its enthusiasm for the divinely ordained use of force by soldiers and
terrorists? Surely the consequence of Robert C. McFarlane's misadventure will be
the political and physical jeopardy of precisely the elements in Iran in whom
the United States must place its hopes.

Yet the fundamental difficulty with Mr. Reagan's little lecture on strategy is
that he cannot be recognized in it. Everything we know about the man tells us
that he cared about the hostages more than he cared about the configurations of
power in Iran. The cold-blooded calculation of strategic interest is not this
President's most touted talent. When did the father figure become Metternich?
Indeed, nothing is less typical of the Reagan style in foreign policy than an
attachment to this sort of geopolitical realism. In the foreign policy debates
of Ronald Reagan's Washington, realism is an object of scorn. It connotes a
constricted vision, a complicity with the unsatisfying world, a failure of
imagination, a lack of courage. And here we come to the heart of the matter, to
the essence of the Administration's dizzy approach to the world. To pure hearts
and dirty hands. PURE HEARTS OFTEN come with dirty hands. The pure hearts hurt
for David Jacobsen, for Father Lawrence Martin Jenco, for the Rev. Benjamin
Weir. The dirty hands send arms to the Ayatollah. The pure hearts hurt for
Nicholas Daniloff. The dirty hands turn over Gennadi Zakharov. The pure hearts
long for a world without nuclear weapons. The dirty hands abandon Europe and
proceed toward the creation of nuclear dangers in space that exceed those on
earth. The pure hearts dream of democracy in Nicaragua. The dirty hands deliver
Iranian cash to the contras. Purity of heart in this Administration takes two
forms, emotional and intellectual. First, there is the sentimentalization of
American foreign policy. This is a development that the President inherited from
his predecessor, Jimmy Carter, who allowed American foreign policy to become
completely obsessed by the incarceration of 52 Americans in the embassy in
Teheran. In 1979, it was established that the United States could be held
hostage to hostages. The lesson was not lost upon America's adversaries. The
Reagan Administration, despite its rough-and-ready rhetoric, has done nothing to
assist those adversaries in the unlearning of that lesson. (According to Stephen
Engelberg of The New York Times, the President raises the matter of the hostages
in half his morning briefings.) The distortion and demeaning of American policy
by the trade of arms in Iran for hostages in Lebanon is merely the most abject
of the Administration's exercises in exaggerated humanitarianism. Its behavior
during the Daniloff affair was a close second. For a brief period the whole of
the relationship between the most powerful states in the world was made to hang
upon the fate of a single man, a political pawn in no physical danger. In
retrospect, the detention of Nicholas Daniloff looks like the beginning of the
ambush of Ronald Reagan by Mikhail Gorbachev that ended in Iceland; the White
House would certainly not have stumbled into a snap summit but for the hysteria
that surrounded the Daniloff affair.

And the sentimentalization does not stop with the release of American hostages,
either. This is an Administration in thrall to the requirements of television.
The release of hostages is followed by the ceremony at the White House, during
which the President makes a speech vowing never to do in a hostage situation
precisely what he has just done in a hostage situation -make a deal. The hapless
hostages are transformed into heroes. Unfree and free, they are permitted to
incarnate the national honor.

These spectacles owe their special strength to a remarkable coincidence of
interests between the two institutions of American society that are more and
more driven by a demand for high ratings -the news media and the Government. To
be sure, the President is obliged to persuade the people of the wisdom of his
policies. To be sure, the news media are obliged to cover all the President's
attempts to persuade. On reflection, many journalists are troubled that their
very diligence in the performance of their professional duties may be easily
exploited. Still, the fact remains that the news media, most of all television,
mesmerize the population and its politicians with these little melodramas. The
sentimentalization of foreign policy during the Reagan Presidency depends in
part on a natural hospitality of television toward one of its former stars. Both
the President and the networks batten from neat little narratives, from the
sophisticated orchestration of collective tension and collective release, from
images memorable enough to obviate the need for thought.

Obviously the Government of the United States must do what it can for the safety
of its citizens around the world. Obviously the families of unfree Americans
will demand nothing less. But is it hardhearted to suggest that foreign policy
is not one of the helping professions? That American leaders must temper their
concern for individuals with their concern for interests? That the
sentimentalization of American foreign policy is in fact an invitation to
kidnappers and murderers?

Then there is the atmosphere of almost total abstraction in which the foreign
policy deliberations of Washington occur. Isolationism, interventionism,
unilateralism; ''the Reagan Revolution,'' ''the Democratic Revolution,'' ''the
Reagan Doctrine'' - a blizzard of abstract nouns and handy circumlocutions has
descended upon the city. In some instances it has raised the intellectual
quality of the debate, but more frequently it has resulted in casuistry, in
orthodoxy, in the furnishing of fancy justifications for the Administration's
actions. It is not difficult for an intelligent man or woman to ''influence''
officials in Washington, since ''influence'' in Washington generally consists in
taking what officials do and returning it to them in an intellectually
flattering form. Pure hearts owe much to eager minds.

In speaking of the intellectual righteousness of Mr. Reagan's Washington, I do
not refer to its anti-Communism. ''Evil empire'' is a satisfactory description
of the Soviet Union. I refer, rather, to some of the maxims that have been
produced to persuade the Administration of its virtue. The ''Democratic
Revolution,'' for example. Such a revolution is said to be spreading through the
developing world, from Latin America to the Philippines, and the Administration
and its apologists are basking in its glory. Never mind that much of the glory
belongs elsewhere.

In much of Latin America, the Reagan Administration merely feasted upon the
fruits of bumbling generals, grasping bankers and the human rights activism of
the Carter Administration that it so abhorred. In the Philippines, it merely
bowed to a popular verdict against a dictator it had supported. The failure of
''the Democratic Revolution'' to materialize in South Africa, moreover, has cast
no pall over the concept. To be sure, democracy, or at least democratic
practices, have returned to countries like El Salvador and Guatemala, but the
perdurability of these practices differs from place to place, from political
culture to political culture. There is good news, then; but how characteristic
of the Reaganite mentality to require that the good news amount to a
''revolution.''

There must also be dogma. The ''Reagan Doctrine'' meets the need. It provides
American support for the anti-Communist insurrections in Nicaragua, Angola,
Afghanistan and Cambodia with a coherence it lacked. In what sense, for example,
are the mujahedeen of Afghanistan fighting for democracy? They are fighting only
to rid their land of an invader, who happens to be America's rival. And how
could American support for the most recent Cambodian war of the butcher Pol Pot
be justified, except by an analogy to finer anti-Communists? And what way was
there of transcending the uglier words and deeds of some of the contras, or the
enthusiasm of Jonas Savimbi for his South African sponsors, except by pressing
them into a higher pattern? The ''Reagan Doctrine'' joins four different places
with a roughly similar problem, erases the differences between them, and awards
the Administration with a spirit of system.

T HE CONSEQUENCE of all these sentiments and slogans is an overwhelming feeling
of official innocence. It is the innocence of those who, like all
revolutionaries, are confident that it is within their power to rescue the
world. How has Mr. Reagan's reputation as a conservative survived his foreign
policy? He is not a conservative. He is a natural utopian.

Nowhere was this more awkwardly apparent than at Hofdi House in Reykjavik, where
Mr. Reagan blithely prepared to surrender the structure of Western security for
Mr. Gorbachev's permission to fulfill his fantasy of a perfect defense against
ballistic missiles. Mr. Reagan entertained the abolition of all ballistic
missiles, indifferent to the fact that such an abolition will leave us at the
mercy of other types of nuclear weapons against which space-based defenses will
be helpless, too. And he entertained the abolition of all nuclear weapons,
indifferent to the fact that he was thereby entertaining the abolition of the
security of Europe. So much the worse for the facts, our idealist President
might well have said.

A foreign policy based not on facts, but on moods; not on prudence, but on
visions; not on candor, but on enthusiasm; not on calculation, but on intuition
- it is not hard to see how Mr. McFarlane, the former national security adviser,
came to his hotel in Teheran. Had the President really made a sober analysis of
the Iranian situation, Mr. McFarlane would have never packed a bag. Nor is it
hard to see how freely intrigue flourishes in such an atmosphere. Thus the
profits from the Iranian arms trade were impertinently reinvested in the White
House's private contra fund, the national security equivalent of insider
trading. ''Remember this,'' Attorney General Edwin Meese reminded reporters,
''the people who were doing it felt they were doing it for a good purpose.'' The
free-booting escapades of Lieut. Col. Oliver North of the National Security
Council and the other errant knights of the ''Democratic Revolution'' follow
naturally from the Reaganites' common conviction that they are history's gang.
The most interesting defense of the Iranian adventure was delivered not in the
spirit of Metternich, but in the spirit of Machiavelli. Jeane Kirkpatrick
offered the hard-boiled argument that her former colleagues had done nothing
that governments do not ordinarily do: ''Governments, including those of our
best friends, normally maintain open channels and working relations with as many
governments as possible. . . . When their nationals are held hostage, they try
dealing and, on occasion, they try force. Usually they act alone. Often, they
say one thing and do another. This is the way the world is.'' What Mrs.
Kirkpatrick does not seem to understand is that the Reagan Administration is
consecrated to the proposition that the world is not the way the world should
be. It seems to believe in the tractability of all things terrestrial.

Idealism is not simply the belief in ideals. Realists believe in ideals, too.
Idealism is the belief that the world is informed by ideals; that they are
inscribed in the world, or can be painlessly inscribed in it; that the world is
more perfect, or more perfectable, than in truth it is. It is odd to see the
woman who was so important in inflaming the idealist temper of the Reagan
Administration defend its deeds in the name of realism. Still, Mrs. Kirkpatrick
may be more correct than she knows. The derelictions in Iceland and in Iran mark
nothing less than the breakdown of the Administration's idealism, the shipwreck
of its moral vanity, the refutation of its case for a statecraft of dreams.

I F AMERICAN FOR-eign policy is to recover from the moral and intellectual
intoxications of the Reagan years, it must be recalled to realism, to the
theoretical and practical advantages of seeing the world as it is, of measuring
action not by its inspirations but by its consequences, of cleaving as closely
to facts and interests as to values.

For decades American foreign policy has swung fitfully between a lofty idealism
and a bitter realism. The crusading confidence of John F. Kennedy gave way
before the results of the American arrogance in Vietnam to the dour and
disenchanted Realpolitik of Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger, which in turn
gave way to the mirror-image idealisms of Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan.
Historians have traced the American ambivalence about power, the tormenting
tendency to swing between saving the world and leaving the world, as far back as
the 17th and 18th centuries. But the practical fact remains that unworldliness
is not a qualification for public life. The fate of nations is determined close
to the ground.

There is no shame in the balancing of national ideals with national interests.
In part that is because interests such as the security of a state and its
citizens are themselves moral. But more importantly, the great American agony
about power may have been based upon sloppy thinking. The distinction between
idealism and realism, in which the Reaganite revels, may not be quite so hard or
quite so fast. Realism may tolerate, indeed it may welcome, a surprising
quantity of idealism. It is simply false that action in the name of interests
defies action in the name of ideals. ''The idealist,'' wrote Raymond Aron,
''believing he has broken with power politics, exaggerates its crimes.'' A state
that is animated by its own interests need not be blind to the interests of
others. Many of the most immodest statesmen in history, experts in expediency,
have recognized a moral prohibition against the infliction of death and
suffering as an instrument of foreign policy, even when their nation and their
state made ''higher'' justification of such cruelty available to them.

Realism does not mean timidity, as the idealist fears it does. In certain
circumstances, the realistic thing to do is to fight. But the circumstances are
what matter. Without respect for the circumstances, interests and ideals will go
down together. Let us conduct ourselves in ''the way the world is,'' as Mrs.
Kirkpatrick advises. But then let us be done with all this cant about American
chastity. The United States has provided for its citizens a system of government
that is morally, politically, economically, socially and culturally superior to
any other system of government in the world. But it is not a system for which
mistakes, or crimes, are impossible. The freedoms that we enjoy at home do not
guarantee that we will always act for freedom abroad. Because there are times
when we cannot act for freedom, there are times when we will not act for
freedom. When we can, we will: even America can aspire to nothing more.

The classical aim of American foreign policy since the Second World War - the
containment of the Soviet Union - is not at all rattled by the casting of a
cold, realist eye upon it. It is, rather, clarified by it. A realist
anti-Communism will not thunder against Yalta and then slink away when
Solidarity is crushed in Poland. Instead, it will accept the fact that Europe is
cruelly divided, but nonetheless will punish the Polish military regime by
declaring Poland's loans in default. It will not wax righteous against the evil
empire and then trade freely with it. Instead, it will accept that the
instruments of policy available to the United States for pressuring the Soviet
Union ar limited, but that a more parsimonious economic and technological
relationship is certainly among them. It will not look the other way when a
tyrant in South Africa or Chile has the wit to wrap himself in the mantle of
anti-Communism. Instead, it will clearly place the United States on the side of
peoples who sooner or later will win their liberty, and not leave them and the
leaders they choose to the cynical support of the Soviet Union. Instead of
''constructive engagement,'' or some long-suffering patience with
''authoritarian'' regimes, it will make resolute use of all the leverage we are
famous for having with these ''friendly'' governments.

In Nicaragua, a realist anti-Communism will aim to prevent the final integration
of the Sandinista state into the structure of Soviet domination and to prevent
the Sandinistas from interfering in the lives of their neighbors. It is hard to
see how these aims will be accomplished without the tightening vise of the
contras. The strategic argument for support of the contras is sound.

But the argument for the contras is not at all an argument for the American
liberation of Nicaragua. Such a liberation must be the work of the Nicaraguans
themselves. If the Nicaraguans in the cities fail to rise up against the
Sandinista dictatorship, there is nothing that the United States can do about
it. In the absence of such a widespread resistance to the Sandinistas, it is
absurd for the United States to demand that they negotiate themselves out of
power. (It is equally absurd, in the absence of such resistance, to contemplate
an American invasion of Nicaragua.) What the Sandinistas may negotiate, in
exchange for an end to the American participation in the Nicaraguan war, is an
end to the Nicaraguan participation in wars and revolutions abroad, the
expulsion of Soviet and Soviet-bloc ''advisers'' from Nicaragua, and the holding
of free elections in which all Nicaraguans, including the contra leaders, can
take part. These are the essential interests of the United States in Central
American, and the instrument of the contras may help us secure them.

Still, the argument for the contras must be made truthfully. The contras are a
mixture of democrats, authoritarians and mercenaries fighting a good fight; but
for the President they have to be, all of them, ''the moral equivalent of our
Founding Fathers.'' Such sentimental overstatement characterizes, too, the
Administration's more well-founded policies in Grenada and Afghanistan. The
United States invaded Grenada not to save medical students, but to save American
interests. The United States supports the mujahedeen not to spread democracy
across Central Asia, but to entangle the Soviet Union.

This is not merely a matter of public relations. What is at stake is the
American people's picture of the world. In this world, there are many dangers,
but some are less serious, and some are more distant, than others. It serves no
purpose to pretend that Communists in Cambodia and Communists in Nicaragua pose
the same threat. A rise in realism will mean that Americans will no longer be
lulled by theologies of history, or fantasies of technology, or rituals of
rectitude, into a hollow confidence.

They may even hear, in the disabused determination of this realism, an echo of
an old American tradition. It is the tradition of ''The Federalist,'' which
established that the United States would be the first democracy in history not
founded upon optimism. In the rather forgotten sixth paper of ''The
Federalist,'' Alexander Hamilton denounced the impact of ''visionary, or
designing men'' upon foreign policy.

''Have we not already seen enough of the fallacy and extravagance of those idle
theories which have amused us with promises of an exemption from the
imperfections, weaknesses and evils incident to society in every shape? Is it
not time to awake from the deceitful dream of a golden age, and to adopt as a
practical maxim for the direction of our political conduct, that we, as well as
the other inhabitants of the globe, are yet remote from the happy empire of
perfect wisdom and perfect virtue?''

What we need in the White House is the moral equivalent of that Founding Father.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President and Mrs. Reagan with former hostage David Jacobsen
(Dennis Brack/Black Star); Photo of contras patrolling Honduras/Nicaragua border
(Charles Bonway/J.B. Pictures) Pg. 44; Photo of Mr. Reagan with John Poindexter,
Robert McFarlane, Donald Regan and Jack Matlock (Larry Downing/Woodfin Camp) Pg.
46; Photo of Eugene Hasenfus (Arturo Robles/J.B. Pictures) Pg. 136

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOOD VIEW;
New Toques Held High

BYLINE: BY CRAIG CLAIBORNE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 121, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2577 words


IT IS THAT TIME OF YEAR when critics of all stripes and persuasions are asked to
polish off their divining rods and prophesy about what the public can expect by
way of new tastes and vogues within the next 12 months. To gaze into the future,
it is, to my mind, best to take inventory of where we are at now.

To say that we have arrived at a degree of sophistication in the kitchen and at
the dining table is to point out the obvious. Consider the ingredients that have
become more or less commonplace, foods that were by and large unheard of on the
domestic scene less than a decade ago.

These include such herbs and other seasonings as fresh coriander and jalapeno
peppers, which, I am convinced, are almost vital to good taste. We have arrived
at the use of fresh coriander leaves because of many foreign influences that we
have adopted, including the cooking of India, China, Latin America and Thailand.
It is, on many counts, one of the most interesting of herbs and flavors, known
in Spanish as culantro and cilantro. Curiously, the flavor of the leaves is
totally different from that of the dried coriander seeds. The flavors are not
interchangeable. But if you plant the seeds, the plant will grow to produce
those delicate, fragrant and flavorful leaves.

Fresh coriander complements jalapeno peppers as Moet does Chandon; Currier,
Ives, and Lea, Perrins. And both are, fortunately, widely available today in
fresh fruit and vegetable markets throughout the nation. The same is true of
fresh ginger, which was an oddity 10 years ago. I well recall those days when it
was necessary to take a trip to Chinatown to find that fine, sharp-flavored
root, the taste of which was little known to Americans outside a sip of ginger
ale. Or in powdered form in gingersnaps. Time was, not long ago, when most
American dishes were flavored or garnished with such herbs as parsley and sage,
a bit later with rosemary and thyme, and then fresh basil. The herb known as
fresh chervil, which tastes remotely like a delicate blend of tarragon and
parsley, has been cited as ''the herb of the year,'' and I am persuaded that its
popularity will increase enormously in the months to come.

And think of the present abundance of wild mushrooms - with all sorts of curious
names, such as shiitake, oyster mushrooms, morels and false morels, chanterelles
and cepes. These were, until recently, the province of mycologists who roamed
the woods in search of their favorite species. Today, they can be found in many
fresh-food outlets and in many groceries and supermarkets.

To my mind, the single most exotic seasoning to gain a foothold in this country
over the last four or five years is an exceptional sauce ''borrowed'' from the
cuisine of Thailand, where it is known as nam pla, and Vietnam, where it is
known as nuoc mam. It is a fish sauce made with an essence of anchovies, and one
of its best uses is in the preparation of a Thai salad made with mixed salad
leaves, two parts freshly squeezed lime juice and one part fish sauce, flavored
with fresh coriander and tossed with thinly sliced hot-broiled or, preferably,
charcoal-grilled beef. I find the sauce in bottles in my local supermarket on
the eastern tip of Long Island. That's progress.

It is interesting that quail, both wild and cultivated, has achieved an
admirable popularity in this country. It is to be found on countless menus in
Manhattan, for the most part grilled after marinating in one sauce or another.
Quail eggs, too, have found acceptance in the nation, and you will find them in
salads, in soup and (as I recently sampled them) poached and served on half a
clam shell with raw clams and the roe of sea urchins.

And speaking of sea-urchin roe, it was all but unheard of in the United States
two or three years ago. It is a great delicacy when eaten raw or cooked in any
of various ways. It has long been available at sushi bars in this country, but
very few restaurantgoers were aware of it. You now find it in the most
sophisticated fish establishments, including Le Bernadin in New York. If you
have not sampled it, be advised that it smacks strongly of iodine and is, for
most people, an acquired taste. You will also find on menus in seafood
establishments the likes of skate (known in French as raie), best served in a
black-butter sauce with capers. Until a short while ago, it was considered a
''trash'' fish, which is to say a fish not popular commercially. It is choice.
THE MOST popular varieties of soup in America t<u4>o<u4>d<u4>a<u4>y<u4>
a<u4>r<u4>e new versions of chowders.

T<u1>h<u1>e<u1>y<u1> a<u1>r<u1>e available in some of the finest restaurants
across the nation and are generally made with corn and lobster, corn with crab
or corn with clams. In any event, they are delectable.

The nation has finally become adult enough to harvest such ''foreign''
delicacies as fresh foie gras, special ducks to produce the breast meat known in
France as magret (generally grilled or broiled) and caviar - black (sturgeon),
golden (whitefish) and red (salmon). These are now served in a legion of ways,
including on thin cornmeal crepes (the American versions of blinis) and with
domestic creme fraiche or with sour cream. I have a craving for the black caviar
if it is of first quality; I consider salmon roe, or red caviar, to be
acceptable in its place, but the golden is not to my taste. I find it a bit
vulgar.

I am wholly bemused by the present uses of cornmeal in this country. It was
formerly a staple of the South and Southwest, rarely encountered in other
sections of the country. In addition to those cornmeal crepes, it is encountered
almost everywhere in some form, mainly in cornmeal muffins. The muffins are
often made with blue cornmeal, which has achieved an incredible acceptance from
coast to coast, but was once found only in Southwestern kitchens. One of the
most heartening ''discoveries'' in this country concerning cornmeal is in its
use in that exceptional dish of Italian origin known as polenta. It is becoming
somewhat standard fare on today's American menus.

Much has been written about the fact that we are living in an age when
''grazing'' or ''noshing'' has become a standard and much-approved way of
dining. That is to say, to sit down at a single sitting and dine on small
well-varied portions of professionally prepared foods from the skilled hands of
one or more chefs. This has been, by and large, a European and Asian phenomenom
that has existed for generations. In France, for example, it is relatively
commomplace to find menus that offer a menu de degustation, or tasting, in which
the customer is served samples of dishes that appear on the main menu. In Spain,
the availabilitiy of tapas, a potentially vast assortment of very small foods to
be chosen at random at a bar and eaten on small plates with a glass or two of
wine at almost any hour of the day or night, is an honorable tradition that has
existed for centuries. In Japan, it is traditional to be served a fairly complex
assortment of small hot or cold dishes, to be eaten in succession prior to the
arrival of the main course or courses. And in China, the service of dim sum -
principally steamed or fried dumplings - in teahouses dates to dynasties long
past.

Within the last two years, there has been a proliferation of tapas bars, or
their equivalents, in America, including the Ballroom and El Internacional in
Manhattan. You will find them in Glen Cove, L.I., a New York suburb, in
Washington, Miami, Santa Monica, Calif., Santa Fe and San Francisco. One of the
most widely acclaimed by tapas fanciers is the Cafe Ba-ba-reeba! in Chicago.

This awareness of the popularity of a diner's wish to dine on many tiny dishes
was responsible for the opening in New York recently of a small restaurant
called the Shun Lee Cafe (it adjoins the larger, more opulent Shun Lee
restaurant), only half a block from Lincoln Center. The cafe specializes in
dishes ranging from dim sum, which you may select from rolling carts, to those
chosen from a menu and served in small bowls or on small plates, such as
suckling pig, spareribs, noodles, curried chicken on rice and
''hundred-year-old'' eggs with bean curd. The management refers to this as
''street food,'' and it emulates the food you might find on street corners
throughout China.

Another establishment dedicated to grazing is the Casual Quilted Giraffe, a
spin-off of one of the grandest dining spots in Manhattan. At the Casual branch,
you can munch on such dishes as duck meatballs with mashed potatoes, brochettes
and lamb by the chop.

Where the kitchen is concerned, we have become a nation of borrowers over the
last two decades or longer. The borrowings have included many ''new'' kinds of
pastas, such as fettuccine and linguine, cappelletti and tortelloni, plus scores
of other so-called innovations from Italy. We have adopted countless dishes from
Asia, especially those of China, Japan, Thailand, India and Pakistan, and a mass
of dishes from Mexico, plus what is referred to as Tex-Mex. You will find that
fine relish known as salsa (made with tomatoes, onions, fresh coriander and hot
chilies) on many menus throughout this country. And in Manhattan alone, you can
dine on almost any ethnic food, including, to mention but a few, Afghan, Thai,
Spanish, Mexican, Sicilian, Ethiopian and West Indian. It is thanks largely to
the Japanese, with their sushi-sashimi orientation, that Americans have finally
learned not to overcook their fish. Many home-grown and other chefs now cook
fish on one side only and serve it cooked-side up. Tuna was never very popular
in this country, except out of a can, before the advent of sushi bars throughout
the nation. It is now one of the most important fish out of native waters.

We have, of course, become almost chauvinistic about our own ''native'' cooking.
We now proudly wave the flag over such foods as barbecue, the food of the South
and Southwest, soul food and the aforementioned Tex-Mex. To my taste, two of the
greatest inventions in this country appeared less than a decade ago. These are
blackened redfish, the contribution of the greatest of all Cajun-Creole chefs,
Paul Prudhomme, and Buffalo chicken wings, which were originated by the late
Teresa Bellissimo of the Anchor Bar in Buffalo. And to hear many people talk,
you would think that oysters were a novelty until recently. People speak with
awe and newfound authority of their preferences for one oyster or another
-Olympia, Wellfleet, Kent Island, Chincoteague, Malpeque, Belon, Cotuit and so
on.

One of the hottest crazes in America today is the fresh salad bar, an idea that
originated, I believe, in New York, although there are those who claim that it
originated in California. These ''bars'' offer a myriad selection of fresh
vegetables, such as lettuces, tomatoes, cucumber, varicolored sweet pepper
strips and so on, to be selected at will, piled onto a small tray, generally
cardboard or plastic, and paid for by the pound. AND WHERE vegetables are
concerned, the American public has seemingly gone wild for color and size. As to
color, all the sweet peppers in the nation seem to come in vivid shades of red,
yellow, green, dark purple, even black. Even the lowly potato, once thought of
as only something with a white or red skin, can now be found with a deep purple
outer coating. And many chefs boast of the dwarf vegetables with which they
regale their clients - two-inch-long or one-inch-round zucchini; miniature ears
of baby corn; tiny eggplants, and so on. I, personally, am not amused, neither
with the size nor the flavor. I can achieve a better product by using vegetables
of standard measurement.

It is to elaborate on the obvious to speak of the proliferation and availability
in this country of scores of foods that were unknown to the public as recently
as 10 years ago. These include a multitude of cheeses, both imported and
domestic; scores of mustards in various flavors (most of them Dijon-style, which
has replaced the Yankee-style, baseball-park product in the public's fancy);
''exotic'' oils such as walnut, hazelnut and sesame, and vinegars, many of which
are flavored with berries, such as raspberry.

To my taste, the most important of the newly discovered vinegars is the one
known as balsamic, made in Italy. The prime innovator and popularizer of that
vinegar in this country was Marcella Hazan, who has described it as ''made from
the boiled-down must of white . . . grapes, and aged in a series of barrels of
different woods, of gradually diminishing sizes.''

It is my belief that we have reached a plateau in our culinary borrowings from
other countries. I do not foresee the cooks of the nation borrowing en masse
from various other countries whose imprint so far has been minor. The taste and
talent of the country is astonishingly high, and I think we will spawn
incredibly sophisticated dishes, employing the techniques and ingredients that
we have already accepted and mastered. The greatest contribution in that
direction is by the countless number of young chefs who head the kitchens of the
nation, coast to coast. A decade or so ago, cooking as a profession was looked
on as demeaning. Today, these young culinarians - many of them graduates of the
Culinary Institute of America, in Hyde Park, N.Y., and Johnson and Wales, in
Providence, R.I. - walk about in their domains with their toques held high, held
in the greatest esteem. It is they, I believe, who will determine to a great
degree the future of America's glory in the kitchen.

One of the grandest new dishes to captivate the minds and palates of guests in
my own home is the following version of a Thai beef salad. It employs the fish
sauce, known in Thailand as nam pla and in Vietnam as nuoc mam. I have recently
discovered this bottled sauce in grocery stores and supermarkets in various
sections of the country. You will find it also in most groceries that deal in
Oriental ingredients.

THAI BEEF SALAD
 1/2 pound lean, tender beef, preferably fillet of beef
2 tablespoons corn, peanut or vegetable oil
1 cup freshly squeezed lime juice
 1/2 cup fish sauce
1 tablespoon finely minced garlic
8 sprigs fresh coriander with stems and leaves
 1/2 teaspoon dried hot red-pepper flakes
8 cups reasonably packed romaine lettuce leaves broken into fairly large,
bite-size pieces
1 cup coarsely chopped, trimmed scallions, green part and all
1 whole cucumber, about 1/2 pound, peeled and cut into thin rounds
2 medium-size tomatoes, about 3/4 pound, cored and cut into small wedges
1 medium-size red onion, about 1/2 pound, cut into thin rings.

1.Preheat a charcoal grill or preheat the oven broiler to high.

2.Rub the beef with the oil and set aside.

3.Combine the lime juice, fish sauce and garlic and set aside.

4.Cut off the stems of the fresh coriander. Set the tender leaves aside. Chop
the stems finely and add them to the lime juice mixture. Add the hot red-pepper
flakes.

5.Put the lettuce leaves, scallions, cucumber rounds, tomato wedges and red
onions in a salad bowl.

6.Put the meat on the hot grill or under the broiler and grill or broil to the
rare stage.

7.When the meat is cooked to the desired degree of doneness, place it while it
is still hot on a board and slice it as thinly as possible. Add the hot meat to
the salad bowl. Stir the sauce well and pour it over all. Toss to blend, and
serve immediately.

Yield: Four servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SILENT BATTLE SURFACES

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN; Richard Halloran, a military correspondent for The
New York Times in Washington, is the author of ''To Arm a Nation,'' published
last month by Macmillan.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 60, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3418 words


UNDER THE four oceans and the seven seas, American and Soviet submarines fight a
near-war every day of the year. Relentlessly, they search for one another,
trailing an adversary when they can and trying to evade one when detected. They
make every move of a real war, except shoot.

The submarines operate in what Adm. James D. Watkins, the former Chief of Naval
Operations, has called an ''era of violent peace.'' It is an era marked by
sharpening debate among naval officers and strategists about the relative
importance to the Navy of submarines, surface vessels and air power in a war at
sea. Consensus is slowly building among the experts that, against the Soviet
Union, the submarine would be the vanguard. At the same time, fueled by
political and budgetary concerns, the debate is gaining a wider audience and
promises to be a key issue when hearings over the military budget resume in
Congress in February.

Should a shooting war erupt, many experts argue, submarines would be the capital
ships of the American and Soviet fleets. The battleship dominated naval
operations in World War I, and the aircraft carrier brought victory at sea in
World War II, but the nuclear-powered submarine would provide the edge in a
future conflict.

Neither carriers nor battleships have become obsolete, by any means. Carriers
are often the first thing a President asks for when he wants a show of force;
they provided air cover for the invasion of Grenada and bases for bombing
Lebanon and Libya. The battleships the Navy is bringing out of mothballs can
also project power from sea to shore.

But during a war at sea between the United States and the Soviet Union,
submarines would provide the most mobility, the greatest stealth and some of the
heaviest firepower, conventional or nuclear. Soviet submarines armed with cruise
missiles would seek to destroy American warships and fire at the United States
itself. Attack submarines carrying torpedoes would go after American warships
and cargo vessels. Soviet ballistic missile submarines would provide a strategic
nuclear reserve.

American attack submarines, which are armed with both torpedoes and cruise
missiles, would seek to destroy Soviet submarines as well as targets in the
Soviet Union. The United States would rely even more on ballistic missile
submarines as a strategic nuclear reserve.

Advancing technology has spread the near-war of submarines to every ocean, most
recently the Arctic. As the range and accuracy of missiles have increased, the
Soviet Union has begun to keep its newer ballistic missile submarines close to
home in ''bastions,'' where they are protected by attack submarines, warships
and land-based aircraft. In contrast, the United States has deployed ballistic
missile submarines at ever greater distances to elude detection. Submarines
armed with Trident I missiles can hide in 30 million square miles of water. When
Trident II missiles become operational in 1990, their longer range - almost
1,500 miles greater than that of the Trident I - will give submarines 50 million
square miles, or nearly one third of the earth's water surface, under which to
roam.

At the recent summit in Reykjavik, it was a reduction in the number of those
missiles - along with land-based missiles, bombers and medium range missiles
-that President Reagan and General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev talked about
unsuccessfully.

New technology in cruise missiles has led the Soviet Union to emphasize those
weapons, which are lifted by stubby wings and powered by jet engines, flying low
over the water at nearly the speed of sound. American naval officers say
submarine-launched cruise missiles can be greater threats to aircraft carriers
than torpedoes.

At the same time, the Soviet Union has been building bigger, faster,
deeper-diving submarines armed with torpedoes. Most important, those submarines
have become quieter in a realm in which the stealthy survive and fight best.

Alarmed by improvements in the Soviet submarine fleet, the United States Navy
has made antisubmarine warfare a top priority. Underwater surveillance systems,
surface vessels, aircraft and submarines send a stream of information about
Soviet submarines into monitoring stations in Norfolk, Va., and Hawaii. Navy
officers say they can account for most of the two dozen Soviet submarines in the
North Atlantic, the Caribbean and the Mediterranean at any one time, but are
less confident about those in the Pacific and Indian Oceans.

American submarines once waited for Soviet submarines to pass through ''choke
points'' between Norway, Iceland and Greenland, into the Atlantic, or to show up
in patrol areas in the Pacific. Now, the strategy has shifted to probing north
into the Soviet bastions and the Arctic, the newest frontier in this near-war.
IN THE EARLY 1980'S, United States Naval Intelligence reported that the Soviet
Union was building better submarines at a rate faster than expected. The Soviets
built the Typhoon, at 25,000 tons the world's largest submarine, to operate in
the Arctic. Then came Delta IV, another ballistic missile submarine built for
Arctic operations. American intelligence determined that Soviet missiles, fired
from waters just north of the Soviet Union, could hit most targets 5,000 miles
away in the United States.

At the same time, new submarines armed with cruise missiles enlarged the Soviet
fleet. Three new classes of attack submarine, each quieter, faster and better
armed than those before, were produced, as were new diesel-electric submarines.

To assess those developments, Admiral Watkins in 1984 ordered a thorough review
of the balance of submarine power. The conclusions were ''somewhat of a
surprise,'' said his successor, Adm. Carlisle A. H. Trost. ''We were surprised
to this extent, that they had advanced more rapidly in their qualitative
improvements and in their numbers of platforms than we might have anticipated
in, say, 1979.''

Rear Adm. John L. Butts, then director of Naval Intelligence, began in early
1985 to brief Congress behind closed doors about advances in Soviet submarines.
The Navy had found that the Barents and Kara Seas had become havens for new
Soviet ballistic missile submarines. That formidable bastion is bounded by the
Kola Peninsula, the Norwegian Svalbard Islands and the Soviet islands of Franz
Josef Land and Severnaya Zemlya. The floor of those shallow waters is strewn
with listening devices, and the surface is patrolled by Soviet antisubmarine
ships. Overhead are antisubmarine warplanes. In a crisis, mines could be laid
quickly - and there is no weapon an intruding submariner fears more, because
they are so hard to detect. In front of the bastion, moreover, are deployed more
attack submarines in the Norwegian and Greenland Seas to form a defense in
depth.

The Soviet desire to protect that northern bastion may help to explain continued
incursions of Soviet submarines into Swedish and Norwegian territorial waters. A
Norwegian military analyst, Kirsten Amundsen, has written that the more than 100
Soviet penetrations of the Scandinavian archipelago and fjords reflect Soviet
intentions of defending the bastion.

''The Soviet Union will try to obtain control over the Norwegian Sea, the
approaches to the Barents Sea and the Baltic,'' Mr. Amundsen wrote. ''It is a
foregone conclusion that the Soviet Union will try to make the Baltic Sea a mare
nostrum, but in order to control the vital northern waters, the incentive is
strong for the Soviet Union to occupy not only the northern half of Norway but
also a large part of Sweden.''

On the eastern side of the Soviet Union, another bastion for submarines carrying
missiles aimed at the western United States, China and Japan, has been fashioned
behind the Kamchatka Peninsula, which separates the Sea of Okhotsk from the
Pacific Ocean.

It was over the sensitive Sea of Okhotsk that the Korean Air Lines passenger
plane flew just before it was shot down by a Soviet fighter in 1983. Information
gleaned from a recent spy case has suggested that the Sea of Okhotsk had been
penetrated by American submarines in an intelligence operation.

Were war to break out, American intelligence officers expect the Soviet Union
would keep some ballistic missile submarines in the northern bastion but send
others into the deep Arctic, where they could hide between keels of ice jutting
down from the frozen surface. This would be particularly true on the North
American side, where Soviet submarines have been seen and where enormous slabs
of older, thicker ice have been tilted by the constant pressure of the moving
ice. In those upside-down valleys, a Soviet submarine would be almost beyond
detection because sonar cannot distinguish between the quiet, motionless ship
and the keels of ice.

Only to launch missiles would the Soviet submarine leave its hiding place and
break through to the surface. Missiles cannot be fired through the ice, or even
in open water with chunks of ice, without risking damage to the missile's
delicate guidance mechanism.

The Navy found in its review that there had been a shift in Soviet shipbuilding
priorities to cruise-missile and attack submarines. In addition, Admiral Butts,
the intelligence chief, told Congress, ''Progress in Soviet submarine quieting
and sonar and signal processing improvements have reduced the acoustic advantage
of Western nuclear-powered attack submarines.''

Among the new Soviet submarines is the 14,000-ton Oscar, which can carry 24
cruise missiles and travel at 33 knots. It could stand off, submerged, 300 miles
from a target, launch a cruise missile and dive deeper to escape well before the
missile hit its target.

Soviet cruise missile and attack submarines roam ever farther afield searching
for American submarines. Both types have been seen increasingly in the
Mediterranean and in the Caribbean, where they have bases in Cuba. Soviet
submarines have patrolled off the coast of South Africa, in the Indian Ocean and
the Persian Gulf, and in the South China Sea, where, ironically, they call at
the Camranh Bay base built by the United States during the Vietnam War.

T HE DISCOVERY OF Soviet submarine strength in the 1984 review was a ''turning
point,'' Vice Adm. James R. Hogg, the director of Naval Warfare, told Congress
earlier this year. Consequently, he said, preparing to fight Russian submarines
became ''the Navy's number one war-fighting priority, because of the severe
national security consequences if we lose that war-fighting edge over the
Soviets.''

That change in priority led to two vital Navy programs. The Antisubmarine Master
Plan and Investment Strategy is due to be completed by the end of this year. It
includes plans to get the Navy's proposed SSN-21 submarine ''off the drawing
board and into production,'' said Admiral Trost.

Navy officers say that submarine, to be named Seawolf, will be able to operate
in the Arctic, travel at about 50 knots, carry 50 torpedoes (twice as many as
the present Los Angeles class), launch Tomahawk cruise missiles and detect
hostile submarines at greater distances than any other submarine. The first of
the Seawolf class is to be delivered in the early 1990's.

The second program, a new master antisubmarine warfare strategy, was
incorporated into the ambitious maritime strategy that the Secretary of the
Navy, John F. Lehman Jr., made public last winter. Details of the new strategy
are secret, but the plan calls for most attack submarines to shift from defense
to offense.

In a war, they would seek to destroy Soviet ballistic missile submarines as
early as possible, as well as Soviet cruise-missile and attack submarines in the
northern waters. A similar assault would be mounted into the eastern bastion.

Before he retired earlier this year, Admiral Watkins told Congress that the
Soviet Union was aware of the new strategy. ''They know we are going to the
bastions,'' he said. ''They know we can get inside their knickers before they
can find us, and they don't like it.''

To enable submarines to operate under the Arctic ice, the Navy has strengthened
the sails, or towers, and the diving planes of the 37 submarines in the Sturgeon
class. Rotating the diving planes so that they are vertical helps a submarine to
cut through the surface ice in an emergency.

In a conflict, the first Soviet ships to become targets would be the older
ballistic missile submarines in the Atlantic and Pacific. Today, two or three of
those submarines, similar to the one that sank 1,000 miles off the Atlantic
coast in October, circle like lazy sharks 500 to 1,000 miles off the East and
West coasts of the United States.

Some 10,000 yards behind each Soviet submarine, an American attack submarine
prowls with torpedo tubes loaded, just out of Soviet sonar range. The rules of
engagement that would govern an American captain's actions are secret, but in a
crisis, he would most likely close quietly on the Soviet submarine ahead. Should
the Russian captain open missile hatches to fire at the United States, the
American submarine would hear it on sonar, and would fire torpedoes with the
intention of destroying the Russian ship before the first missile was away.
Submarines fire missiles at about one-minute intervals, so the American
submarine would almost certainly be able to destroy the Soviet submarine before
a second missile was launched.

As for Soviet submarines in the bastions, Admiral Watkins said the maritime
strategy called for ''an aggressive campaign.'' By driving into the bastions, he
said, American attack submarines would reduce ''the attractiveness of nuclear
escalation by changing the nuclear balance in our favor.'' With the Soviet Union
placing ''great weight on the nuclear correlation of forces,'' he asserted,
American ''maritime forces can influence that correlation'' by sinking Soviet
submarines, then deploying carriers closer to the Soviet Union. The new
submarine strategy, however, has been questioned on two counts: will it work,
and is it wise?

Not all Navy officers think so. During a recent conference at the Naval War
College in Newport, R.I., several officers asserted that submarines trying to
penetrate the Soviet bastions would be picked off like ducks. Other naval
officers have argued that dispatching attack submarines into the northern
bastions would leave American carriers exposed to Soviet submarines. They have
contended that the attack submarines should be held back to protect the fleet.

Still other Navy critics have pointed to the advantage Soviet electrically
powered submarines would have in home waters, where those quiet boats would be
hard to detect and sink. A naval officer long experienced in antisubmarine
operations was succinct: ''Forget it.''

Outside the Navy, Thomas Stefanick of the Federation of American Scientists has
asserted that the submarine strategy might lead to escalation from conventional
to nuclear war. ''No other aspect of United States or Soviet military strategy
calls for an immediate threat of attack on intercontinental nuclear forces as
part of a conventional war plan,'' he said.

Similarly, the Center for Defense Information, run by retired military officers,
contended in a recent study: ''The Soviets might respond to United States
attacks on the ballistic missile submarines by launching pre-emptive nuclear
strikes against the threatening naval forces, thereby triggering a nuclear
exchange.''

W HEREAS THE Russians have gathered ballistic missile submarines into bastions,
the United States Navy has dispersed its ''boomers,'' as the ballistic missile
carriers are known, ever farther afield - and alone. ''We are moving back,''
Admiral Watkins told Congress. ''We are moving our forward-deployed ballistic
missile submarines back because we have the longer missile, the C-4 missile.''

The C-4, also known as Trident I, is replacing the Poseidon missile in older
submarines and is going into the new Ohio class, of which eight have joined the
fleet. The Poseidon has a range of 2,800 miles; the Trident I's range is 4,600
miles.

In the 1990's, the Trident II missile will be able to hit targets 6,000 miles
distant and land within 400 feet of them, giving it an accuracy comparable to
that of the Air Force's MX missile. When Trident II is deployed, the United
States will have nuclear weapons at sea that, for the first time, could destroy
any known Soviet target.

Most important, however, is the sea room provided by each advance in missile
technology. Dr. Donald C. Daniel, a specialist in naval strategy at the Naval
War College, has calculated that submarines armed with Poseidon missiles have
only 3 million square miles of ocean under which they can patrol, compared with
the 30 million square miles of the Trident I and the 50 million square miles of
the Trident II.

American submariners assert that advances in quieting, speed, sonar and
deceptive tactics have made it impossible for Soviet submarines to trail a
boomer. Vice Adm. Bruce DeMars, who is in charge of submarine operations, told
Congress last winter that ''our Trident and Poseidon missile submarines patrol
undetected throughout the oceans of the world.'' He added: ''We know of no
projected or postulated threat to this survivability we cannot overcome.''

The Central Intelligence Agency, however, has done a study of Soviet
antisubmarine efforts in which it identifies 13 Soviet institutes seeking ways
to detect American submarines. The agency told Congress that techniques other
than sonar, such as synthetic aperture radar, infra-red, magnetic or laser
sensors might be able to find a submarine even if deeply submerged, but said
they had no proof of a Soviet breakthrough.

When a boomer leaves Bangor, Wash., or Charleston, S.C., its first task is to
shake Soviet attack submarines lurking outside those ports. Submariners say that
one Soviet submarine is always waiting, and often more.

The boomer slips past the Soviet submarines by having a Navy surface ship jam
Soviet sonar, or by having an attack submarine run interference. Sometimes, the
boomer launches a device that imitates the submarine's sound and goes northward
-while the submarine goes quietly south.

Once in its patrol area, the boomer avoids detection by boring holes in the
ocean at three knots, making little noise. If the submarine's powerful sonar
hears a Soviet submarine headed its way from a long distance, the boomer fades
quietly in another direction.

American submariners have worried that a boomer's ability to remain undetected
might be compromised by a weakness in its communications system. Until recently,
a submarine rose near the surface to raise an antenna or remained deep but
streamed a wire that floated up just under the surface to receive messages. With
gains in Soviet technology, submariners feared those receivers could be
detected.

But that shortcoming is being overcome with new communications on extremely low
frequencies, known as ELF, which became operational several months ago. ELF
permits submarines to receive messages at great depths; boomers rarely transmit,
so as not to give themselves away.

That one-way communication is vital to deterrence. If communications were not
reliable, the President could not be confident that his command to launch
nuclear missiles would be received.

As a constant check on security, the Navy loads into each submarine a black box
that records every move made during a two-month patrol. After the patrol, the
box is taken to specialists at Johns Hopkins University for scrutiny. The
researchers look for lapses in operating procedures, study sounds the
submarine's sonar has heard and analyze habits into which a captain may have
inadvertently fallen, such as spending too much time in a given quadrant of the
patrol area.

Once the data are analyzed, the captain is directed to avoid in the future any
mistakes he has made. With random operation, the submariners say, comes
security.

Meantime, every day, the hunt goes on. Not long ago, two American attack
submarines stood guard silently next to a strait in the Mediterranean. When
their sonar detected a Soviet cruise missile submarine trying to slip by, one
American submarine pulled out to trail it. Shortly afterward, a second Soviet
submarine came along behind, whereupon the second American submarine fell into
the tail of the parade. The four submarines proceeded through the Mediterranean.

The captain of the second American submarine said later, ''I wondered who was
behind me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of torpedo and missile area and three submarines surfaced at the
geographic North Pole (Herman Kokojan/Black Star; U.S. Navy); Map of globe
showing location of strongholds (NYT);

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER THEY DEFECT...

BYLINE: BY DAVID K. SHIPLER; David K. Shipler is a reporter in The New York
Times's Washington bureau. His most recent book is ''Arab and Jew: Wounded
Spirits in a Promised Land.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 108, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3033 words


DEFECTING DIPLOMATS, MILI-tary men and intelligence officers from the Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe have found in recent years that despite their intimate
knowledge of the Soviet bloc, the United States Government does virtually
nothing to help them use their expertise or adjust to the baffling array of
choices in American life. The result, many say, has been that they suffer
considerable hardship in entering American society. A few prominent defectors,
such as Arkady N. Shevchenko, the former Soviet official who was Under Secretary
General of the United Nations, write successful books, lecture for lucrative
fees and give occasional advice to the White House and the State Department.
Viktor Belenko, a Soviet pilot who flew his MIG-25 jet fighter to Japan in 1976,
works as a consultant to the aerospace industry. But most defectors begin their
lives in America in menial jobs entirely unrelated to their skills.

''We have found brilliant people washing dishes, repairing typewriters, on
relief,'' said William W. Geimer, a Washington attorney who has represented Mr.
Shevchenko. Mr. Geimer heads the Jamestown Foundation, which was created in 1984
by a group of Chicago business executives to help defectors, especially
diplomats and intellectuals, find fulfilling careers in the United States.

''An intelligence officer who graduated first in his class in law school was
repairing typewriters,'' Mr. Geimer said. ''A Rumanian economist was victimized
by lawyers and lenders and got into the laundromat business in Brooklyn. We got
him out. He's starting a career in academic life.''

Some defectors believe that the very freedom they sought becomes the problem.
Accustomed to higher authorities making decisions for them, they often look to
some governmental agency to plan their lives; when they see they have only
themselves to rely on, they feel adrift in a sea of seemingly infinite choices.
''Scary'' is the word that Nikolai Movchan, a Soviet soldier who deserted in
Afghanistan, uses to characterize American society's emphasis on personal
initiative.

Of those who have deserted from the Soviet Army, five now live in the United
States, according to Ludmilla Thorne of Freedom House, a New York-based
human-rights organization. They are not highly educated, she said, and are often
unable to get and keep jobs.

''They're so young, usually 19 or 20,'' she explained. ''They have no parents,
they have no friends, they don't know the language. They're on the far side of
the moon.''

One, Alexei Peresleni, has gone through a series of jobs during the past two
years, according to Ms. Thorne, and is now studying in a Russian Orthodox
monastery in upstate New York. Another, Nikolai Ryzhkov, is no longer among the
five in America. He returned to the Soviet Union after a difficult time here and
has reportedly been sentenced to 12 years in a labor camp.

''He didn't know how to deal with his freedom,'' she observed. ''He couldn't
hold a job. He had three jobs in 1984. They all lasted three weeks, not more. He
was drifting. He was a free person. He had difficulty dealing with his
freedom.''

Ladislav Bittman, who defected in 1968, sees the process as profoundly
traumatic. He made the odd transition from being a senior officer in the
disinformation department of the Czechoslovak intelligence service to teaching
journalism at Boston University - where he recently opened a center for the
study of his former specialty, warning that ''we should never pollute ourselves
by putting out disinformation in the U.S. press.'' Like many defectors, he has
changed his name and is now known as Lawrence Martin.

''The individual who makes the decision, for whatever reason, goes into a very
deep psychological shock,'' he said. ''You are giving up everything that makes
any sense in your life. You have to build up a set of values from scratch. You
suddenly become very vulnerable. You are giving up your friends, your family
members. You know you will never see them again. Every defector has to go
through this crisis. There is no way out of it.''

Although defectors might find solace among emigres or other defectors, they tend
to avoid them, assuming that some are secret police agents from their homelands.
''The main thing is security,'' Mr. Martin said. ''Every defector tries to
maintain a security zone. To maintain contact with other defectors is risky.''

He said he understood the decision last fall by Vitaly S. Yurchenko, a
high-ranking K.G.B. official who had defected, to return to Moscow.

''He went through a very severe psychological shock, and obviously the people
who dealt with him were not sensitive enough. He went back because he went back
to something he knew. It was the security. Even very brutal, severe punishment
was a kind of security, but here in the U.S. everything was new, everything was
strange and unpredictable. He didn't get any help.''

The Central Intelligence Agency, which houses, feeds and pays defecting
intelligence officers for periods of debriefing that can last as long as a year,
has been widely criticized since the Yurchenko case as neglecting defectors'
social and psychological needs.

''They squeeze these guys out and then drop them,'' said one American who
maintains close contacts with a number of defectors. ''They don't care about
their future. They don't want these people out in the open. They don't want them
to become citizens.''

To protect defectors from possible kidnapping or assassination by Soviet bloc
agents, the C.I.A. usually gives those it debriefs new names and often channels
them into obscure jobs after their debriefings, defectors say. And the defectors
are usually submissive because they ''don't know their rights,'' the American
observed. ''They look at the C.I.A. as a benign K.G.B. They attribute all kinds
of powers to it that it doesn't have.''

The White House, concerned that potential defectors may be frightened off by
stories of bad experiences in the West, is reportedly studying these failures
and may recommend some corrective measures. The C.I.A.'s deputy director, Robert
M. Gates, is said to be concerned about the problems. But Lieut. Gen. James A.
Williams, a former Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency who is a vice
president of the Jamestown Foundation, doubts that intelligence organizations
are the right ones to handle such matters. ''None of the agencies that get
involved from an intelligence or counterintelligence standpoint are equipped to
do social services kinds of things,'' he said. ''They say a guy who defects is a
traitor, no matter how you look at it. And they treat them like dirt.''

Those defectors in whom the C.I.A. has no interest are, for the most part, left
on their own, according to private individuals who try to help. In addition to
the Jamestown Foundation, which Mr. Geimer said is currently helping some 25
defectors, another private organization, the International Rescue Committee in
New York City, has given Soviet Army defectors some support, including weekly
stipends of $45.

TADEUSZ KUCHARSKI

''We had no help whatsoever. We didn't ask for any help. We were not offered,''
recalled Tadeusz Kucharski. ''We went to a hotel. We had our savings from
Angola. We began with odd jobs, including packing fish in a fish factory, and
later on my wife began working for a bank. I am now working in the real-estate
business, selling houses. It is not as though I am complaining. What is
important is to be a free man and to do what I want to do.''

Now living in New York City, Mr. Kucharski, 42, was the Polish Embassy's
commercial attache in Angola when he and his wife, Anna, defected in 1983.
During a visit to Portugal - ostensibly en route to East Berlin -they asked for
political asylum in the United States. The decision had been reached slowly, his
disillusionment beginning, he said, in 1973, when he served on the Polish
delegation to the International Control Commission in South Vietnam and was
barred by his superiors from reporting any cease-fire violations by the Vietcong
or North Vietnamese. Then came the 1981 declaration of martial law in Poland and
the crackdown on the Solidarity trade union. In Solidarity's heyday, Mr.
Kucharski had felt free enough to express his irreverent political views rather
openly, he said. This candor caught up with him later, and when he received
orders to return to Poland, he sensed trouble.

''At a certain age,'' he observed, ''when you are around 40, you have to have
your own opinions and your own experience, and it is a time when you don't want
to hide what you stand for and what you are thinking. I think =it is around 40
when people reject something or accept something and take decisions. I could not
bear anymore to pretend to believe what I did not believe.''

Having spent nearly five years in Angola, where the C.I.A. was involved in
supporting rebel guerrillas in a civil war against Cuban- and Soviet-backed
forces, Mr. Kucharski expected to be mined by American agencies as a rich source
of information. But he says the C.I.A. has never talked to him. ''Polish
propaganda very often said that special efforts were made by the C.I.A. and the
F.B.I. to get people to work for the United States,'' he said. ''All this
propaganda proved to be complete baloney, because when we came here I observed
that nobody really cared. Nobody really cared what we knew, what experience we
had, what information would be useful to the United States. It was amazing to
me. Nobody was really interested in what was going on in Angola, nobody at
all.''

YELENA

MITROKHINA The seeds of defection sometimes lie in family problems. Yelena
Mitrokhina's marriage to the Washington representative of the Soviet copyright
agency had been deteriorating, as she writes in her newly published memoir,
''Stepping Down From the Star.'' He was drinking heavily, she said, and she
wished to remain in the United States with her two small children, who are now 9
and 11.

When she left her Soviet Embassy apartment in 1978, she also left a note for her
husband, Lev, offering him a chance to stay with her. He vacillated for two
days, then refused. As the first member of the embassy to have defected, she was
taken into the protective custody of the C.I.A. She said the agency provided her
with a safe house, gave her $12,000 a year and paid for her children's day-care
expenses and her own tuition while she earned her master's degree in business
administration at the Wharton School. The C.I.A. also supplemented the low
salary she received in her first job and later helped her with her
naturalization papers so she could become a United States citizen.

Still, she found the C.I.A. people cold. ''I was determined to get away from
their money as soon as possible,'' she said. ''I started at $5 an hour at Radio
Shack.'' Finally she set up her own computer consulting firm, doing customized
accounting for businesses and enjoying being ''individualistic,'' to use the
criticism her Soviet teachers once branded her with. She now earns about $50,000
a year, she said, and owns a house in Washington's Virginia suburbs.

''The insecurity can probably be extremely difficult for people who come from
the Soviet bloc,'' she said. ''When I was without medical insurance for a year,
it was pretty scary. There are a lot of choices, which is good, but a serious
illness can wipe you out. There is nobody to back you up and no social
network.''

''Now I'm becoming more American,'' said Mrs. Mitrokhina, who has changed her
name to Alexandra Costa. ''I'm worrying about mortgages and insurance and
keeping up with the latest books. First you get a mortgage and then you run
yourself crazy trying to pay it.'' She laughed merrily.  VASILY MATUZOK Vasily
Matuzok was a 22-year-old diplomatic trainee in the Soviet Embassy in Pyongyang,
North Korea, when his father, a Communist Party member and lieutenant colonel in
the air force, died back home. ''My father wasn't only my dad,'' Mr. Matuzok
said. ''He was my very special friend, and I enjoyed a very special relationship
with him. My parents were willing to believe what the party said, and he never
questioned it. When he was gone, I didn't feel I had any connections with the
Soviet Union at all. It was a foreign country, and I felt alienated from it.''

In November 1984, Mr. Matuzok, who speaks Korean and said he was working in the
embassy as a translator, got permission to go on a trip arranged by the Kim Il
Sung University to the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea.

''Control over the group was pretty lax,'' he said. ''I was left alone for some
time, and I was able to get to the demarcation line, pretty close. I figured out
that I had a pretty good chance of making it by running across the line. I ran
across.'' Gunfire broke out. ''They almost got me as I crossed the line,'' he
said. ''I made a left turn across the line, and I shouted in English, 'Help me!
Cover me!' '' North Korean troops chased him into South Korean territory,
setting off a gun battle in which three North Koreans and one South Korean were
killed and an American wounded.

Helped by the International Rescue Committee, Mr. Matuzok arrived in New York
City and lived for six weeks near Grand Army Plaza in Brooklyn. ''I tried to
comprehend somehow what is America,'' he recalled. ''I was at a loss. I was
afraid to go to a store and buy a pack of cigarettes. I didn't know there was
such a variety of goods. I couldn't make my choice. I was afraid to go in the
streets.''

It was also the political variety that baffled him. ''At first it was amazing,''
he said. ''I could not comprehend how the United States could allow the
existence of the Communist Party. Now I understand that in a true democracy even
wrong ideas should be tolerated. The victory of one idea does not necessitate
the defeat of all others. They should have a chance of survival and have a
chance of being comprehended.''

He has worked as a refrigerator repairman, and now does graduate work in Boston.
He prefers that the university not be identified. Nor does he want the new name
(Continued on Page 125) he is using mentioned - because he is convinced that if
the circumstances of his defection were known, the university would expel him
for fear of losing an exchange program it conducts with the Soviet Union. A
reporter's arguments to the contrary could not change his view.

NIKOLAI

MOVCHAN ''After having arrived in Afghanistan and having spent some time there,
I realized that the war was not the way it was described to us back home. I
realized it was an unjust war,'' said Nikolai Movchan. Now working at a
Ukrainian publishing house in New York, Mr. Movchan spends his spare time
collecting clothing and other goods to be sent to Afghan refugees in Pakistan.
''The fact that Afghanistan has been in my life has left an imprint in what I
want to do,'' he said.

A Ukrainian who was trained in woodworking and furniture-making, he was a
sergeant in an antitank unit for seven months before he came to a decision, one
night in June 1983, to desert. He gave no thought to coming to the United
States, he said, but simply to getting out of the army.

''It happened one very early morning, when everybody was still asleep, and it
was possible for me to leave the regiment where I was stationed,'' he recalled.
''But they saw me get away anyway, and I realized I was being pursued by
helicopters and tanks. But then an Afghan man helped me and concealed me.''

In the United States, his ''first problem,'' as he put it, is his lack of
English; he had none when he arrived and still speaks very little. The next
adjustment problem is that ''in this society everything depends on your own
initiative,'' he said. ''Over there it's easy in this respect. Personal
initiative isn't important. For example, I have decided that I do want to study.
But now the question comes up, what do I want to study? How do I go about it?
Should I move somewhere? Should I stay here? I realize it's up to me. In the
Soviet Union you can't just go from place to place. Now that I can, I'm almost
scared to leave here.''

ROMUALD

SPASOWSKI As Poland's Ambassador to Washington in 1981, Romuald Spasowski found
himself in the uncomfortable position of having to justify the imposition of
martial law as reporters questioned him during his repeated appearances at the
State Department. ''Being an ambassador of the regime, I should have been very
cautious about this,'' he said. ''At the same time, I had at the tip of my
tongue very strong words and statements. So it was an unbearable condition for
me, to hide inside me what I was thinking.''

Since driving away from the embassy in December 1981, with his wife, Wanda, his
daughter and his daughter's husband, Mr. Spasowski has lectured extensively and
written a long autobiography, ''The Liberation of One.'' But he has an air of
disappointment about him, for the book did not provide the financial cushion he
had hoped for. Fifteen thousand hard-cover copies were sold, but 22 paperback
publishers refused to buy it.

That decision of the marketplace is one to which Mrs. Spasowski has not
adjusted. ''It's some kind of conspiracy,'' she said firmly. ''It makes me
uneasy that here in this free country it's possible that this long Russian hand
can manipulate American people, American audiences, American publishing
houses.''

Her husband is not as quick to draw such a dire conclusion. He aims his
criticisms elsewhere. ''I admire this society,'' he said. ''But some things are
shocking to me -for example, that in this society, in the richest country in the
world, there is such illiteracy. There shouldn't be hungry people. When I will
be earning some money, I would take a portion of it and give it to the hungry
people, because I feel it is my obligation.'' Many defectors share his shock at
American poverty.

Like others who have come here, Mr. Spasowski also finds a certain American
insularity, a lack of sophistication about the rest of the world. Listening to
him, an American suggested that perhaps the United States was somewhat
provincial.

Mr. Spasowski beamed and then bellowed, ''But what a province!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tadeusz Kuckarski, defector from Poland (Ethan Hoffman/Archive
Pictures); Photo of Nicolai Movchan, a Ukranian (Benno Friedman)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT MEN;
A Joy Not Shared

BYLINE: BY JAMES RESTON JR.; James Reston Jr.'s most recent book, his sixth, is
''Sherman's March and Vietnam.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 92, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words


LAST YEAR, WHEN I WAS IN Japan, I sought out Kenzaburo Oe, the stormy,
controversial novelist whose book ''A Personal Matter,'' I admire. I had written
him from America, but Oe was not an easy catch. Notorious for resolute
protection of his privacy, he did not, at first, respond. Then word retubned
that Oe had not granted an interview for months, that he was hard at work on
essays about America and did not wish to be disturbed.

But I persisted, and Oe must have sensed a special urgency beyond my announced
purpose to discuss with him the dark recesses of Japan's modern psychology. He
met me at the train station not far from his home in the pleasant Seijo section
of Tokyo. There, in the midst of the fluid throng, I did not recognize him
immediately. In my mind was a 20-year-old photograph from the jacket cover of
''A Personal Matter.'' It showed a bespectacled figure with rather prominent
bulbous ears and a remote, independent air, riding a bicycle with his young son.
On the book jacket, the boy looked perhaps 4 years old, and he had the same
prominent ears as his father. In the photograph, the child looked perfectly
normal.

For all his early elusiveness, Oe could not have been more forthcoming as we
walked through the narrow streets of Seijo, past the walled mansion of the actor
Toshiro Mifune, in this village in the heart of Tokyo's vastness.

We share a common outlook. He had been an uncompromising leader in the Japanese
antinuclear movement, a strong voice for the view that Japan, as the only victim
of nuclear warfare, must remain a model for disarmament to the world. I find in
his novels and essays about his generation's predicament over Japan's defeat in
World War II a parallel for my own work about my generation's coming to terms
with the Vietnam defeat.

But these common views, largely cerebral in nature, were not the core of the
matter. Rather, the situation of his son, struck down at birth with a congenital
abnormality of the skull, provided my urgency. For I, too, have a child who was
devastated three years ago, at the age of 18 months, by an undiagnosed brain
disorder. I, too, have pictures of myself riding a bicycle with Hillary, and in
them, she, too, can look perfectly normal.

In literary gossip, the affliction of Oe's son is often mentioned as a turning
point that had a profound influence on his later work. It is said that after his
personal tragedy he had become brusque and distant to the point of paranoia in
his personal relations, as he became more passionate in his social and political
beliefs about the aftereffects of Hiroshima and human survival. In the last
three years, I have wondered if my own personality and later work will be
similarly affected.

In three hours of animated conversation with Oe, we touched upon our bond only
once, fleetingly. There was not much to say. I told him how I identified with
the book's rage and the desire for release in outrageous, depraved behavior from
the horror of a dying child. I had been moved, I told him, by the affirmation of
life that emerges from despair at the end of the novel. But particularly, I had
found useful one notion in the book where grief is likened to a mine shaft,
narrow and deep.

Recently, Oe's mine shaft has returned to me often. Two months ago, sweet
Hillary developed a second, life-threatening disease, quite unrelated to her
neurological scourge, and, for weeks, lay close to death in the intensive-care
unit. My impulse was to withdraw down that hole. It was a personal matter,
narrow and deep. There was no way to make grief horizontal. It could not be
spread sideways.

Inevitably, one presents a certain face to the world. You are told that things
are going to be all right, and how well you are handling ''this thing.'' What
else can others say? What can they really do? It is a dangerous time for
friends, for they must beware of the shame and the embarrassment and anger that
comes with acute distress. I watched their awkward shifting about as they
searched for the right thing to say.

When friends said I was handling this well, that everything was going to be all
right, as those tubes protruded grotesquely from Hillary's orifices and the
machines beeped and flashed red lights and nurses scurried about under the
obscenely bright, unrelenting lights, I wanted only to shrink away. I seethed
with the outrageous anger I had found in Oe's book, wanting to cry out:

No, you don't understand, it is not going to be all right; and no, I am not
handling this well. I longed for release from this suffocating situation. I
wished I could find escape in exotic, private dissipation.

Men are not well suited to emergencies with their children. Our impulse is to
block, to deny, to leave it to the women. We become shut out, but the truth is,
we want it that way. The brave stiff upper lip is expected, although an
occasional relapse into public tears is allowed for the modern man.

And yet, I have discovered that there is a corollary to Oe's mine shaft. As
Hillary fluttered slowly, haltingly, out of danger, like a mourning dove, my
joy, too, was vertical. It was a veritable laser beam of joy that had no
terminus. It was mine alone, totally a personal matter. It could not be shared.
As Hillary experienced reverses, I seemed alternately to live in the
stratosphere and in the lithosphere.

My relations with those who have experienced something like ''this thing'' have
been the easiest. As with Oe, the shared adversity is usually unspoken. It is
realized in a giving that takes another form and shape. To Oe, I was a perfect
stranger, and yet, he opened up, uncharacteristically. He grappled with cerebral
issues about modern Japan until I ran out of questions. As time passes, I
remember less what I wrote coming out of that session than what he had written
about grappling with the fate that is handed to him and then affirming life with
action.

''All I want,'' says the main character in Oe's book, ''is to stop being a man
who continually runs away from responsibility.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEY'LL TAKE MANHATTAN

BYLINE: BY ALBERT SCARDINO; Albert Scardino writes about business for The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 35, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6410 words


TWO YEARS HAD PASSED SINCE RICH-ard A. Kahan left his imperial post as chairman
of three state agencies, responsible for launching the construction of office
buildings, housing and hotels in New York City worth more than $3 billion. Now,
on this Friday afternoon last July, the intense, barrel-chested 40-year-old
found himself presiding over a small, private development company with just a
single project on the drawing boards.

Kahan was preparing to leave his two-room offices on Madison Avenue for his
summer place in Connecticut when the telephone rang. A friend in the city
government was calling. The message: ''Go have a nice weekend. You have nothing
to worry about.''

Six days later, Kahan stood on the dais in the Blue Room at City Hall as Mayor
Koch made it official. The city had selected the winning team of developers in
the competition to build a skyscraper at South Ferry. There, at the foyer of New
York City, a spot on the shoreline where the Hudson and the East River meet, a
60-story office tower of pink granite would rise, capped by a glass dome. It
would be a $400 million project, and Richard Kahan would be part of it.

For Kahan, the South Ferry deal had a familiar ring. In his state post, he had
forged a relationship with developers that became the model for such joint,
public-private ventures. Now, from the developers' side of the table, he would
play a role in the city's very different version. South Ferry is just one of
dozens of municipal sites that will be auctioned off to builders over the next
10 years - part of a dubious scheme that has put the government into partnership
with the builders in the biggest new real-estate game in town.

The eight bidders on the South Ferry Plaza, as the site is officially known, had
included some of the oldest and richest builders in town and some of the newest
and most aggressive. Olympia & York Developments, the giant Canadian company run
by the secretive Reichmann brothers who own and operate more than 20 million
square feet of office space in New York, had invested the $300,000 it takes to
prepare an offer. So had a partnership made up of Tishman Speyer Properties and
the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, two of the most
respected names in New York real estate. But they had lost.

Among the winners, the managing partners would be Kahan and a comeback artist,
William Zeckendorf Jr., son of the man who, operating as Webb & Knapp, built and
then lost one of North America's greatest real-estate empires. Victor Elmaleh, a
Moroccan-born automobile importer, architect and developer, would be part of the
team. And the financial clout would be provided by KG Land, a subsidiary of
Kumagai Gumi, a Tokyo-based construction company that has poured hundreds of
millions of dollars into Manhattan real estate in the last two years.

For Mayor Koch, the South Ferry decision represented a windfall. Over the first
20 years of a 99-year lease on the site, the project will generate $375 million
for the city. As Alair A. Townsend, Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic
Development, pointed out, the winning bid was $50 million more than the next
best offer.

And the city can use the money. ''We have $55 billion worth of work to do over
the next 10 years,'' Mayor Koch says, ''for schools, streets, parks,
transportation projects - and only $45 billion that we can find to do it with.''
By auctioning off underutilized municipal property, from old police stations to
rotting piers, he hopes to fill the gap. His prospects are good. The
spectacular, decade-long bull market in New York real estate is ending its
stampede, but developers are still hungry to build. At the same time, most
convenient, privately owned sites are now occupied by towers of granite and
glass. Today, the city is to real estate what Fort Knox is to gold, the holder
of enough inventory to control the market.

Yet the city's new partnership with developers raises profound ethical
questions.

The traditional relationship between New York's powerful real-estate industry
and the city government is adversarial. The developer wants to maximize his
profits, to build the biggest building he can on the best site he can find. The
city, through its zoning regulations and endlessly long review process, is the
referee, balancing the developers' desires against the public need.

At its best, the system is ripe for political corruption. Candidates for
elective office in New York City may receive virtually unlimited contributions.
New York also allows candidates to hold onto contributions that have not been
spent on their campaigns. The city's real-estate magnates routinely pour
substantial funds into local races - $5,000 for a borough president's race is
common, $10,000 for a candidate for mayor. Yet many of these same candidates end
up in city government, where they sit in judgment on their benefactors'
proposals.

With its plans to develop its own real estate, the city has raised the stakes.
While continuing to function as referee, Mayor Koch has stepped in as
quarterback. Now, the adversaries are also partners, potentially poisoning the
whole relationship.

''The city has become a development partner rather than the public's advocate,''
says Ruth W. Messinger, a member of the City Council. ''Once you taint the
process that way, no amount of project review by other boards and agencies can
restore its integrity.''

HE 35-PAGE DOCUMENT ON RICHARD

Kahan's desk was labeled ''Request for Qualifications.'' The city was asking
developers who might be interested in South Ferry to show their qualifications
for the project. The document was filled with technical drawings and
photographs, but for Kahan on this February morning in 1984, it read like
poetry. ''It was the most spectacular site in the city,'' he recalls thinking.
''It was perfect for us.'' The office of the managing director of the
Continental Development Group has the feeling of a private railway car with low,
curved ceiling, dark woods and a set of frosted glass doors that separate Kahan
from his secretary, his only employee. Even when he is relaxed, Kahan talks with
such intensity that his eyebrows wrinkle his forehead two-thirds of the way to
the top of his balding head.

Kahan grew up in suburban Mount Vernon, N.Y., son of a trade-magazine publisher,
and received a degree in history from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y. He came
to construction in 1971 out of frustration. He had just spent three years
earning a law degree at Columbia University where he had won election to the
presidency of his class by running against the war in Vietnam. By the time he
graduated, he no longer had any interest in being a lawyer. Instead, he found a
job at the New York State Urban Development Corporation, helping Edward J.
Logue, president of the agency, build public housing. After two years, he
switched to the private sector, supervising foundation work on the first
buildings at Battery Park City for the Lefrak Organization, the great postwar
colonizer of Queens. ''If I was ever going to understand the construction
business,'' he says, ''I had to get mud on my shoes.''

Kahan spent his spare time walking through the adjoining neighborhood, studying
the vacant, turn-of-the-century office and loft buildings in an area that later
became known as TriBeCa. He decided to become a real-estate developer, creating
cooperative apartments in the old industrial area, but he had to start small;
his stake was nothing more than the $3,000 from his bar mitzvah. After picking
his first building, he asked a friend to name someone in the conversion business
who could help him analyze the project but who wouldn't steal it from him if it
looked good.

''Talk to Martin Raynes,'' the friend said. ''You can take him at his word.''
Raynes told him the project would work, and Kahan went ahead with it, eventually
multiplying his bar mitzvah money by 10. But making a fortune as a converter did
not intrigue him, and in 1976 he returned to the U.D.C.

Two years later, at the age of 32, Kahan was named chief - but only after
several other candidates had turned down the job. The U.D.C., along with many
other city and state agencies, was almost bankrupt.

Over the next four years, he forged a new framework for joint ventures between
public agencies and private builders. The three agencies he came to control -
U.D.C., the Battery Park City Authority and the Convention Center Development
Corporation - launched billions of dollars in new construction. The office space
alone was the equivalent of six Chrysler Buildings.

Kahan took a radical approach to development, especially when compared with the
way the city would handle its joint ventures. As the head of a state agency, he
was not subject to the usual city review process. He could have ignored everyone
and simply put up buildings that would reap the greatest immediate payout for
the state. Instead, he solicited ideas and opinions from civic groups,
environmentalists and neighborhood representatives, ironing out any potential
problems before they could turn into lawsuits.

''The most difficult and expensive part of any project for a developer is
uncertainty and delay,'' says Kahan. ''We were prepared to remove all the
uncertainty so that a successful bidder could start construction immediately.''

It worked. In the first phase of Battery Park City, eight teams bid for the
chance to build four office towers. One of them, Olympia & York, offered to put
down $50 million as a guarantee that it would go ahead on all four buildings
simultaneously. Four years after the start of construction, Battery Park City is
generating enough money to pay off $260 million in debt and is expected to
underwrite a new $400 million state bond issue, which Governor Cuomo plans to
set aside for low-income housing. New York City expects to earn billions in
coming years in taxes and other payments from a project in which it never
invested a dime.

FTER MARIO CUOMO WAS ELECTED governor in 1982, he put his own man in charge at
Battery Park City, and Richard Kahan found himself without a job.

The notion of forming his own real-estate development firm had appeal, but he
needed a partner, and he decided to renew his acquaintance with Martin Raynes.
As it turned out, Raynes was interested.

''I liked his ideas,'' Raynes says today, ''and I admired what he'd accomplished
at Battery Park City.'' Raynes, 42 years of age, is a third-generation
real-estate man who has created what is rapidly becoming New York's largest
full-service apartment agency. He brokers and manages apartments and specializes
in turning older buildings into cooperatives. He and his partners are currently
converting 8,000 apartments. Raynes is an imposing figure - 6 feet 2 inches tall
and broad-shouldered. He is given to few words, delivered in a calm, always
controlled manner. The two men agreed that Kahan would be the operating partner,
with Raynes in the wings unless needed. In the beginning, though, his help was
essential. To start with, Raynes drew upon his network of wealthy friends and
associates to put together a board that gave Continental instant credibility.
Its members include Marvin Davis, the Denver oil magnate and investor who is
also Raynes's father-in-law, and Leonard H. Goldenson, the former chairman of
ABC.

Then the partners set about alerting the development community to the existence
of their new company. ''We drew up a list of 50 or 60 people in the real-estate
business we thought we might want to undertake projects with,'' says Kahan,
''and over a period of two or three months, we scheduled a breakfast or a lunch
with each of them.''

One of their first targets was Victor Elmaleh, a partner in the World-Wide
Group. Elmaleh, 67, is a tall, distinguished-looking man with an attentive gaze.
He spent his early years working for a trading company that his father had
founded in Morocco before World War II. The company has long held the license to
handle the distribution of Volkswagens, Porsches and Audis in the tristate
region. Now, with a staff of no more than 15, World-Wide has become a major
real-estate investor with office and retail centers in California, Connecticut,
Massachusetts and New York City. And Elmaleh, who has a degree in architecture
from the University of Virginia, is back in his element.

''Putting up buildings is the most satisfying thing I've ever done in
business,'' he says. ''I should have started a long time ago.''

At the age of 50, Elmaleh won a national squash championship, and he still plays
tennis every day. He prefers doubles, and so does one of his sometime opponents,
Martin Raynes. When Raynes called to suggest lunch at the Four Seasons, Elmaleh
agreed - but said he would rather eat in. So Richard Kahan's introduction to
World-Wide came over cold cuts in Elmaleh's 35th-floor office on Third Avenue.

After lunch, the three men stood at Elmaleh's corner window, gazing out over the
Queensboro Bridge and Long Island City and talking about the possibility of
rebuilding New York's waterfront.

AYOR KOCH WAS HAVING SIMILAR thoughts. Still struggling to recover from the
fiscal collapse of the mid-1970's, the city needed billions of dollars to
rebuild its subway system, its roads and bridges, parks and playgrounds. Spurred
by the financial success of Battery Park City, the city was rapidly moving ahead
on its plans to auction off its real estate.

First on the city's list: the 21-year-old Coliseum. As developers were invited
to bid on the site, the city's priorities became clear. The dollar size of the
offer would rank first, followed by the financial ability of the developer to
complete the project. The overall benefit to the city - including such items as
tax revenue, jobs and design - would be third. Officials stretched the zoning
laws to permit a 2.7 million-square-foot tower, a structure the size of the
Empire State Building. The bigger the building, the more space available for
leasing and the more developers would be likely to bid.

As part of its joint-venture deals, the city has demanded certain public
improvements. In the case of South Ferry, the bidders were asked to take on such
items as the conversion of Peter Minuit Plaza, a jumble of traffic islands and
streets in front of the present terminal, into a two-acre park with fountains
and an amphitheater. In the case of the Coliseum, the developers were expected
to rebuild the 59th Street subway station.

On the face of it, these extras represent a windfall for the city. But some
officials and civic leaders view the process as haphazard and misguided. They
believe that the extra funds such concessions represent should be collected and
applied throughout the city, wherever they are most needed.

''We have turned over the job of urban planning to the development community,''
says Ruth Messinger. ''Just because a developer decides to build a new tower in
a neighborhood doesn't mean we need a park or a subway improvement there. Maybe
the subway station that needs improvement most is in Brooklyn.''

By the time the bidding on the Coliseum project ended, the price had reached
$455 million. The tower that will rise on the site will belong to Boston
Properties, a company controlled by Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the real-estate
developer and magazine publisher, and to Salomon Brothers, the investment house.
Salomon plans to move its headquarters there.  City officials were gleeful.
Seated in her small office, Deputy Mayor Townsend recalls her surprise. ''Who
could possibly have imagined it?'' she marvels, adjusting her oversized pink
glasses and reaching for a half-full ashtray. ''We thought we might get $200
million, $250 million tops.'' It was the kind of surprise she had seldom
encountered in 22 years as a public employee, first in Washington, and since
1981 in the Koch administration.

But the decision to build the massive tower on the Coliseum site infuriated
many. Brendan Gill, chairman emeritus of the Landmarks Conservancy, an
organization involved in historic preservation and development, calls the sale
''a catastrophe.'' Says Gill: ''It is an outrage to impose something like this
on our most important landmark, Central Park. What's worse, it wasn't a
developer manipulating the laws, it was the city itself misusing its own
power.''

HILE THE COLISEUM DRAMA was playing out, the city was moving ahead on other
projects, including South Ferry. Along with 14 other developer teams, Kahan and
Raynes had informed the city of their interest in bidding on the site. The
Public Development Corporation, the agency charged with the real-estate
projects, set about refining the guidelines it would provide developers.

In the city's joint ventures, there has been little of the prior consultation
with civic groups that characterized Kahan's work with the U.D.C. And not until
the traditional zoning process begins - after the city has already designated a
developer and agreed to the design and size of a project - do the Department of
Parks and Recreation or the Landmarks Preservation Commission have any
significant influence.

In February 1985, 14 developers were invited to bid on South Ferry - the city
had disqualified one potential bidder because he did not have the financial
wherewithal. At least on paper, the city's priorities had changed, with design
considerations moving to the top of the list ahead of the financial package.

The Coliseum developer had been prohibited from reconstructing Columbus Circle
to reclaim it from traffic; the South Ferry developer would have to do the
opposite, eliminating the traffic and rebuilding the park space. The city had
all but forced the Coliseum developers to produce a plan for a massive building
that would overshadow one quadrant of Central Park; at South Ferry, developers
were urged to protect the open view down Whitehall Street into the harbor.

The change in priorities, says the Public Development Corporation, was dictated
by the nature of the South Ferry site. But developers and civic groups contend
that it was a reaction to the explosion of criticism over the Coliseum project.
= During its first two years, Richard Kahan's company had stayed away from
Manhattan, concentrating instead on seeking contracts to build research parks in
conjunction with universities in Missouri, New Mexico, Florida, Ohio and New
Jersey. But he found the South Ferry site too tempting to resist - a chance to
use his expertise in a public-private partnership, though this time from the
vantage point of a developer.

Yet Kahan had never undertaken a major project as a private developer, and a
submission would entail expensive design and engineering work. He felt he had to
find experienced partners who would lend their track records and bankrolls to
his proposal. ''I needed a couple of big eagles to carry me through this
process,'' he says.

Bernard H. Mendik was his first choice. A close friend and frequent business
partner of Martin Raynes, Mendik, 57, is an experienced syndicator and manager
of Manhattan office buildings. He had never before built a major project from
scratch. Kahan also lined up the support of the Prudential Realty Group, the
real-estate arm of the Prudential Insurance Company and one of the nation's
largest real-estate developers.

For architects, Kahan chose the firm he had come to know at Battery Park City:
Cooper Eckstut Associates. They would design the base of the building,
incorporating the ferry terminals and the parks. Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates
would handle the tower. The more he talked with Stanton Eckstut, the more
excited Kahan became about the South Ferry project. It began to trouble him that
Mendik and Prudential did not seem to share his enthusiasm. ''Bernie was willing
to honor his commitment,'' Kahan remembers, ''but he wasn't calling me every day
to check on our progress or spending his mornings walking around the site.''
Kahan got the same feeling from Prudential. ''We had too much on our plate at
the time,'' says Donald R. Knab, chairman of the Prudential Investment
Corporation.

For a project of this size, Kahan wanted partners who would be more entranced
with the idea. ''I talked the project over with Oxford Properties, the Canadian
company,'' he says, ''and they agreed to take over for Prudential.'' But almost
immediately Kahan began to sense that, like Mendik, they were lukewarm, ready to
drop out if he could find a replacement. Time was running short. The deadline
for the proposals, Aug. 1, was just three weeks away.

''I was sitting at home one weekend in the middle of July,'' Kahan recalls,
''thinking about how to improve our chances at winning the designation, when
something made me go back and read the Request for Proposals. There was a line
that said, 'A developer may submit more than one proposal.' ''

Kahan knew that only eight of the 15 developers who had originally expressed
interest in South Ferry were actually planning to put in a bid. He decided to
approach one of them with this proposition: Continental and the other team would
become partners on both their proposals; the new double partnership would then
submit two bids.

Kahan talked with Jerry Speyer, president of Tishman Speyer Properties and a
partner in one of Continental's research-park proposals in Florida. ''Jerry was
friendly, but he did not immediately take to the idea,'' Kahan says. ''Finally,
I realized we would be most compatible with the Zeckendorf group, but I had
never met Zeckendorf. Marty didn't know him either.'' But they did know Victor
Elmaleh.

Over the last three years, Elmaleh and his World-Wide partners had joined
Zeckendorf in nine major projects, worth more than $1 billion. And World-Wide
was part of the Zeckendorf team for South Ferry.

So back Kahan went to Elmaleh's 35th-floor office for another lunch of cold
cuts. By then it was July 25, only a week before the deadline. But as it turned
out, Elmaleh was predisposed to accept Kahan's idea. In real estate as in
tennis, he prefers to work with partners. ''I saw no reason why we shouldn't
both improve our chances by sending in two proposals,'' says Elmaleh.

That very afternoon, Elmaleh discussed Kahan's proposition with Zeckendorf.
Since the collapse of his father's company in 1965, Zeckendorf has made a
phenomenal comeback, building his way back to the big leagues of New York real
estate. Today, he is managing more major projects than anyone else in town.

At the age of 57, Zeckendorf is a tall, slender, hyperactive man who can't sit
still for more than a minute or two. He carries his father's name with pride: he
has just rejoined the Real Estate Board of New York, the industry's trade
association, after an absence of 20 years, having quit because the board had
ousted his father for not paying dues while he was bankrupt.

Zeckendorf has strictly compartmentalized his projects. He spreads the risk
among several partners and isolates each project from the others - rather than
leaning every part of his empire up against every other part as his father had
done. In most instances, he puts up a very small percentage of the money and
takes responsibility for managing the project in exchange for an equal share of
the ownership. While Zeckendorf's net worth of about $40 million is only a
fraction of his father's fortune back in the 1960's, it is secure.

Zeckendorf was a latecomer to the South Ferry project. The original ''expression
of interest'' to the city was submitted by Zev Wolfson, a developer who owns a
building adjacent to South Ferry. Once Zeckendorf agreed to join in, he brought
along two other frequent partners, World-Wide and Arthur G. Cohen, a private
real-estate developer and former head of the now defunct Arlen Realty and
Development, once the largest publicly held real-estate company in the country.

Within 24 hours of Kahan's lunch with Elmaleh, an agreement was reached between
Continental and the Zeckendorf group, known as South Ferry Associates. ''We
shook hands, and we've operated on that basis ever since,'' says Elmaleh.
''Nothing written, but a firm understanding of who will do what.'' It is a
casual agreement for a $400 million deal, but typical of the small world of New
York real estate. Because so many projects involve such a web of part-(Continued
on Page 114) ners, a developer who fails to honor a commitment can find himself
unable to get back into the game.

As a result of the agreement, South Ferry Associates now had two proposals to
offer, nearly identical financially but in conflict architecturally. The
Zeckendorf team had produced a design that would require demolition of the
existing Whitehall Ferry Terminal and construction of a new tower above it.
Continental's plan called for renovating the existing ferry building and placing
the tower at the end of Whitehall Street.

At 9 A.M. on Thursday, Aug. 1, Kahan slipped his 200-page offer into a cloth
binder and slid it into a purple slipcase. On the front he pasted a card that
listed Continental as the first of the six partners in South Ferry Associates.
He drove to Eckstut's office in a rented station wagon to pick up the model of
the project, then headed downtown to the Battery Maritime Building to deliver
the offer and model at the offices of the Department of Ports and Terminals.

ITHIN DAYS OF receiving the eight South Ferry bids, the city found itself under
pressure from the arts organizations and civic groups that had been so critical
of the Coliseum project. They asked that the details of the bids be made public.
But the city, in its new role as developer, sought to manage the bidding process
in the confidential style of a private business.

Jon Benguiat, assistant commissioner of waterfront development for the
Department of Ports and Terminals and the official in charge of the project,
refused to let anyone outside the city government see any of the proposals. ''We
felt the bids -the models and the drawings and the ideas - belonged to the
developers who had prepared them,'' says Benguiat. He is now vice president for
waterfront development at the Public Development Corporation, which has since
taken over the project.

The civic groups, however, interpreted the department's decision as an effort to
keep the public from learning how its government was making a decision that
would have far-reaching effects on the city. ''They were obviously
con-(Continued on Page 116) cerned that submitting the project to public review
would risk delaying it,'' says Laurie Beckelman, executive director of the
Landmarks Conservancy.

Eventually, the city agreed to a presentation of the proposals before a limited
group of officers of the civic organizations. At the same time, city agencies
were invited to review the proposals and offer any criticisms they might have.
And in a gesture to the civic groups, the president of the P.D.C., James P.
Stuckey, invited them to propose members for a panel of architects that would
review the eight designs. ''He made it clear that the panel would have no
binding authority,'' Laurie Beckelman says, ''but he promised to listen.''

In mid-December, a five-man panel, with Jonathan Barnett serving as chairman,
began deliberations. Though the members had strong reservations about whether
anything at all should be built on the site, they examined the offers with a
view to making the best of the situation. ''We decided that two of the eight -
the one from Howard Ronson with Salomon Brothers and the other, the Cooper,
Eckstut plan from Kahan -would provide the best solutions within the city's
design criteria, and we recommended them in that order,'' says Barnett.

Stuckey complained that eliminating all but two of the entries would make it
difficult for the city to negotiate with the developers in refining their bids.
Barnett was asked to meet again with his committee to add two more.

As far as Barnett was concerned, the P.D.C. was changing the rules, asking the
architects to consider factors beyond the merits of the designs. But they agreed
to the request. ''We still thought we might be able to influence the quality of
the project to some degree,'' Barnett recalls, ''so we added the Zeckendorf
design and the Parker scheme, even though we didn't think they met the
criteria.'' The Jack Parker Corporation had proposed a futuristic tower on a
platform just off the shore.

To the dismay of Barnett and other members of the panel, Stuckey failed to make
their report public. And in February, when the city announced the four
finalists, no mention was made, as Barnett points out, ''that we had recommended
them in order.''

Both of the plans that had Continental's name on them were among the finalists.
In Kahan's view, his only serious competition was the proposal offered by Howard
P. Ronson, a British real-estate operator who has completed 11 major projects
since settling in Manhattan eight years ago.

The platform scheme proposed by Parker would never be selected, Kahan believed,
because it would require lengthy environmental studies and might pose a hazard
to navigation. ''The city was not looking for delays,'' he says. After Westway,
the highway that died following a decade of environmental lawsuits, the city was
eager to avoid any design that extended into the harbor. A serious delay would
postpone the day when the city would receive any money for the site. In the
development community, it would also be viewed as proof that the city was unable
to clear the way for construction, making it harder to attract developers for
future projects. LL THROUGH THE spring, Kahan spent a lot of time on airplanes,
chasing university officials in Missouri, politicians in New Mexico and
architects in Florida. Continental needed work.

The first round of good news arrived in June. The University of Missouri had
accepted Continental's plans for a 2.5 million-square-foot research center
adjacent to its Kansas City campus.

The bad news was not far behind. Kahan's sources in the city government began to
hint that his original South Ferry proposal was out of the running. The city's
own design team had decided that it violated the program specifications by
blocking off the view down Whitehall Street into the harbor.

''I thought that would give it to Ronson,'' he recalls. But the city did not
find Ronson's design so pleasing. The base of the proposed tower would have
extended beyond the existing Whitehall Ferry Terminal building outline, which
would have required an environmental impact study.

Having eliminated the other contenders, the city called Zeckendorf to a press
conference at City Hall July 17. For Kahan, the merger strategy had paid off.
Zeckendorf and World-Wide Holdings would have their 10th major joint project.
And a latecomer to the partnership, the KG Land Corporation, would have a new
and prestigious Manhattan venture in its portfolio.

KG Land is an affiliate of Kumagai Gumi, Japan's largest construction company.
Like many Japanese corporations, Kumagai has invested heavily in the American
real-estate market in the last two years. The company hopes to parlay its role
as a financier into major construction jobs in the United States. The president
of KG Land is Richard Katano, 44, a soft-spoken executive whose main office is
in Palo Alto, Calif. But last year, he says, he spent 247 days on the road, 150
of them in New York. Real estate in the city is a cyclical business, he says.
''If we have the staying power to last for five or six years, we should be able
to catch at least one peak in the cycle.''

Since 1984, Katano has put his firm into partnership with Zeckendorf on almost
all of his New York projects. In the case of the South Ferry deal, when Katano
heard that Zeckendorf was going to participate, he expressed great interest.
''They had just lost the bidding for the Coliseum site,'' Zeckendorf says.
''They wanted a very visible project to be involved in, and there was not
another project like this likely to come along for a long time.''

Under what is still a tentative arrangement, KG Land would put up two-thirds of
the money, about $256 million, but receive only one-third of the ownership. In
other words, though the other partners would provide just a third of the money,
they would get two-thirds of the profits to split among the five of them - if
there are any profits.

Though demand for first-class office space has stayed strong for the last seven
years, the South Ferry tower will not be ready for occupany before 1990 at the
earliest. Much could change. A renewal of corporate flight from the city or a
serious retraction of the financial-services industry could send the Manhattan
office market into a tailspin. That could leave the partners with a $400 million
investment in a project that had no tenant.

If the partners in South Ferry do find a company willing to pay a premium to
occupy what promises to be one of the most visible buildings in the United
States, they stand to earn a fortune every year for a century. Their analysis
indicates that, after expenses and rental payments to the city, operating
profits should exceed $40 million a year once the building is occupied and go up
from there.

When the designation of the Zeckendorf proposal was announced last July, the
winning bid turned out to be worth $375 million to the city over the next 20
years, $50 million more than the next offer. For all the increased attention
paid to the esthetics of the project, once again, the city's nod had gone to the
highest bidder.

HE SOUTH FERRY proposal still faces the traditional reviews applied to any
private real-estate venture - by the neighborhood community board, by city
agencies and by the city's committee of last resort, a peculiar institution
known as the Board of Estimate. (The board's seven elected officials hold the
power to reject any project that seeks a zoning variance or involves city money
or city land.) Mayor Koch is confident that the system offers enough safeguards:
''We hope that by (Continued on Page 118) the time a project has been through
the streamlined, but arduous, planning process, we have eliminated any errors in
judgment.''

Yet even under normal circumstances, the integrity of the system is subject to
tremendous stress. The handful of extraordinarily wealthy developers who control
the lion's share of major projects in Manhattan are also among the largest
contributors to the election campaigns of local officials who, in turn, hold
veto power over their projects.

In 1985, for example, Zeckendorf's contributions included $33,500 to Andrew
Stein's successful campaign, for election as City Council president. Stein casts
two of the 11 votes on the Board of Estimate. Of such gifts, Zeckendorf says,
''All it buys is access.'' And the Mayor, Zeckendorf says, goes out of his way
to let you know that he doesn't owe you anything because of it. Koch, himself,
comments: ''I'm guilty of monumental ingratitude.''

Some in city government, like Council member Ruth Messinger, insist that such a
system is built on conflict of interest. ''What's the difference between selling
access and selling favors?'' she asks. ''What about the citizen who has nothing
to offer but his vote?''

When the city crosses the line from regulator to joint-venture partner, the
issues become even more stark. The city is now in business with the developers,
helping them to devise plans that will generate the highest financial return,
choosing which proposal it will accept, then sharing in the profits.

''The city is the worst developer we have faced,'' says Joseph B. Rose, a
doctoral candidate in government who is chairman of the community board
responsible for reviewing projects in midtown Manhattan.

''Boston Properties has bent over backward to work with us on problems with the
Coliseum,'' Rose says, ''but the city has tried to bulldoze it through. Instead
of setting an example for responsible development, the city tramples over its
own safeguards.''

Richard Kahan, though he is pleased to be part of the development team that won
the designation for South Ferry, worries that the city is playing too direct a
role in its real-estate projects: ''The government should not participate in
private business ventures except in times of crisis. At times like that, you
need the government to get an economy moving again.''

Kahan believes that the late 1970's was such a period. ''We don't have a crisis
anymore in Manhattan, and so now the government ends up becoming a competitor
with private developers.''

Carol Bellamy, a former City Council president and member of the Board of
Estimate who now is an investment banker at Morgan Stanley & Company, sees the
process as fragile at best. ''Even with the strongest planning department and
the best intentions of honest people, it would be impossible for the system to
be entirely pure.'' she says. ''As it is now, with these joint ventures, the
professional staffers know how the Mayor feels about a project. It's difficult
for them to raise objections after he has held a press conference to say how
much a project will contribute to the life of the city.''

Bellamy believes the city's planning function has been turned over to those who
have the most to gain from it - the developers. ''Instead of having the
real-estate people react to a plan devised by the city's professional staff,''
she says, ''we have a staff reacting to plans put forward by real-estate
developers, with the city itself being one of the developers. When you do that,
you are inviting a breakdown.''

ONTHS BEFORE the July press conference announcing the developers for South
Ferry, the city had already moved on to its next site, a square block squeezed
between New York University Medical Center and Bellevue Hospital at Kips Bay.
Here, the city wants a developer to build a riverfront apartment complex. In
describing the project to potential bidders, the city's Division of Real
Property specified that the developer would have to provide 127 apartments for
nurses at the two hospitals.

It was typical of the requirements that the city has attached to its joint
ventures in the last two years. But this one had a special twist. The developer
would have to provide $1 million worth of sheets and towels for Bellevue, a
city-owned hospital.

''Any particular designer?'' asked one of the 15 developers who had come to a
meeting to hear the city's presentation. The room erupted in laughter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Mayor Koch, William Zeckendorf Jr., Richard A. Kahan, Victor
Elmaleh, Richard Katano and Deputy Mayor Alair A. Townsend (William Coupon);
Photos of South Ferry, Kips Bay, Battery park, East River Landing, Coliseum,
Times Square and Javits Convention Center (Jan Staller)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: DECEMBER 7, 1986

SECTION: Section 7; Page 80, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


Fiction
            Weeks
This   Last    On
Week   Week  List
1         1     5 WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.)
                  Iran during the month following the Shah's
                  departure.
2         2    13 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.)
                  Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman who
                  grew up in a small Maine town.
3         3    19 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.)
                  Without using nuclear weapons, the West staves off
                  the Russians in World War III.
4         4     6 A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf,
                  $18.95.) Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a
                  brutal double murder.
5         5     8 HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon
                  & Schuster, $18.95.) A top New York model
                  encounters three of Los Angeles's most dynamic men.
6         6    10 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton
                  Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family relationships in
                  South Carolina's low country and New York City.
7         7     6 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                  Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                  Vietnam.
8         8     8 FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,
                  $16.95.) The hero of the ''Foundation'' series
                  searches for the lost planet Earth.
9        12    21 WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) A rich orphan comes of age while she
                  travels the world.
10       10     9 THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) Continuing the saga of a
                  turn-of-the-century New York family begun in
                  ''Evergreen.''
11        9    14 THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random
                  House, $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and
                  greed mark a young woman's life in 18th-century
                  England and France.
12       11     6 PERFUME, by Patrick Suskind. (Knopf, $16.95.)
                  An olfactory vampire kills people to steal their
                  scents.
13       13    11 THE BEET QUEEN, by Louise Erdrich. (Holt,
                  $16.95.) Forty years in a small North Dakota town
                  near an Indian reservation.
14             11 ROGER'S VERSION, by John Updike. (Knopf,
                  $17.95.) A fiftyish professor wrestles with God,
                  sex, science, technology, mathematics and
                  computers.
15       14     3 THE MIRROR OF HER DREAMS, by Stephen R.
                  Donaldson. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $19.95.) First of
                  two novels about Mordant, a strange land where
                  reality is intertwined with illusion.
                  Nonfiction
1         1     5 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                  Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                  recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.
2         2    31 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday,
                  $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from the
                  television star and father of five.
3         3     9 HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.)
                  From Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized
                  biography of Frank Sinatra.
4        11     2 PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon
                  Eisenhower. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A biography
                  of the wife of the 37th President written by her
                  daughter.
5        12     3 WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Putnam,
                  $14.95; $16.95 after Dec. 25.) A new collection of
                  columns by the journalist and television
                  personality.
6         4    11 MCMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi. (Warner,
                  $16.95.) The autobiography of the quarterback for
                  the Chicago Bears.
7        14     6 DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland with
                  Greg Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The ballerina
                  recalls her checkered career.
8         6     6 ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Random House,
                  $18.95.) The comedian's autobiography, beginning
                  with her impoverished childhood in Hollywood.
9        16     2 LIFE: The First Fifty Years, 1936-1986. (Little,
                  Brown, $50.) The past half-century as seen in the
                  magazine's photographs.
10        8    29 JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot.
                  (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire
                  veterinarian about his favorite animal.
11       10    39 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random
                  House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic
                  in pictures and rhyme; the first Dr. Seuss book for
                  adults.
12 *      9     9 THE STORY OF ENGLISH, by Robert McCrum, William
                  Cran and Robert MacNeil. (Sifton/Viking, $24.95.)
                  Companion volume to the PBS series about the
                  world's most widely used language.
13        7     6 DREAMGIRL, by Mary Wilson with Patricia Romanowski
                  and Ahrgus Juilliard. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A
                  former member of the Supremes describes her time
                  with the group.
14              1 THE CHRISTMAS DAY KITTEN, by James Herriot.
                  (St. Martin's, $9.95.) An illustrated story for
                  children.
15        5     9 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow,
                  $19.95.) The crisis in the American automobile
                  industry and Japan's role in it.

                  Advice, How-to and
                  Miscellaneous
1         2     6 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff
                  Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at
                  moderate cost.
2         1    12 MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM, by
                  Susan Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.)
                  How to cope with overbearing men.
3         3    29 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton,
                  $15.95.) A regimen based on the Vanderbilt
                  University Weight Management Program.
4         4     6 BE HAPPY YOU ARE LOVED, by Robert H. Schuller.
                  (Nelson, $15.95.) Inspiration from a California
                  clergyman.
5              43 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow,
                  $14.95.) A television chef's inexpensive dishes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHRISTMAS BOOKS;
Notable Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Patricia T. O'Conner

SECTION: Section 7; Page 82, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2826 words


This list of paperbacks is a selection from the New & Noteworthy column since
the December 1985 Christmas issue. It includes novels, stories, biography,
memoirs, history, essays and science.

THE ABANDONMENT OF THE JEWS: America and the Holocaust, 1941-1945, by David S.
Wyman. (Pantheon, $8.95.) An inquiry into the question: Where was America during
the Holocaust?

THE ACCIDENTAL TOURIST, by Anne Tyler. (Berkley, $4.50.) A Baltimore travel
writer, drifting into lonely eccentricity after his son dies and his wife leaves
him, becomes involved with an animal trainer.

ALL FALL DOWN: America's Tragic Encounter With Iran, by Gary Sick. (Penguin,
$8.95.) A chronicle of the Iranian crises of 1979-1980.

AMERICAN COMMUNISM AND SOVIET RUSSIA: The Formative Period, by Theodore Draper.
(Vintage, $12.95.) The second volume of a history of the American Communist
Party, from 1923 to 1929.

ANNIE JOHN, by Jamaica Kincaid. (Plume/New American Library, $5.95.) A novel,
made up of interrelated stories, about a young girl growing up in Antigua.

AUTHOR FROM A SAVAGE PEOPLE, by Bette Pesetsky. (G. K. Hall, $5.95.) A
successful female ghostwriter has just helped one of her famous clients win the
Nobel Prize and threatens to expose him unless he gives her the award money.

THE BASS SAXOPHONE, by Josef Skvorecky. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $5.95.)
Musical themes are richly woven into these two novellas - the title piece and
''Emoke.''

THE BEANS OF EGYPT, MAINE, by Carolyn Chute. (Warner, $3.50.) A bleak novel
portraying a dynastic poor-white family in rural Maine and a neighbor woman who
marries into the incestuous clan.

BLOOD TIE, by Mary Lee Settle. (Scribner Signature, $7.95.) A beautiful town on
the Turkish coast for a time becomes home to a group of cultural dropouts,
expatriates, tourists and pleasure-seekers.

THE BONE PEOPLE, by Keri Hulme. (Penguin, $7.95.) Set in New Zealand, this novel
by a Maori writer centers on three people who have become separated from their
tribal heritage.

BROADWAY, by Brooks Atkinson. (Limelight, $14.95.) A profusely illustrated
history of Broadway by The Times's former drama critic.

CARPENTER'S GOTHIC, by William Gaddis. (Elisabeth Sifton/Penguin, $6.95.) At the
center of this novel is the stormy marriage of the Booths, a couple who live in
a Victorian house on the Hudson River north of New ork City.

THE CHIEF: A Memoir of Fathers and Sons, by Lance Morrow. (Collier/Macmillan,
$8.95.) The Time magazine writer offers recollections of family life and a
portrait of his father, Hugh.

THE CIDER HOUSE RULES, by John Irving. (Bantam, $4.95.) This novel explores
abortion and the relationship between a spiritual father and son.

COCTEAU, by Francis Steegmuller. (Nonpareil/Godine, $15.95.) A biography of the
author, film maker and artist Jean Cocteau.

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF PETER TAYLOR. (Penguin, $9.95.) A collection of 21
stories, written from the 1940's to the 1960's, many of them set in Tennessee.

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF WILLIAM HUMPHREY. (Laurel/Dell, $4.95.) These stories
are ''fascinating and, in contrast to much contemporary fiction, unspoiled,''
our reviewer said.

COMMON GROUND: A Turbulent Decade in the Lives of Three American Families, by J.
Anthony Lukas. (Vintage, $9.95.) A Pulitzer Prize-winning study of Boston from
1968 to 1978.

CRAMPTON HODNET, by Barbara Pym. (Plume/ New American Library, $7.95.) Three
sets of characters in an English village grapple with as many ill-fated
flirtations.

THE DANGEROUS SUMMER, by Ernest Hemingway. (Scribners, $9.95.) A chronicle of
the rivalry between two bullfighters in Spain in 1959.

DELMORE SCHWARTZ: The Life of an American Poet, by James Atlas.
(Harvest/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $10.95.) A critical biography of the poet,
novelist, critic and professor.

ECONOMICS IN PLAIN ENGLISH, by Leonard Silk. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster,
$7.95.) The Times's economics columnist offers an updated and expanded edition
of his 1978 primer.

EMMA GOLDMAN IN AMERICA, by Alice Wexler. (Beacon, $10.95.) This study of the
anarchist, visionary and orator makes use of the discovery in 1975 of her
passionate correspondence with her lover.

A FANATIC HEART: Selected Stories, by Edna O'Brien. (Plume/New American Library,
$7.95.) In these 29 stories, our reviewer said, Edna O'Brien ''tells the Irish
woman's inside story.''

FINAL CUT: Dreams and Disaster in the Making of Heaven's Gate, by Steven Bach.
(Plume/New American Library, $8.95.) A film industry insider's account of the
making of a box-office flop.

THE FINISHING SCHOOL, by Gail Godwin. (Avon, $4.50.) A compassionate
psychological novel about a 14-year-old girl and her friendship with an older
woman.

FLAUBERT'S PARROT, by Julian Barnes. (McGraw-Hill, $4.95.) A retired physician
and amateur Flaubert scholar is obsessed with his literary hero.

FOXYBABY, by Elizabeth Jolley. (Penguin, $5.95.) A collection of matrons gathers
for a weight-loss and self-improvement course on an Australian college campus.

FRANK AND MAISIE: A Memoir With Parents, by Wilfrid Sheed. (Touchstone/Simon &
Schuster, $7.95.) The author's memoir of his Australian father and his English
mother.

FROM THE FIFTEENTH DISTRICT, by Mavis Gal-lant. (G. K. Hall, $5.95.) These nine
stories, set in a variety of European countries, are centered around characters
who are expatriates of one sort or another.

FROST: A Literary Life Reconsidered, by William H. Pritchard. (Oxford
University, $7.95.) This biography of Robert Frost is ''a compact, sympathetic
account of Frost's life as a poet,'' our reviewer said.

FUNNY MONEY, by Mark Singer. (Laurel/Dell, $5.95.) The author reconstructs the
rise and fall of Oklahoma City's Penn Square bank.

GALAPAGOS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Dell, $4.50.) The author populates a nature cruise
with celebrities and turns it into a modern-day Noah's ark, bound for the
Galapagos Islands.

GEORGE ELIOT, by Gordon S. Haight. (Penguin, $9.95.) This is surely the
definitive biography of the 19th-century novelist, our reviewer said.

GLITZ, by Elmore Leonard. (Warner, $3.95.) A crime thriller that pits a Miami
cop against a psychopath.

HABITATIONS OF THE WORD, by William H. Gass. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster,
$8.95.) A collection of essays on such topics as Emerson and the essay, Plato's
''Phaedrus'' and the souls of sentences.

HABITS OF THE HEART: Individualism and Commitment in American Life, by Robert N.
Bellah, Richard Madsen, William M. Sullivan, Ann Swidler and Steven M. Tipton.
(Perennial/Harper & Row, $7.95.) A critique of individualism and its
consequences for American cultural, economic, political and religious life.

HAZLITT: The Mind of a Critic, by David Bromwich. (Oxford University, $12.95.) A
biography of William Hazlitt, the 19th-century critic and man of letters.

HEART OF EUROPE: A Short History of Poland, by Norman Davies. (Oxford
University, $9.95.) This study of Poland begins and ends with the Solidarity
labor movement, seen as a frame for the nation's history.

THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH: A Political History of the Space Age, by Walter A.
McDougall. (Basic Books, $11.95.) This Pulitzer Prize-winning study focuses on
the United States and the Soviet Union between the launching of Sputnik 1 in
1957 and the election of Lyndon Johnson in 1964.

HOOPLA, by Harry Stein. (St. Martin's, $7.95.) A part-fact, part-fiction
re-creation of baseball's ''Black Sox'' scandal of 1919.

OTEL DU LAC, by Anita Brookner. (Obelisk/ Dutton, $6.95.) A quiet, absorbing
novel about an Englishwoman vacationing at a Swiss resort.

HOUSE, by Tracy Kidder. (Avon, $4.50.) The author chronicles the construction of
a house.

THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS, by Isabel Allende. Translated by Magda Bogin. (Bantam,
$4.50.) A family saga set against the backdrop of revolu-tion and
counterrevolution in an unnamed Latin country.

LLITERATE AMERICA, by Jonathan Kozol. (Plume/ New American Library, $6.95.) A
study of illiteracy in the United States.

IN COUNTRY, by Bobbie Ann Mason. (Perennial/ Harper & Row, $6.95.) The heroine
of this novel is a Kentucky teen-ager whose father was killed and her uncle
damaged physically and emotionally in Vietnam.

IN PRAISE OF OLDER WOMEN: The Amorous Recollections of Andras Vajda, by Stephen
Vizinczey. (Atlantic Monthly Press, Paper, $6.95. Cloth, $11.95.) A young
philosophy instructor shares his view of life and love.

KING OF THE JEWS, by Leslie Epstein. (Plume/ New American Library, $7.95.) This
Holocaust novel focuses on the politics of survival of a Judenrat, or Jewish
town council, in a fictional Polish ghetto.

LAKE WOBEGON DAYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Penguin, $3.95.) A comic memoir of the
fictional hamlet of Lake Wobegon, Minn.

LANARK: A Life in 4 Books, by Alasdair Gray. (George Braziller, $9.95.) This
novel moves back and forth in time, from a dismal, futuristic city called
Unthank to postwar Glasgow and back.

LAST WISH, by Betty Rollin. (Warner Books, $8.95.) The author shares the ordeal
she faced when her terminally ill mother asked that she help her commit suicide.


LATER THE SAME DAY, by Grace Paley. (Penguin, $5.95.) A collection of stories
that our reviewer called ''fiction of consequence.''

LINDEN HILLS, by Gloria Naylor. (Penguin, $6.95.) An adaptation of Dante's
''Inferno'' set in an affluent, thriving community of black professionals.

LONESOME DOVE, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket Books, $4.95.) A cattle drive from
south Texas to Montana in the late 1870's provides the backdrop for Larry
McMurtry's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel.

LOSING GROUND: American Social Policy, 1950-1980, by Charles Murray. (Basic
Books, $10.95.) Social programs do too much for the poor, the author argues, and
have served only to reduce their incentives to work, to learn, to obey the law
and to get along on their own.

LOUISE BOGAN: A Portrait, by Elizabeth Frank. (Columbia University, $14.50.)
This life of the lyric poet was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for biography.

LOVE ALWAYS, by Ann Beattie. (Vintage, $5.95.) Fourteen-year-old Nicole Nelson,
a soap opera star, comes to Vermont to spend the summer with her aunt.

LOVE MEDICINE, by Louise Erdrich. (Bantam, $6.95.) Seven characters tell their
stories in this novel set on and around a North Dakota Indian reservation.

THE LOVER, by Marguerite Duras. Translated by Barbara Bray. (Perennial/Harper &
Row, $5.95.) An old woman looks back on her adolescence in Indochina and her
passionate affair with a rich Chinese man.
  A MATTER OF PRINCIPLE, by Ronald Dworkin. (Harvard University, $8.95.) A
collection of 19 essays on a broad range of legal and philosophical issues.

MEN AND ANGELS, by Mary Gordon. (Ballantine, $4.50.) A novel about a young art
historian and her fanatically religious mother's helper.

METAMAGICAL THEMAS: Questing for the Essence of Mind and Pattern, by Douglas R.
Hofstadter. (Bantam, $14.95.) A collection of essays about science as well as
verbal puns and their equivalents in mathematics and computer science.

MIGRAINE: Understanding a Common Disorder, by Oliver Sacks. (University of
California, $8.95.) This study, our reviewer said, should be read ''as much for
its brilliant insights into the nature of our mental functioning as for its
discussion of migraine.''

MONEY: A Suicide Note, by Martin Amis. (Penguin, $6.95.) The hero-narrator of
this novel, a loutish advertising executive named John Self, turns movie maker.

MOVE YOUR SHADOW: South Africa, Black and White, by Joseph Lelyveld. (Elisabeth
Sifton/Penguin, $7.95.) Joseph Lelyveld's account of the evolution of apartheid
won a Pulitzer Prize.

MR. PALOMAR, by Italo Calvino. Translated by William Weaver. (Harvest/Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, $4.95.) The hero of this slim but dense book, our reviewer
said, ''confronts the problem of discovering his place in the world and of
watching those discoveries dissolve under his habitual intellectual scrutiny.''

NIGHTS AT THE CIRCUS, by Angela Carter. (Penguin, $6.95.) A young journalist
runs away with a traveling circus to follow his lady love - an aerialist.

THE OLD GRINGO, by Carlos Fuentes. Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden and the
author. (Perennial/ Harper & Row, $5.95.) A novel providing an imaginative
conclusion to the life of Ambrose Bierce, the American writer who vanished in
Mexico in 1914.

ONCE UPON A TIME: A True Story, by Gloria Vanderbilt. (Fawcett/Ballantine,
$4.50.) This autobiography takes the heiress through adolescence.

OTHER PEOPLE'S HOUSES, by Lore Segal. (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) An account,
written in novelistic form, of the author's flight from the Nazis as a child.

THE PERIODIC TABLE, by Primo Levi. (Schocken, $6.95.) These reflections - each
piece named after an element in the periodic table - draw analogies between the
elements and various human types.

PICTURES FROM THE WATER TRADE: Adventures of a Westerner in Japan, by John David
Morley. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $6.95.) A travel book that, though nonfiction,
is written in the third person about an English traveler exploring Tokyo.

THE QUALITY OF MERCY: Cambodia, Holocaust and Modern Conscience, by William
Shawcross. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $9.95.) A look at the world's response
to the catastrophic hunger and disease that engulfed Cambodia's people in 1979.

REASONS TO LIVE, by Amy Hempel. (Penguin, $5.95.) A collection of stories with
the flavor of contemporary Southern California.

RETURN TRIPS, by Alice Adams. (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) The protagonists in these
stories are mostly professional women, and love and loss, travel and return,
death and survival figure in many of the tales.

THE SECOND STAGE, by Betty Friedan. (Summit, $8.95.) A new plea for cooperation
between the sexes to redefine success at home and at work.

SKELETON CREW, by Stephen King. (Signet/New American Library, $4.95.) A
collection of scary tales.

SOLSTICE, by Joyce Carol Oates. (Berkley, $3.95.) Two women form a complicated
friendship that will become a voyage of discovery for them both.

THE SOONG DYNASTY, by Sterling Seagrave. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $9.95.) A
group biography of the powerful Soong clan, which played an influential part in
Chinese politics from 1911 to 1949.

SOUTH STREET, by David Bradley. (Scribner Signature, $6.95.) This novel of
ghetto life in black Philadelphia focuses on Lightnin' Ed's bar, a hub of
activity for the hoodlums and prostitutes of South Street.

STANLEY ELKIN'S THE MAGIC KINGDOM, by Stanley Elkin. (Obelisk/Dutton, $8.95.)
Mourning the loss of his son, a father leads a group of terminally ill children
on a trip from England to Disney World.

THE STORIES OF MURIEL SPARK. (Plume/ New American Library, $7.95.) Many of these
tales turn on events that are supernatural or preternatural.

''SURELY YOU'RE JOKING, MR. FEYNMAN!'' Adventures of a Curious Character, by
Richard P. Feynman with Ralph Leighton. (Bantam, $4.50.) An autobiography by the
Nobel Prize-winning physicist.

THE TRUE CONFESSIONS OF AN ALBINO TERRORIST, by Breyten Breytenbach.
(McGraw-Hill, $5.95.) The South African poet's memoir of his trial and
imprisonment on trumped-up charges of terrorism.

VITAL LIES, SIMPLE TRUTHS: The Psychology of Self-Deception, by Daniel Goleman.
(Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $8.95.) An examination into the ways the mind
ignores unwelcome truths.

WAITING: The Whites of South Africa, by Vincent Crapanzano. (Vintage, $8.95.) An
American anthropologist offers a report - mostly in the form of actual
conversations and interviews - on the white citizenry of a small town in South
Africa.

WALT WHITMAN: A Life, by Justin Kaplan. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $12.95.)
This biography takes a view of Whitman that is ''affectionate but undeluded,''
our reviewer said.

WHAT'S BRED IN THE BONE, by Robertson Davies. (Penguin, $6.95.) A novelistic
portrait of a wealthy and eccentric art patron.

WHITE NOISE, by Don DeLillo. (Elisabeth Sifton/ Viking, $5.95.) A novel about a
Middle Western college professor whose community is threatened by toxic fumes.

WORLD'S FAIR, by E. L. Doctorow. (Fawcett Crest, $4.95.) A hybrid of novel and
memoir, E. L. Doctorow's tale, which won the American Book Award for fiction
this year, is told from the point of view of a Bronx boy growing up in the
1930's.

ZUCKERMAN BOUND: A Trilogy and Epilogue, by Philip Roth. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
In a volume combining ''The Ghost Writer,'' ''Zuckerman Unbound,'' ''The Anatomy
Lesson'' and a short novel, ''The Prague Orgy,'' the author chronicles the
adventures of the literary lion Nathan Zuckerman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHRISTMAS BOOKS;
200 Notable Books of The Year

SECTION: Section 7; Page 52, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 4105 words


are the subjects of this novel in which the author's ''prose is so easygoing, so
companionable, that he appears to accomplish this act of literary ventriloquism
without moving his lips.''

PERFUME: The Story of a Murderer. By Patrick Suskind. Translated by John E.
Woods. (Knopf, $16.95.) ''As a disquisition on sensibility and as an instrument
of historical analysis,'' this first novel, set in 18th-century France, ''is
both well conceived and carefully sustained.''

THE PIANOPLAYERS. By Anthony Burgess. (Arbor House, $16.95.) The author's 29th
novel ''comes equipped with overtones of parable and hints of autobiographical
significance.''

RAT MAN OF PARIS. By Paul West. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The author ''has imagined
the mind and times of the historical Rat Man, who used to walk the boulevards of
Paris several years ago, opening his coat to flash a live rodent'' at
passers-by.

RAVEN'S WING. By Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $17.95.) ''Much of
what is admirable'' in this collection of stories ''comes from a rich
inventiveness conveyed in a plain style.''

THE REAL LIFE OF ALEJANDRO MAYTA. By Mario Vargas Llosa. Translated by Alfred
Mac Adam. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $16.95.) ''There are in fact two stories''
in this engaging novel -''that of the title character and his abortive guerrilla
uprising'' in Peru during the 1950's ''and that of the unnamed
narrator-investigator and his frustrated fictional exploration'' of the event.

RECKLESS EYEBALLING. By Ishmael Reed. (St. Martin's, $12.95.) ''This novel
displays the [author's] familiar malice and discursiveness'' as he ''bludgeons
several ideologies and individuals -Clint Eastwood's Dirty Harry, feminists,
neoliberals and the new right among them.''

RUBICON BEACH. By Steve Erickson. (Poseidon, $15.95.) In this second novel -
''part science fiction, part surrealist love story, part political fable'' - the
author ''has shunned the strictures of realistic fiction to create a highly
imaginative world whose true subject is the imagination itself.''

SEVEN RIVERS WEST. By Edward Hoagland. (Summit, $18.95.) What the author has
achieved ''is both a tall tale of the American West and a piercing account of
what men have dreamed - of what we Americans have lost.''

THE SISTERS. By Robert Littell. (Bantam, $16.95.) In ''as slick a thriller as
they come,'' Mr. Littell ''explores the labyrinth of Soviet and American
intelligence activities.''

SOLDIERS IN HIDING. By Richard Wiley. (Atlantic Monthly, $14.95.) This first
novel about a Nisei who joins the Japanese Army in 1941 is marked by ''quiet but
sizable ambitions.''

THE SPORTSWRITER. By Richard Ford. (Vintage, Paper, $6.95.) ''A daring and
intelligent novelist'' offers ''a moody chronicle'' that is ''less about sports
than about alienation.''

THE STARS AT NOON. By Denis Johnson. (Knopf, $15.95.) This ''daring'' book about
''a down-and-out American [woman] trapped in Managua,'' Nicaragua, is a
''political novel that disdains politics, [a] philosophical work that rejects
all philosophies.''

THE STORIES OF HEINRICH BOLL. By Heinrich Boll. Translated by Leila Vennewitz.
(Knopf, $25.) The Nobel Prize-winner's stories ''are less schematic or
calculated than his novels, and also less inward in the presentation of
character.''

SUCCESS STORIES. By Russell Banks. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) These short stories
are ''precise and coldly objective delineations of reality, black-and-white
prose photographs with virtually no shading or dramatic emphasis.''

A SUMMONS TO MEMPHIS. By Peter Taylor. (Knopf, $15.95.) ''Not so much a tale of
human weakness as of the power of larger patterns . . . that engulf individual
character,'' this novel of manners conjures ''the great slow shapes of epic and
tragedy.''

TABLE MONEY. By Jimmy Breslin. (Ticknor & Fields, $17.95.) A ''serious
literary'' novel about a working-class couple from Queens that ''brings together
a man increasingly at the mercy of his self-doubt and a woman who with great
courage lays claim . . . to her own self-esteem.''

TEFUGA. By Peter Dickinson. (Pantheon, $14.95.) This author is best known for
his ''literary detective stories''; in this novel set in Nigeria, ''without
sacrificing the wit and erudition of all his work, he has managed his more
serious themes of anticolonialism and feminism in a manner that seems to point
away from . . . genre writing.''

TO SKIN A CAT. By Thomas McGuane. (Seymour Lawrence/Dutton, $16.95.) These
''partly surreal, partly artful'' stories ''have in common with [Thomas]
McGuane's longer work their heroes' restlessness, their lapses into anomie and
their skepticism.''

TO THE LAND OF THE CATTAILS. By Aharon Appelfeld. Translated by Jeffrey M.
Green. (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $14.95.) In this parable, the author of
''Badenheim 1939'' ''conveys an almost hallucinatory sense of the Holocaust as
an irrevocable historical divide.''

TRANSACTIONS IN A FOREIGN CURRENCY. By Deborah Eisenberg. (Knopf, $15.95.) ''In
this provocative debut collection of stories,'' the author's ''voice seduces
upon contact, and she is a master of entrancing dialogue.''

VIENNA GIRL. By Ingeborg Lauterstein. (Norton, $16.95.) The success of this
''cryptic'' novel, ''set in the Vienna of the last days of World World II and
the early period of Allied occupation,'' is ''in establishing and maintaining a
sort of phenomenology of indeterminacy.''

THE WELL. By Elizabeth Jolley. (Viking, $14.95.) An ''exquisite story,'' the
''most spellbinding work to date,'' by ''a relaxed and appealing storyteller
with a great sense of humor and a wonderful ear.''

WHAT'S BRED IN THE BONE. By Robertson Davies. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $17.95.)
''Part Trollope, part Samuel Johnson, part Nabokov,'' this novel, whose
''intricate conception and intelligence are impressive,'' tells the life story
of a painter-art forger.

WHERE YOU'LL FIND ME: And Other Stories. By Ann Beattie. (Linden/Simon &
Schuster, $14.95.) Short fiction that displays ''the sensitive elegance one
hopes for from a remarkably gifted writer.''

THE WHITE HOUSE MESS. By Christopher Buckley. (Knopf, $16.95.) A first novel
that satirizes Presidential politics and is ''funny, especially when it sticks
to what might be called the little picture.''



History

THE AFFAIR: The Case of Alfred Dreyfus. By Jean-Denis Bredin. Translated by
Jeffrey Mehlman. (Braziller, $24.95.) A re-examination, written in a ''taut
narrative style,'' of the spy case that tore France apart.

THE AGENCY: The Rise and Decline of the CIA. By John Ranelagh. (Simon &
Schuster, $22.95.) ''A thoughtful analysis of the C.I.A. from gestation to
middle age.''

THE BOURGEOIS EXPERIENCE: Victoria to Freud. Volume Two: The Tender Passion. By
Peter Gay. (Oxford, $24.95.) The second installment of the author's ''projected
five-volume survey of middle-class culture in the 19th century'' is lent ''an
unmistakable authority'' by ''the range and variety'' of its sources and ''the
intrepid imagination with which he deploys them.''

CADILLAC DESERT: The American West and Its Disappearing Water. By Marc Reisner.
(Viking, $22.95.) ''A revealing, absorbing, often amusing and alarming report''
of ''Federal water projects in the Western states.''

CRABGRASS FRONTIER: The Suburbanization of the United States. By Kenneth T.
Jackson. (Oxford, $21.95.) Winner of the Francis Parkman Prize of the Society of
American Historians and a Bancroft Prize in history, this book ''unfolds the
comprehensive history of those forces behind the suburban boom and the
implacable and virtually irresistible pressures that brought it about.''

THE CYCLES OF AMERICAN HISTORY. By thur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Houghton Mifflin,
$22.95.) The noted historian ''edits, updates and synthesizes 25 years' worth of
his more notable historical and political essays, constructing from them a
definitive profile of American liberal theory and practice.''

HE FBI-KGB WAR: A Special Agent's Story. By Robert J. Lamphere and Tom
Shachtman. (Random House, $18.95.) The authors ''have done a good job of telling
the story of the initial break into the Soviet code system'' by the United
States in 1944 ''and offer a few new details concerning the heavily publicized
spy trials of the late 1940's and early 50's.''

FRANCE, FIN DE SIECLE. By Eugen Weber. (Harvard, $20.) ''Statesmen and treaties
are set aside in favor of the stuff of everyday existence'' as the author
''manages to raise anecdotal history to a nearly philosophical level.''

THE FRENZY OF RENOWN: Fame & Its History. By Leo Braudy. (Oxford, $27.50.) This
''exploration is rich in original insights and - considering the fact that its
characters are, after all, inescapably familiar - surprisingly free of received
opinion.''

THE GREAT DEPRESSION: An Inquiry Into the Causes, Course, and Consequences of
the Worldwide Depression of the Nineteen-Thirties, as Seen by Contemporaries and
the Light of History. By John A. Garraty. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.) A
''timely, troubling'' history of the Depres- ion that is ''disturbingly
pertinent to our current concerns.''

THE HARVEST OF SORROW: Soviet Collectivization and the Terror-Famine. By Robert
Conquest. (Oxford, $19.95.) ''A powerful story, powerfully told'' of ''Stalin's
brutal collectivization of Soviet agriculture, from 1929 to 1932, and what the
author calls the 'terror-famine' of 1932-33, which fell most heavily upon the
area where most of the grain was grown, the Ukraine.''

HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE: The Making of the British Intelligence Community.
By Christopher Andrew. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $25.) ''With immense
industry,'' the author ''has written a narrative history of the British
intelligence and security services from their origins in the first decade of
this century to their still mist-enshrouded present.''

THE HOLOCAUST: A History of the Jews of Europe During the Second World War. By
Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $24.95.) ''By letting the victims speak,'' Mr. Gilbert
''has here taken the story of [the Holocaust] and has made it vividly, terribly
present.''

HOME: A Short History of an Idea. By Witold Rybczynski. (Viking, $16.95.)
''About comfort and the source and spread of domesticity,'' this study examines
the cultural values that have influenced the places we call home.

MAYDAY: Eisenhower, Khrushchev and the U-2 Affair. By Michael R. Beschloss.
(Harper & Row, $19.95.) A ''very readable and thoroughly documented account,
which is part thriller and part political history,'' of the Soviet Union's
shooting down of an American U-2 reconnaissance plane in 1960 and the collapse
of a four-power summit and renewal of the cold war.

THE NAZI DOCTORS: Medical Killing and the Psychology of Genocide. By Robert Jay
Lifton. (Basic Books, $19.95.) ''It requires strong nerves to read this book''
about ''the crimes committed by physicians in the German concentration camps,''
written, the author says, to ''bear witness 'to the fact that doctors killed and
did so in the name of healing.' ''

OUT OF WORK: The First Century of Unemployment in Massachusetts. By Alexander
Keyssar. (Cambridge, Cloth, $49.50. Paper, $14.95.) ''In underlining the
historical continuity of the individual's powerlessness against large economic
forces,'' this work encourages ''us to rethink some cherished social and
economic policies.''

THE OXFORD HISTORY OF THE CLASSICAL WORLD. Edited by John Boardman, Jasper
Griffin and Oswyn Murray. (Oxford, $39.95.) ''The best one-volume survey
available.''

THE PAPER: The Life and Death of the New York Herald Tribune. By Richard Kluger
with Phyllis Kluger. (Knopf, $24.95.) Richard Kluger is ''compelling'' - ''most
delightfully so when he is limning the words and deeds of the people who made
The Paper crackle with vitality for more than a century.''

PERFECTION SALAD: Women and Cooking at the Turn of the Century. By Laura
Shapiro. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $16.95.) A ''delightful'' book, offering ''a
rich historical context for [various] culinary mysteries'' that ''were
achievements of the 'scientific cooking' movement begun by progressive-minded
women near the turn of the century.''

POPULUXE. By Thomas Hine. (Knopf, $29.95.) A ''splendid'' study of ''the whole,
gaudy range of consumer products cranked out by the American industrial machine
in the decade between 1954 and 1964.''

THE PURGE. By Herbert R. Lottman. (Morrow, $19.95.) ''An informative, balanced,
judicious account'' of the fate of French collaborators after World War II.

THE RANDLORDS. By Geoffrey Wheatcroft. (Atheneum, $17.95.) ''A literate,
absorbing narrative about South African robber barons [Cecil Rhodes chief among
them] of the late 19th century.''

SARANAC: America's Magic Mountain. By Robert Taylor. (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
This ''segment of our social history seen through the prism of a dread disease''
- tuberculosis - captures ''the way people from about 1860 to 1945 were drawn to
Saranac Lake in northeastern New York State for health and recreation - and
sometimes to die.''

THE SIEGE: The Saga of Israel and Zionism. By Conor Cruise O'Brien. (Simon &
Schuster, $24.95.) Written by a man with ''a critical and discriminating mind
and a shrewd practical judgment,'' this history of the Jewish nation ''can be
read with profit by scholar, specialist and general reader alike.''

STRENGTH FOR THE FIGHT: A History of Black Americans in the Military. By Bernard
C. Nalty. (Free Press, $22.50.) ''The soundest and best documented synthesis of
black American military history we have.''

''THE TARGET IS DESTROYED'': What Really Happened to Flight 007 and What America
Knew About It. By Seymour Hersh. (Random House, $17.95.) ''A careful, detailed,
lucid account of a painful event'' - the shooting down of a South Korean
airliner by the Soviet Union in 1983.

THE UNITED STATES NAVY: 200 Years. By Edward L. Beach. (Holt, $24.95.) This
''small gem of combat history'' by a retired Navy captain is ''highly personal,
informal [and] affectionate.''

UTOPIA IN POWER: The History of the Soviet Union From 1917 to the Present. By
Mikhail Heller and Aleksandr Nekrich. Translated by Phyllis B. Carlos. (Summit,
$24.95.) ''Originally published in Russian four years ago,'' this history of the
Soviet Union by two emigre scholars ''portrays a moral struggle that we would be
wrong to ignore, and bears testimony to courage and a commitment to truth that
we would do well to emulate.''

WAR WITHOUT MERCY: Race and Power in the Pacific War. By John W. Dower.
(Pantheon, $22.50.) ''A careful historian'' argues ''that the Pacific war was
whipped into its final frenzy by racial hatreds that were more primal than the
ideological motivations behind the war in the Atlantic.''

THE WISE MEN: Six Friends and the World They Made: Acheson, Bohlen, Harriman,
Kennan, Lovett, McCloy. By Walter Isaacson and Evan Thomas. (Simon & Schuster,
$22.95.) ''A richly textured account of a class, and a historical period'' -1945
through Vietnam.



Poetry

ALL OF US HERE. By Irving Feldman. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, Cloth, $17.95.
Elisabeth Sifton/ Penguin, Paper, $8.95.) The title sequence is ''a meditation
on the all-white, life-size human figures of the sculptor George Segal.'' In the
poems, gallerygoers' ''smugness is checked by a half-articulate sense of the
work's timelessness,'' and we are reminded that ''usually we have to hear the
noise of our own names screaming in our ears if art is to have the opportunity -
there are no guarantees -to save us from ourselves.''

COLLECTED POEMS 1948-1984. By Derek Walcott. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.)
''If one thinks of self-division and alienation, of a combination of
homesickness and homelessness as a personal condition . . . one would look far
to find a more stunningly sensuous and telling projection of it than Mr.
Walcott's.''

DREAM WORK. By Mary Oliver. (Atlantic Monthly, Cloth, $14.95. Paper, $8.95.) The
people in these poems ''are troubled by more than private concerns,'' but they
are ''given 'the chance to love everything,' to cite the title of a beautiful
poem. . . . One of Ms. Oliver's hallmarks is plain speech. The earnest questers
in her poems . . . are ordinary people who are close to the elements.''

THE FLYING CHANGE. By Henry Taylor. (Louisiana State University, Cloth, $13.95.
Paper, $6.95.) ''Mr. Taylor seeks for his poetry the kind of unsettling change,
the sort of rent in the veil of ordinary life'' that he expresses in one poem
where he realizes ''you can still make a wrong step / on rough ground, in the
dark, and not / quite cripple yourself.''

FROM THIS CONDENSERY: The Complete Writing of Lorine Niedecker. Edited by Robert
J. Bertholf. (Jargon Society/Inland Book Company, $30.) Publication of all of
Niedecker's poetry, not widely known during her life and unavailable since her
death in 1970, is ''a distinctive literary event, for her poems, in their
powerful yet nearly mathematical compoundings of language and silence, are among
the subtlest of our time.''

THE GAVIN EWART SHOW: Selected Poems 1939-1985. By Gavin Ewart. (Bits Press,
Cloth, $14.95. Paper, $8.95.) ''Obviously we are in the presence of a clever,
lively, often extremely funny writer with wide literary and cultural reference
and extraordinary technical ability.'' This British poet is ''a master of the
conversational mixed tone, an urbane blend of knowingness, satirical edge,
wisdom and tolerance.''

SELECTED POEMS. By John Ashbery. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking, $22.95.) Mr.
Ashbery's is ''a highly complex performance.'' At times he is ''easygoing,
antididactic . . . undemanding,'' but at others he is an ''exorbitantly
demanding poet . . . hedged about with obscurity and nevertheless always hinting
at a profundity of philosophical insight.''

THE SELECTED POETRY OF YEHUDA AMICHAI. Edited and translated by Chana Bloch and
Stephen Mitchell. (Harper & Row, Cloth, $22.95. Paper, $12.95.) These superbly
translated selections from 10 volumes by the Israeli poet form ''the artistic
record of his own highly personal 30-year war on forgetfulness and silence. . .
. One of his achievements is to . . . register the human implications of
history. Speaking about his own richly felt inner life, he ends up telling the
tale of his tribe.''

SIN. By Ai. (Houghton Mifflin, Cloth, $13.95. Paper, $5.95.) ''Imagine a
Browning monologue rewritten by Sam Shepard and you have a good idea of what an
Ai poem sounds like.'' This third collection by the ''harrowing and courageous''
writer is ''easily her best. . . . Ai is ultimately a religious poet, but the
deity she envisions is wrathful and . . . these are poems in which violence and
destruction become eerily voluptuous.''

THE STORM AND OTHER THINGS. By Eugenio Montale. Translated by William
Arrowsmith. (Norton, Cloth, $14.95. Paper, $6.95.) ''The most difficult and most
beautiful'' book by the late Italian Nobel laureate reflects some of his
fascinating, and only recently discovered, entanglements with two formidable
women, one Italian and one American. William Arrowsmith's translation ''keeps
more of Montale's crackling energy than would seem possible.''



Science Fiction

CHILDREN OF THE LIGHT. By Susan B. Weston. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A ''cleanly
written, tightly constructed, painfully moving'' first novel ''about life after
the nuclear holocaust.''

EARTH AND ELSEWHERE. (Macmillan, $22.95.) ''A sampler of the best science
fiction being written in the Soviet Union today.''

GOODMAN 2020. By Fred Pfeil. (Indiana University, $15.) ''In a near-future world
that has survived some sort of nuclear nastiness, multinational corporations
dominate a welfare state gone mad.'' A first novel.

KITEWORLD. By Keith Roberts. (Arbor House, $15.95.) ''Set in a wounded world of
survivors, a truncated England known as the Realm, controlled by a Church that
itself controls the principal technology - huge kites that fly day and night . .
. manned by observers who keep an eye out for Demons'' - this is ''one of the
best science fiction novels of recent years, with one of the worst 'surprise'
endings.''

THE PLANET ON THE TABLE. By Kim Stanley Robinson. (Tor/St. Martin's, $14.95.)
''Whether he is writing about an alternate-universe World War II bombardier who
refuses to drop the first nuclear device on Japan or a Dixieland jazz revival in
the far reaches of the solar system,'' the author of these eight short stories,
''a powerful and consistent'' science fiction voice, ''invests his flights of
imagination with a palpable sense of place.''

THE SONGS OF DISTANT EARTH. By Arthur C. Clarke. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $17.95.) A
''poetic evocation of human dignity in the face of death'' is achieved in this
tale that ''takes place some 200 years after the sun blows up.''



Science & Social Science

BIRD OF LIFE, BIRD OF DEATH: A Naturalist's Journey Through a Land of Political
Turmoil. By Jonathan Evan Maslow. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A ''wonderful''
book that documents the author's ''uneasy, stubborn search for the legendary
bird [the quetzal] in the midst of Guatemala's past and present pain and
violence.''

THE CHIMPANZEES OF GOMBE: Patterns of Behavior. By Jane Goodall. (Harvard, $30.)
The summation of 26 years of research on the chimpanzee, this book ''should
become a prime source for material on which theories of evolution are based.''

GREAT AND DESPERATE CURES: The Rise and Decline of Psychosurgery and Other
Radical Treatments for Mental Illness. By Elliot S. Valenstein. (Basic Books,
$19.95.) ''A complex and difficult subject'' is given ''a fine rendering'' in
this ''eminently readable book that will be of keen interest to a broad range of
readers.''

HOW MEN FEEL: Their Response to Women's Demands for Equality and Power. By
Anthony Astrachan. (Anchor/Doubleday, $19.95.) ''A comprehensive account of a
nine-year investigation'' and close to 400 interviews, many of which ''starkly
display'' how men's ''hostility [and] denial'' can outweigh their ''acceptance
[and] support'' of the women who challenge them.

ON FIJI ISLANDS. By Ronald Wright. (Viking, $19.95.) The author ''combines the
expert travel writer's techniques of looking, listening and introspection with a
skeptical curiosity about the political past and a scholarly interest in
19th-century documents.''

RISING FROM THE PLAINS. By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.95.)
''This instructive account of the geologic West and the frontier West is a
delight.''

THE SECOND CREATION: Makers of the Revolution in Twentieth-Century Physics. By
Robert P. Crease and Charles C. Mann. (Macmillan, $25.) This study of
physicists' ''unification'' goal (to find a description of how matter behaves
that can apply equally to everything) ''is a good hard read (in which phrase,
both adjectives count).''

SILENT PARTNERS: The Legacy of the Ape Language Experiments. By Eugene Linden.
(Times Books, $17.95.) ''In his reporting of the vituperation, the increasing
defensiveness of experimenters and the bad faith of some critics, the
sensationalism and sentimentalism of much media coverage,'' the author's
''candor and fair-mindedness contrast wonderfully with the prejudice and
paranoia he describes.''

THE SILENT TWINS. By Marjorie Wallace. (Prentice Hall, $16.95.) ''The most
detailed portrayal we have ever been given of the inner worlds of greatly
afflicted and tormented identical twins - at once an enthralling story, and a
major source and study.''

SOUTH LIGHT: A Journey to the Last Continent. By Michael Parfit. (Macmillan,
$17.95.) This may very well be the first book ''to convey the unearthly beauty
of [Antarctica] and the exhilaration of simply being alive that takes hold
there.''

WAS EINSTEIN RIGHT: Putting General Relativity to the Test. By Clifford M. Will.
(Basic Books, $18.95.) The author ''acquaints us not only with the science and
machinery of his specialty, gravitational physics, but with the people who
practice it as well.''

WOMEN AND CHILDREN LAST: The Plight of Poor Women in Affluent America. By Ruth
Sidel. (Viking, $16.95.) ''With grace and persuasiveness,'' a sociologist uses
interviews and statistics to argue that America's social-welfare policies
actually hurt women and children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHRISTMAS BOOKS;
Travel

BYLINE: BY MAUREEN HOWARD; Maureen Howard's most recent novel is ''Expensive
Habits.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1835 words


I HAVE in my possession two wooden boxes of color slides meant to be projected
by a simple magnifying device onto a plain wall. The projector was long gone
when, as an acquisitive kid, I discovered them in the attic, so I have only seen
my views in miniature - Mt. Fuji, the Matterhorn, the Taj Mahal and the Pyramids
- the wonders of the world instantly recognizable in their shrunken, luridly
touched-up state. It was hard to imagine the darkened parlor in which a chorus
of ''ohs'' and ''ahs'' greeted a costumed camel train, an elephant romp, a
panorama of the Tyrol. I felt that given the advanced art of the travelogue at
the neighborhood movie house and the superior photos in our monthly National
Geographic, I was on the cutting edge of telecommunications, which would
obliterate the distant and exotic. Many years later, having traveled too
carefully to civilized places, I've developed respect, even a minor passion, for
fine travel books that like palm trees and wild beasts quivering on the living
room wall, may seem outmoded projections but like all good reading deliver the
thrill - a bit of magic in the dark.

So much of the world has been charted it now seems natural for the travel writer
to dismiss news from afar and to invent his own adventure. This is done
admirably by Alan Booth in THE ROADS TO SATA: A 2000-Mile Walk Through Japan
(illustrated, 281 pp., Viking, $16.95). Mr. Booth, an Englishman who went to
Japan to study Noh theater, stayed on and married a Japanese woman. His walk,
from Cape Soya on the most northerly island, where the Siberian winds blow,
south to Cape Sata, with its touristy Hawaiian music blaring, is a self-imposed
quest in which he looks hard and long at the country he has lived in for 16
years.

If you have ever walked a length of road that you normally drive, you will
recognize the testing of response to landscape and culture that Mr. Booth
accomplishes with stunning effect. With the advantage of near-perfect Japanese,
staying only at native inns, he is able to see and hear a contemporary Japan. He
comes upon a miraculously successful and troubled society, a culture that
accepts without question ''Jingle Bell Rock'' as background music for their
Dance of the Dead festival. Mr Booth's description of ancient samurai houses -
''Their tranquility stems from the brush of death on them'' - and the Adult Shop
Venus is detailed, interpretive. As though the author had plotted it, the Peace
Park at Hiroshima, with its museum, comes near the end of the journey, when the
walker and his reader have accumulated something of a history together and face
the displays in mutual horror. Mr. Booth writes a moving, restrained account of
the unspeakable - one of the truest I've ever read - and comes to the end of his
walk still a foreigner, still a bewildered student of the country he cannot
resist.

Peter Jenkins embraces the role of foreigner in ACROSS CHINA (illustrated, 351
pp., Sweet Springs/ Morrow, $18.95), a brash, beguiling book. He comes off as a
Boy Scout lured away from his domestic duty by the kids who are off on a daring
exploit. In this case the kids are the American team that attempted the
unclimbed north wall of Mt. Everest in 1984. Stout fellow though he may be, he
leaves the mountaineers at base camp (17,200 feet); he speaks no Chinese and
must travel with an interpreter. With all of China to explore, Mr. Jenkins
chooses to live with a family of Mongolian herders. It would seem a forced
adventure, but his main pursuit is to reveal the superiority of home truths,
American-style. It's the Mongols, the people who rode down under Genghis Khan to
conquer the Chinese, he sees as his allies. What sustains this homesick,
chauvinistic journey is simple narrative skill. For the first time I felt all
that Everest lore beyond the theoretical and semispiritual - 24 bottles of
Tabasco sauce, 200 one-ounce tins of raspberry jam, spools of climbing rope,
batteries - much loved comrades each with his own story of heroic
miscalculation. Our self-styled adventurer and professional travel writer, on
reaching Hong Kong, headed for McDonald's, and, if we're honest, many of us
after a trip abroad would gladly share his fries and Quarter Pounders.

Freya Stark is 93 years old and one of the great travel writers of our time. Her
career grew naturally out of a need to experience the world on her own, apart
from family, and to grow to independence through knowledge of the languages and
customs of ancient tribes - the truly foreign. TRAVELLER THROUGH TIME: A
Photographic Journey With Freya Stark by Malise Ruthven (illustrated, 141 pp.,
Viking, $19.95) will make clear why this sturdy woman has been so celebrated as
a traveler, quite aside from her wonderful books, which cover half the world -
her beloved North Africa, the Levant, north Italy, Kurdistan. This is a short
biography with photographs of 90 years, from Freya in her child's bonnet to the
late snapshot of Dame Freya and the Queen Mother on a tramp. Her black-and-white
photos are more breathtaking than most aerial views in coffeetable dream books.

Ms. Ruthven quotes liberally from Freya Stark to illustrate how she elevated
travel to her necessary art. Landscape description and escapade, two hallmarks
of travel writing, are transcendent in her writing. Her sense of history was
majestic. Though never quite unglued from the last days of empire, she entered
the plain life of plain people, which may be the key to her earned celebrity.
She brought back real news those at home had never bothered to understand:
''This is a true feeling, presenting humanity as it is, amid the antiquity, the
size and the grandeur of earth. . . . It is scarcely to be found in towns or
easy places, where men triumph so habitually one over the other.''

With the declining possibility of travel as true adventure, the reissued book
has become a worthy staple. RAMAGE IN SOUTH ITALY: The Nooks and By-Ways of
Italy, edited by Edith Clay (illustrated, 232 pp., Academy Chicago, Cloth,
$17.95; Paper, $7.95), has not faded to a curiosity. Craufurd Tait Ramage, age
24, tutor to the sons of the British Consul in Naples, searched out the
antiquities of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies: the year was 1828, and off he
marched, armed only with his umbrella, to a land always noted for its brigands,
now besieged by the dread Carbonari. Forty years later he shaped his famous book
from his diaries and letters, preserving all the wit, charm and folly of his
younger self. What puts us to shame is the young man's easy, intimate possession
of the classics. Calypso's cave, a Ciceronian olive grove - his Italy comes
alive with Pliny, Ovid and Dante. Ramage traveled properly, with letters of
introduction, but he met the peasants as well as local officials and nobility
and was ever alert to instances of the evil eye, the cure for beestings and the
delicacy of a rare double fig. Generous in his attitudes, only once or twice
does he mildly berate a country that cannot serve a Scottish breakfast or
welcome his scientific explanation for its miraculously bleeding statues. Like
Harold Acton, ''I quite simply fell in love'' with Ramage and feel he's just the
thing to take to southern Italy to get the lay of that land.

Young Ramage covered exhausting distances in a day, often walking miles not to
miss a ruin. The less energetic traveler will enjoy The Boston Globe's HISTORIC
WALKS IN CAMBRIDGE by John Harris, with photographs by Janet Knott (388 pp.,
Globe Pequot Press, Paper, $10.95), which endows every square and street with
its architectural history and accumulated lore. Unlike most guidebooks, it stops
for chatty digressions - about the local Gold Coast, inhabited by the Lowells
and Danas, and Cambridge's long history of student riots, from the 1807 Cabbage
Rebellion (there were maggots in the soup) to an early protest against the
Vietnam War. Not many American cities have quite so much to yield: the research
behind ''Historic Walks'' is formidable, but Mr. Harris keeps a Brahmin cool,
considering commercial and industrial Cambridge with as much pleasure as Harvard
and M.I.T. Of a town that welcomed George Washington on the brink of war,
Charles Dickens on tour, Joan Baez in its coffeehouses, the reader might well
agree with Gertrude Stein, a Radcliffe graduate who came back to lecture, ''It
was as though I had never been there.''

If a good part of the fun in reading travel books is the call of the vast
unknown, the other must surely be the comfort of recognition. We do like to
declare ourselves experts on last summer's trip, as though we could put our
small human thumbprint on all that natural grandeur and cultural accretion. I
was happy to find that KILVERT'S DIARY: 1870-1879, edited and introduced by
William Plomer (illustrated, 288 pp., Godine, $24.95) is set in the border
country of Wales, where we stayed with friends. I fancy the young Rev. Robert
Francis Kilvert, bearded and very handsome, must have visited their stone
farmhouse on his genial rounds. There, in view of the Black Mountain, Kilvert
falls in love a dozen times, reports Welsh superstitions, bloody suicides and
sledding accidents as ripe as the violence in Ramage's Sicily. We are less the
tourists, less the weekenders from London, knowing what went on in these
cottages and gardens - the bourgeois pretentions, the flirtations, hearing news
of cattle and crops. Long regarded as a ''minor classic,'' this edition of the
diary is beautifully printed, a real Christmas book.

And then there is THE BECKETT COUNTRY by Eoin O'Brien, with photographs by David
H. Davison (402 pp., Black Cat Press/Faber & Faber, $60), not, strictly
speaking, a travel book, yet the most impressive of them all - a handsomely
produced volume of literary criticism-cum-biography with grand photos,
appropriately black-and-white. It sends us on the more difficult trip to views
of our own past - whether they be the open farmland of Middle America or the New
York streets that shaped us - to scenes we can never take lightly as tourists.
This splendid excursion through Samuel Beckett's country proves that he is a
careful realist - an approach he encouraged - as well as a philosophical
ironist. Here we can see what we always suspected, that place in his work is
never just metaphor or stage set.

The Latin cross in ''Molloy'' is at Tully. The garden of the suburban villa in
''Company'' is his family's own at Foxrock. The famous Knapp & Peterson pipe in
''Waiting for Godot'' came from the tobacconist on O'Connel Street. Nelson's
Pillar, the pubs and trams of Dublin, the National Gallery, the Wicklow shore -
the world he left behind is demonstrably in the work, sharpened by memory. And
by way of bringing much of Beckett's reality to the reader, Mr. O'Brien may have
given us a book that tells us why we read travel literature. ''The use of
travel,'' Dr. Johnson advised, ''is to regulate imagination by reality, and
instead of thinking how things may be, to see them as they are.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of haymaking in England in 1870

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'Reckless Disregard'

SECTION: Section 7; Page 78, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 151 words


To the Editor:

Marvin E. Frankel's review of Renata Adler's tour de force, ''Reckless
Disregard: Westmoreland v. CBS et al.; Sharon v. Time'' (Nov. 9) was extremely
perceptive. However, at one point he fell into precisely the error of egregious
exaggeration that the volume explores. The Phalangist massacres at Sabra and
Shatila were horrendous enough to need no exaggeration, yet he quotes the stock
line about the ''slaughter of several hundred helpless 'enemy' Palestinians
-mostly old folks, women and children.''

The official report of the Lebanese Government, which has not been seriously
challenged, stated that of the over 400 victims, 35 were women and children; of
the 425 men killed, half were not Palestinian but freelance terrorists from as
far away as Pakistan. Among the ''unidentified'' there were allegedly several
Asians and Latin Americans.

JOHN P. ROCHE
  Medford, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'Reckless Disregard'

SECTION: Section 7; Page 78, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 45 words


To the Editor:

Marvin E. Frankel's review of Renata Adler's ''Reckless Disregard'' is almost as
dense as the book itself. Both the author and the critic smother an interesting
and important legal issue with impenetrable rhetoric.

CLIFTON DANIEL
  New York

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'Reckless Disregard'

SECTION: Section 7; Page 78, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 171 words


To the Editor:

In dealing with the Sharon and Westmoreland libel actions, a main service that
Renata Adler did was to cull those mountainous transcripts for revealing
excerpts. Her book is a rouser, as much perhaps because of her selections as her
comments. Would other excerpts have told a different story? Did she falsify by
misquoting or manipulating the testimony? If not, CBS should envy the quality of
her reporting. Is her story mendacious? If not, Time should take it as a model.

I regret that the review was so loftily dispassionate. Marvin E. Frankel has
written elsewhere with fervor about reporting and lawyering; here not. It is a
lofty view indeed that enables him to bestow pity on the author for her
disappointment in the performance of lawyers and journalists and to suggest that
what we get along these lines is no better than what we deserve. On reading the
first published version of the book, I was led to share Ms. Adler's indignation.
I hope many others do, or will.

W. F. YOUNG
  New York

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PLANTS FOR HOLIDAYS

BYLINE: By RALPH GINZBURG

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 2, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 533 words

DATELINE: PISCATAWAY


NEW JERSEYANS may be wrapping their mufflers around their necks these mornings,
but at Geerlings Greenhouses here, it is spring.

Working extra shifts seven days a week, 100 nurserymen are packing poinsettias,
chrysanthemums, Christmas cactuses and other holiday houseplants for shipment to
supermarkets, department stores and garden centers throughout the country.

Geerlings is believed to be the largest houseplant grower in the Northeast and 1
of the 10 largest in the nation (the 9 others are in California and Florida).
Its greenhouses cover 10 acres, making it Piscataway Township's most extensive
commercial complex.

Although more than 160 houseplant species - including exotica like gerbera and
Molokai violets - are propagated, at this time of year all efforts are bent on
Christmas plants.

''Walk into any Pathmark, Shop-Rite, K-Mart or Grand Union in New Jersey right
now and you'll find Geerlings plants,'' said Lou Venuti, the sales manager.

Most people, he added, ''probably have never heard of us'' because ''after all,
we are wholesale growers.''

Geerlings produces more than 11 million plants a year. For a company of such
size, it is relatively new, having been founded in 1964 by Peter Geerlings.

Mr. Geerlings had been a bulb grower in the Netherlands, and he decided to
settle in Piscataway because it was midway between the enormous markets of
Philadelphia and New York. He felt at home in Piscataway's flat, Dutch-like
terrain and - at least in autumn and spring - a climate resembling that of his
native land.

But Mr. Geerlings did not hold onto his company for long.

In his employ, almost from the start, was an ambitious 19-year-old Dutch
immigrant named Peter Jansen, who soon married Mr. Geerling's daughter, Maria.
Soon thereafter -when Mr. Jansen was only 25 - Mr. Geerlings sold his company to
the young couple.

Geerlings now operates in four sites in three states; outside Piscataway, it
maintains greenhouses in East Brunswick (for cactuses) and Homestead, Fla., and
La Port, Ind. (for tall, decorative greenery).

None of the offshoots is as large as the Piscataway operation and expansion is
expected to take place only here.

Mr. Jansen's business success is the archetypal story of an immigrant who made
good through industry and perseverance.

Not only does he work 18 hours a day, but his wife draws up the payroll and
their five children - two adopted from Vietnam - help out on the production line
during busy seasons.

Mr. Jansen's office walls are covered with plaques of appreciation from local
Junior Chambers of Commerce, nursing homes, hospitals, Boy Scout troops and
other organizations.

Middlesex High School students are permitted to use the Geerlings greenhouses as
biology laboratories. Mr. Jansen is always amenable to supplying free plants for
charity bazaars, and Geerlings employees maintain a number of public flower
beds, free of charge, in and around Piscataway.

Business rivals attribute Geerlings's prodigious success to high-quality bulbs
Mr. Jansen gets at cut-rate prices from a brother, a major producer in the
Netherlands.

Mr. Jansen himself offers a different explanation:

''We're located in the Garden State.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Peter Jansen and his greenhouse and dieffenbachia plants
(NYT/Ralph Ginzburg)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

3 DROWN IN VIETNAM FLOODS

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 71 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 6


Floods in southern vietnam caused by heavy rains drowned three people, inundated
several towns and burst two dams, the Hanoi radio reported. The radio, monitored
here, said rain on Tuesday and Wednesday had swept away a truck with three
people inside in Quang Nam-Danag Province and left the town of Quang Ngai under
as much as six feet of water. Other towns were also affected, and in Phu Khanh
Province, two dams collapse.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A COUNCIL OF 'WISE MEN' FOR REAGAN

BYLINE: By Walter Isaacson; Walter Isaacson, the nation editor of Time magazine,
is co-author (with Evan Thomas) of a book about the ''wise men'' of America's
postwar foreign policy establishment.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1181 words


The covert funding of the contras, the murky connection between Iranian arms
shipments and hostages, the foray into uncharted territory in Reykjavik -each
new disclosure reveals a President who seems to conduct foreign policy by the
seat of his pants, following gut instincts rather than well-wrought initiatives
based on national principles. Responding to the disarray, Democrat Sam Nunn and
Republican Richard Lugar, two of the Senate's most thoughtful members, have been
among those endorsing the same proposal: the appointment of a panel of ''wise
men,'' an outside group of elder statesmen to give regular foreign policy advice
to a foundering President.

It is easy to dismiss the idea of a chin-stroking council of elders
pontificating to an inattentive President as one of those high-minded proposals
that sound worthy on Sunday interview shows but are useless in the real world.
The portentous rumbling of a covey of has-beens is the type of thing that could
give bipartisanship a bad name. Nor is it likely that a President with a
penchant for covert escapades will be transformed through required sessions
every now and then in a room filled with pipe smoke.

Yet unlike most civics book notions, there is, on third glance, some merit to
this one. In the case of Ronald Reagan, regular sessions with a panel of wise
men could be a small step toward alleviating some of the shortcomings that have
contributed to his string of woes: his isolation from divergent opinions, his
tendency not to reflect long and hard on the implications of his decisions and
his detachment from the nuances of policy.

President John F. Kennedy, having been burned by the Bay of Pigs fiasco,
summoned a group of elder statesmen who had shaped America's bipartisan foreign
policy consensus after World War II - they included Dean Acheson, John J. McCloy
and Robert A. Lovett - to join in the tense deliberations over the Cuban missile
crisis. ''The best service we could perform is to try to approach this the way
Colonel Stimson would,'' Mr. Lovett told the national security adviser, McGeorge
Bundy, invoking the memory of Henry L. Stimson, whose rotation in and out of top
posts during the first half of this century made him the patron saint of
bipartisan commissions.

At Mr. Bundy's suggestion, President Johnson created a formal advisory group,
which became known as ''the wise men,'' to give the Establishment's imprimatur
to the Vietnam War. Initially, they did. But even when such panels are created
to affirm what a President plans to do anyway, things can turn out differently.
By March 1968, Averell Harriman had succeeded in convincing his old friend Dean
Acheson that the war was futile. When ''the wise men'' met that month, Mr.
Acheson led them in telling President Johnson so. Within a week, the President
announced that he would seek negotiations and drop his bid for re-election.

Nicaragua, Reykjavik and Iran represent the three most fundamental foreign
policy issues facing the United States - the commitment that it should make to
resist the spread of Soviet Communism, the military strategy it should pursue in
a nuclear age and the methods it should adopt to deal with terrorism. The
approach to these issues should not depend on the whims or instincts of a
particular President. This is especially true with regard to Ronald Reagan, who
has fanciful whims about abandoning nuclear deterrence and romantic instincts
about the power of ''freedom fighters'' to roll back Soviet influence.

These notions, arguably, could have some merit, if pursued through pragmatic and
well-calculated initiatives. But when combined with President Reagan's penchant
for circumventing Congress and the State Department, his weakness for covert
actions and his willingness to delegate operations to a bunch of gung-ho cowboys
whose bizarre schemes could charitably be described as hare-brained, it becomes
clear that providing him with a sounding board of experienced wise men might
indeed serve a useful purpose.

Of course, there is no evidence that President Reagan would pay much heed. He
has twice convened groups of this kind when faced with national security
dilemmas, but they mainly served as public-relations ploys. When the MX missile
was threatened by a sense that President Reagan was simply seeking new weapons
with little regard for how they fit into a nuclear strategy, he asked a panel
headed by Brent Scowcroft to develop such a strategy. Mr. Reagan promptly
ignored it. Likewise, the findings of Henry A. Kissinger's bipartisan panel on
Central America, appointed by Mr. Reagan to allay criticism that his support for
the contras was not part of a coherent policy, were also consigned to a dusty
shelf.

Nor, for that matter, should a President necessarily be expected to take the
advice of blue-ribbon panels. By their very nature, such groups tend to revere
conventional wisdom. That can have a dampening effect, particularly when there
is a need for boldness and risk-taking. President Reagan's tenure has been
marked by risks that defy the conventional wisdom - among them, invading
Grenada, launching air strikes against Libya and proposing a ''Star Wars''
defense system that challenges the notion of nuclear deterrence. Like his
dealings with Iran and support for the contras, these initiatives are debatable.
But it would be unhealthy to set up a system that enshrined conventional
thinking to such an extent that it prevented bold new approaches.

The ideal should be to provide a President, and Mr. Reagan in particular, with a
sounding board, some discreet and experienced advisers who could raise an
eyebrow now and then. It certainly could have helped in preparing the President
for Reykjavik: an afternoon spent around a table with some experienced hands,
ranging from Richard Nixon to Paul C. Warnke, might have engaged the President's
mind on the role that the Strategic Defense Initiative could play in achieving a
reduction of offensive weapons. At the very least, it might have clued him into
the dangers of an unplanned discussion about eliminating all nuclear forces and
disabused him of the notion that Mikhail S. Gorbachev was the first Soviet
leader to mouth the ideal of total disarmament.

Such sessions could even be a useful forum to sound out plans for covert
actions: properly constituted, a handful of senior statesmen would be less
likely to leak than a Congressional committee, and more likely to provide wise
counsel than a morning briefing with some of the yes-men who have served as Mr.
Reagan's aides.

Of course, President Reagan does not particularly like to bounce ideas around or
to wrestle with the ramifications of proposed actions. But like most people, he
could benefit from hearing outside criticism of some of his policy notions and
profit from being encouraged to develop them more fully in free-wheeling
discussions. Instead of discouraging initiatives that defy the common wisdom,
this could insure that they are launched with a full understanding of that
wisdom rather than because the President is oblivious to it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 116 words


32 Rhodes Scholars Named
  Thirty-two American students, including a refugee from Vietnam who is at the
Air Force Academy, were named Rhodes Scholars. Page B20.
  Mets and Ray Knight Part

The World Series hero's time with the team came to an end when he and the club
could not reach agreement on salary. SportsMonday, page C3.
  Hong Kong Migrant Policy

Some doubts have arisen about Hong Kong's policy of sending illegal immigrants
back to China when it means returning children. Page A4.
  Next Speaker: Jim Wright

As the Speaker of the House, Representative Jim Wright is expected to be more
involved in legislation than in enunciating policy. Page B9.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOR NEW SPEAKER, NEW ROLE IS SEEN

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1447 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 7


Representative Jim Wright of Texas, who is due to be chosen as the next Speaker
of the House on Monday, is expected to play a very different role on Capitol
Hill from that of his predecessor, Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.
Congressional experts say Mr. Wright is more interested in the details of
legislation than Mr. O'Neill, whose strong point was broad political strategy,
and they expect the new Speaker to put a more personal stamp on bills emerging
from the House.

''Jim Wright is very legislatively oriented, much more so than Tip O'Neill,''
said Ronald M. Peters Jr., the director of the Carl Albert Congressional Studies
Center at the University of Oklahoma.

However, the election of a Democratic majority in the Senate means that Mr.
Wright will probably be a less visible public spokesman for the Democratic Party
than Mr. O'Neill. For the last six years, with Republicans controlling the
Senate as well as the White House, the Speaker has been the major voice of
opposition in the capital.

Not Taking a Back Seat

Mr. Peters, who is writing a book about the Speakership, put it this way:
''There are a hell of a lot of hungry, handsome Democrats in the Senate who are
not willing to take a back seat to the Speaker of the House.''

Mr. Wright also represents a different region and a different philosophy than
Mr. O'Neill. The outgoing Speaker, from Massachusetts, was an unabashed liberal
from perhaps the most liberal state in the country, while his successor, from
Texas, has close ties to the oil and gas industry and as a more moderate
approach to most issues.

In an interview, Mr. Wright said he believed that House Democrats have become
''more centrist'' as a result of President Reagan's two smashing victories.

House Republicans expect the new Speaker to lead his party back toward the
middle of the road.

''I think we're going to have somewhat of a difference being played out,'' said
Representative Bob Michel of Illinois, the Republican leader. House Democrats,
he added, are likely to say to themselves, ''We're going to have to change our
ways and come back more toward the center and get the kind of votes we need to
elect a President.''

Mr. Wright, who has been the majority leader for the last 10 years, has no
announced opposition and is virtually certain to be chosen by acclamation Monday
morning at the Democratic Party caucus, of all the House Democrats elected to
the new Congress.

Chance for Legislative Impact

While last month's election means the new Speaker will have to share the
Washington spotlight with Senate leaders, it also means the Democrats will have
a greater chance to initiate legislation that might actually become law.

The electoral outcome, Mr, Wright noted, ''places upon the leadership of the
House an additional responsibility, to work in tandem with the leadership of the
Senate. It's an opportunity instead of a problem.''

Like other Congressional leaders, the Texan expresses concern that the spreading
investigation into the Administration's secret arms deal with Iran could
preoccupy Capitol Hill in the months ahead and hinder other legislative
initiatives.

''I surely hope we will not be obsessed by it,'' said Mr. Wright, who announced
last week that the House investigation would be conducted by a special 15-member
panel.

In talking to his Democratic colleagues, Mr. Wright says he discerns ''a strong
desire to have a specific agenda of limited but achieveable objectives.''

That agenda, he adds, includes a bill to clean up the nation's waterways that
was vetoed by President Reagan; legislation to finance the highway system that
failed in the last Congress; a comprehensive trade bill designed to ''reverse
the erosion of American industry'' and changes in the welfare system and the
farm subsidy program.

Considered a Craftsman

Unlike Mr. O'Neill, who seldom got involved in legislative details, Mr. Wright
is considered a legislative craftsman with a strong interest in shaping the
policies of the House.

''I think Wright is more aggressive, and more feisty, than O'Neill,'' said Lynne
P. Brown, a political scientist at New York University who has studied the House
leadership. ''He is prepared to use all the tools at his disposal in an
aggressive manner.''

In the last Congress, for instance, Mr. Wright took the lead in fashioning a
bill to combat the growing drug problem. And his feistiness showed itself last
week, when he consistently opposed a suggestion by Senator Bob Dole, the
Republican leader, for a special session of Congress to deal with the Iran
affair.

At one point, the Democratic leader accused Mr. Dole of ''grandstanding'' and
said the Republican was ''seeking whatever publicity he could get'' out of the
situation.

Christopher J. Matthews, the spokesman for Mr. O'Neill, said one clue to Mr.
Wright's leadership style could be found in his election to the majority
leader's job in 1976. The Texan was considered a long shot for the job, but he
entered the race against two better-known rivals, Richard Bolling of Missouri
and Phil Burton of California, and won by one vote.

'Took On the Big Guys'

''At one point in history,'' Mr. Matthews said, ''this guy had the nerve to go
for it, and he won. He took on the big guys. And the essence of leadership is
courage, the ability to stick to your guns.''

Many Congress-watchers, however, say Mr. Wright might lack some of the other
qualities needed for effective leadership, and one of them is the ability to
make cogent, quotable statements in front of a TV camera. Mr. Wright is
considered one the of the finest orators on the floor of the House, but his
florid, tub-thumping style does not play as well on the home screen.

One joke on Capitol Hill says that instead of delivering the ''30-second sound
bite'' required by television news programs, Mr. Wright remains ''the master of
the 30-minute sound bite.''

''He still smacks of the old style,'' Mr. Peters said. ''A lot of members are
asking, is he quite as telegenic as he needs to be?''

Mr. Wright heatedly rejects the criticism and snaps: ''I'm not a damn bit
uncomfortable on TV.''

The 63-year-old legislator, who has represented a Fort Worth district since
1954, is less sensitive to another criticism, that he has favored the parochial
interests of Texas on many occasions, rather than looking at the national
interest. ''He can't just be in there protecting the interests of home, which is
basically oil,'' Mr. O'Neill said.

Puting 'National Welfare First'

''I plead guilty to that,'' said Mr. Wright, referring to his defense of
home-state interests, particularly oil. But as Speaker, he added, he intends
''to put the national welfare first, above the parochial welfare of my state or
district.''

Perhaps the most frequent criticism on Capitol Hill is Mr. Wright's failure to
control his temper. ''Jim's biggest problem is that he's very thin-skinned, and
he's very quick to react,'' Mr. O'Neill said in an interview. ''He's a redhead -
he's apt to flare.''

''I keep telling him, 'Jim, listen, people come in here, and you blow off a
little steam in a little hurry if you don't agree with them,' '' Mr. O'Neill
continued. '' 'A good listener is better than a good talker. Listen to
everybody's statement along the line.' ''

Asked to comment on Mr. O'Neill's description, Mr. Wright does not quibble: ''I
think he's right, no question about it.''

The issue of Mr. Wright's temperament could be particularly important in a
Congress that has changed dramatically in the last decade, and now includes a
membership that is younger, better-educated and more independent than in the
past.

''There are very few gray-haired people in the House anymore,'' said Mr.
Matthews. ''Their values are the values of the 60's and the 70's. They are not
the values of order and regimentation.''

This change in the character of the House has changed the role of the Speaker,
who can no longer appeal to party loyalty and discipline to get things done. In
describing the new lawmakers who came to Congress after the upheaval of Vietnam
and Watergate, Mr. O'Neill said: ''They had no loyalty to the party whatsoever.
They looked down on it. They said, 'The party didn't elect me, and I'm not
beholden to the party.' ''

As a result, Mr. O'Neill said, he had to substitute personal relationships for
party relationships, and appeal to members on an individual basis to follow his
lead.

Mr. Wright agrees that the Speaker's job has changed greatly since he came to
Congress, when Sam Rayburn of Texas held the post.

''It is a more participatory body than in Mr. Rayburn's time,'' he said. ''I've
got more people to persuade.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Representatives Jim Wright, Thomas Foley and Mary Rose Oakar
(NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Le Trong Tan Is Dead; Hanoi's Chief of Staff

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 250 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 7


Gen. Le Trong Tan, Chief of Staff of the Vietnamese Army since 1978 and a key
commander in the offensive that brought victory to Communist forces in 1975, has
died of a heart attack in Hanoi, the official Vietnamese press agency said
today. He was 72 years old.

General Tan died in a military hospital Friday, the press agency said in a
report monitored in Bangkok.

The agency said General Tan was born in a village in Hoai Duc district, on the
outskirts of Hanoi. In 1945, he joined the Indochinese Communist Party, the
precursor of the Vietnamese Communist Party.

At the end of the war against the French, who ruled Vietnam as a colony until
1954, he was made director of an infantry school, the agency said. He was
promoted to major general in 1961 and made deputy to the Chief of Staff of the
Vietnam People's Army.

General Tan led Communist forces in the March 1975 assaults on the cities of Hue
and Da Nang, part of the general offensive that led to the Communist victory in
April of that year.

He was deputy commander of the ''Ho Chi Minh campaign,'' the final assault in
which Communist forces seized Saigon, capital of South Vietnam.

General Tan was appointed Vice Minister of National Defense and army Chief of
Staff in 1978, and the following year he and other military commanders led
Vietnamese forces into Cambodia to help insurgents topple the pro-Chinese Khmer
Rouge Government, the agency said.

General Tan was elected to the Communist Party Central Committee in March 1982.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

32 FROM U.S. NAMED RHODES SCHOLARS

BYLINE: By HOWARD W. FRENCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 754 words


The names of 32 Rhodes Scholars from 24 colleges in the United States were
announced yesterday.

The American students, including 11 women, two blacks, and a Vietnamese refugee,
will join winners from 17 other countries for two years of study at Oxford
University in England.

The announcement was made by David Alexander, the American secretary of the
Rhodes Scholarship Trust who is president of Pomona College.

One of the winners, Hoang Nhu Tran, 21, son of a high officer in the Vietnamese
Air Force who fled Vietnam with his family in 1975, became the first Vietnamese
Rhodes Scholar.

Mr. Tran, who will become the second Vietnamese graduate of the Air Force
Academy this spring, is second in his class of 960 students. He has a 3.91 grade
point average and is majoring in biology and chemistry.

Speaking by telephone from his Air Force Academy squadron barracks in Colorado,
Mr. Tran said, ''I never thought of it or dreamed of this day.''

He said that he would like to spend two years at Oxford, then return to the
United States for medical school, and a career as an Air Force flight surgeon.

A classmate of Mr. Tran's, Robert Levinson, described him as ''an amazing guy.''
Besides being second in his class, Mr. Levinson said, his friend had been
''Freshman of the Year, wing champion wrestler for his weight class, and a
flight instructor for gliders.''

Yale University led this year's list of schools represented, with four
scholarships, followed by Georgetown University with three. Each of the three
United States military academies was represented with one candidate.

The awards, established in 1902 in the will of Cecil Rhodes, a British colonial
financier, were originally intended for young men from British colonies and from
the United States and Germany, in the hope of contributing to world
understanding and peace. Women have been eligible for the awards since 1976.

Scholars are now selected from India, Pakistan, Malaysia, Nigeria, Singapore,
Hong Kong, the British Caribbean and Kenya, in addition to the original
constituencies. Those include Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Bermuda, South
Africa, Zambia, Zimbabwe and Jamaica.

In the United States scholars were chosen from eight regions on the basis of
intellectual attainment, character, leadership, and physical vigor.

At regional competitions on Saturday, the finalists were chosen from 1,143
applicants.

NEW ENGLAND

Andrew Z. Lopatin, Newton, Mass., Boston University and Brisk Rabbinical
College; Robert W. Radtke, Charlestown, Mass., Columbia University; Michael S.
Barr, Chevy Chase, Md., Yale University; James J. Collins, Nashua, N.H., College
of the Holy Cross.

MIDDLE ATLANTIC

Michael Gaffney, Fayetteville, N.Y., Naval Academy; Sylvia M. Mathews, Hinton,
W.Va., Radcliffe College of Harvard University; Donna J. Roberts, Verona, Pa.,
University of Pittsburgh and Cornell University; Mark Ouweleen, Rochester, N.Y.,
Georgetown University.

SOUTHERN

Maria Weston Merritt, Franklin, Va., Wake Forest University; William H.
Lipscomb, Lynchburg, Va., Duke University; Paul W. Ludwig, Signal Mountain,
Tenn., University of Tennessee-Chattanooga; Barbara Petzen, Sharpsburg, Ga.,
Columbia University.

GREAT LAKES

Robert M. Dow Jr., Joliet, Ill., Yale University; Jacob Weisberg, Chicago, Ill.,
Yale University; Daniel D. Stid, Mason, Mich., Hope College; Atul A. Gawande,
Athens, Ohio, Stanford University.

MIDDLE WEST

David H. Mehnert, Roeland Park, Kan., Princeton University; Kelly Dean Welch,
Moran, Kan., Kansas State University; Laura Ruetsche, Northbrook, Ill., Carleton
College; Kenneth Brashier, Aurora, S.D., University of Missouri-Columbia.

GULF

Sarah H. Cleveland, Birmingham, Ala., Brown University; C. Damon Miguel Moore,
Coldwater, Miss., University of Mississippi and Johns Hopkins Medical School;
Susan Pepin, Tulsa, Okla., Yale University; T. Andrew Chin, Austin, Texas,
University of Texas-Austin.

SOUTHWESTERN

Kathleen L. McLaughlin, Tucson, Ariz., Boston University; John K. Tien,
Cerritos, Calif., United States Military Academy and University of
California-Irvine; Hoang Nhu Tran, Rohnert Park, Calif., Air Force Academy;
Brett Gilbert Scharffs, Salt Lake City, Utah, Georgetown University.

NORTHWESTERN

Nina R. Bowen, Petersburg, Alaska, Georgetown University; Michael V. Woodhouse,
Burley, Idaho, The College of Idaho; Jocelyn H. Alexander, Bozeman, Mont.,
Princeton University; Elizabeth M. Cousens, Tacoma, Wash., University of Puget
Sound and Princeton.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Hoang Nhu Tran (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Why the Debacle Shouldn't Hearten Liberals

BYLINE: By Robert S. McElvaine: Robert S. McElvaine, professor of history at
Millsaps College, is author of a forthcoming study of the revival of liberalism.

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: JACKSON, Miss.


Most Democrats, like most other Americans, are concerned about the effect of the
Iranian-contra scandal on the standing of the United States in the world. But
many Democrats are also privately gleeful that the affair seems to be scrubbing
the Teflon off President Reagan. Such a visceral reaction is natural. Yet the
President's debacle is no cause for a liberal celebration. By an ironic twist,
Mr. Reagan - an antigovernment man to the core -has managed to accomplish
something that the liberals had not: revival of the public's faith in
government. Should that faith erode once more, the liberals would suffer along
with everyone else.

Modern liberalism is based to a substantial extent on the belief that
affirmative government can be a positive force in bettering people's lives. The
last liberal era came to a close in the late 1960's and early 1970's, as most
Americans lost faith in the Federal Government. There were many reasons for the
collapse of confidence, but the person who did the most damage to the reputation
of the Government - and, hence, indirectly to the standing of liberalism in the
public mind - was Richard M. Nixon, certainly no liberal himself.

The remarkable irony is that through failure and disgrace President Nixon
achieved the conservative objective of destroying the Americn people's faith in
government more fully than he ever could have by abolishing social programs and
impounding funds. Public confidence in government fell noticeably during the
Vietnam War, plummeted with Watergate and continued to decline through the
remainder of the 1970's. An age of cynicism - often called the ''Me Decade'' -
arose in place of the idealism of the 1960's.

In the 1980's, however, the irony came full circle. Ronald Reagan's
antigovernment program restored the people's faith in government. In the spring
of 1986, the President's pollster, Richard Wirthlin, found that ''Americans once
again have faith that our public institutions can cope with problems.'' Opinion
surveys indicated that confidence in government had returned to its 1972 level,
before Watergate eroded the public's trust. It appears that Mr. Reagan's seeming
success had damaged the ultimate conservative objective as much as Mr. Nixon's
failure had advanced it. The irony does not end here. Liberals themselves played
an important part in bringing the most recent age of reform to an end.
Liberalism has usually been grounded in optimism, but in the early 1970's
liberals became increasingly pessimistic. Their pessimism prepared the soil for
the seeds conservatives were planting. If traditionally optimistic liberals lost
hope for the world, there was nothing for most people to do but pursue personal
advancement. Until the present scandal over Iran, however, it seemed possible
that the optimism that the Reagan conservatives had brought to public life might
produce a climate in which liberalism could once again germinate. Americans want
to be optimistic, and Ronald Reagan's cheerful outlook has been one of his most
attractive qualities. But the President's brand of optimism is a very limited
one. He leads people to believe in their own advancement but implies that there
is little we can do as a community to solve our social problems. The educational
sociologist Arthur Levine has aptly termed the sort of optimism that the
Reaganites encourage ''going first class on the Titanic.''

Therein lay the liberals' best hope. Mr. Reagan was doing a first-rate job of
bringing to a close the era of cynicism that led to the conservative ascendancy.
Americans were no longer particularly antigovernment; they were no longer
disillusioned. Why should they be? It was, after all, ''morning in America.''
That dawn, contrary to the President's hopes, might well have been, and could
still be, a new era of liberalism. If ''America is back,'' as the Reaganites
insisted, why then should we settle for a narrow, selfish, personal optimism? If
anything is possible, why tolerate hunger and poverty and the threat of nuclear
war?

Now, however, there is a danger that the public's realization that there is
another gang that can't shoot straight in the White House may once more
undermine confidence in the Federal Government. That result would be tragic for
the nation and of no political help to liberals. Liberal goals may actually be
better served if Mr. Reagan manages to escape continuing blame for the Iranian
fiasco than if people lose faith in him, and, hence, in government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Cuba Reports Millions Join Five-Day Defense Exercises

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 165 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Dec. 8


Millions of Cubans are taking part in military exercises aimed at preparing the
population to defend the island against a surprise air attack, the Cuban press
agency Prensa Latina reported today.

The exercise, which began Sunday and ends Thursday, represents a new approach by
the Cuban military toward national defense, according to a Prensa Latina
dispatch monitored in Mexico City.

''Bastion '86,'' as the operation is called, began with drills that involved
about seven million people of all ages in such exercises as defending towns
against invaders and evacuating residents from their homes, the agency said.

Regional militias, made up of about 1.5 million civilians, practiced stopping
assaults by heavily armed attackers. The militias used both modern weapons and
crude arms ''like those used by the people of Vietnam during the U.S.
aggression,'' the dispatch said.

In Santiago de Cuba, the country's second largest city, hundreds of thousands of
people were mobilized.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 10, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PRETORIA EXPELS A U.S. JOURNALIST

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 732 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG, Dec. 9


The Government said today that it had refused to renew the work permit of the
correspondent of The Los Angeles Times, and told him to leave South Africa by
Dec. 31.

The journalist, Michael Parks, is the fifth foreign correspondent to be ordered
out of country since a nationwide state of emergency was imposed June 12. The
Department of Home Affairs would not give a reason for his expulsion.

In a related development, representatives of South African newspaper publishers
met with a Cabinet committee today about Government plans for tighter press
controls. One anti-apartheid group, Black Sash, urged the publishers not to
become ''a party to fascism.''

Mr. Parks, 43, has been in South Africa since mid-1984. He said he had sought
renewal of his work permit since it expired in September. He declined further
comment, saying: ''If there are any problems, I will discuss them with the
Department of Foreign Affairs, Home Affairs and the Bureau for Information.''

Statement by Newspaper

Alvin Shuster, foreign editor of the newspaper, said: ''The Los Angeles Times,
which has had a bureau in South Africa for 15 years, regrets the decision.'' He
said the paper was ''appealing for an extension of the deadline to discuss the
matter.''

''The Times feels that Mr. Parks has carried out his duties responsibly and
objectively and hopes that he will be able to continue to do so,'' Mr. Shuster
said.

He said Mr. Parks was Peking correspondent for The Baltimore Sun before joining
The Los Angeles Times. Mr. Parks also served in several other foreign posts for
The Sun, including the Soviet Union, Egypt and Vietnam.

An American diplomat in Pretoria, speaking on condition of anonymity, said
American officials were discussing the case with the authorities.

Four Others Expelled

Four foreign reporters were ordered out of the country within three weeks of the
June emergency declaration: Richard Manning, correspondent for Newsweek, Wim de
Vos, a cameraman for CBS News, Heinrich Buttgen, a West German television
reporter, and Dan Sagir, who reported for the Israeli newspaper Haaretz and the
Israeli army radio.

The meeting between Cabinet ministers and newspaper executives resulted from
President P. W. Botha's announcement last week that the system of self-policing
practiced by news organizations needed ''pepping up.''

He said the National Press Union, which includes executives of the four main
newspaper groups, agreed that South Africa faced ''a many-pronged but
well-coordinated revolutionary onslaught.''

The Home Affairs Minister, Stoffel Botha, announced after today's meeting that
the Press Union wanted time to review the code of conduct for news organizations
and that a second meeting had been set for Feb. 13.

Mandatory Restrictions Feared

Newspaper editorials in the last few days have expessed alarm over the
Government's attitude, suggesting that Mr. Botha hopes to press publishers to
exercise greater self-censorship. It is widely believed that new mandatory
restrictions will be issued if the papers balk.

The Cabinet committee was led by Chris Heunis, Minister of Constitutional
Development and Planning, and included the ministers of justice, law and order,
education and home affairs.

Black Sash said in a statement that it sent a telegram to the National Press
Union urging publishers to opposing new restrictions or broader self-censorship.

''It is vital that the press does not allow itself to be a party to fascism,''
it said. ''We trust that you will restrain your representatives on the N.P.U. so
that never again will they be party to such a scandalous statement as that
issued last week'' by Mr. Botha. ----U.S. Rejects Pretoria Charge HAMBURG, West
Germany, Dec. 9, (Reuters) - Chester A. Crocker, Assistant Secretary of State
for African Affairs. said today that assertions by South Africa that the United
States is responsible for violence in that nation are laughable.

Mr. Crocker, who is considered a chief architect of the Reagan Administration
policy of ''constructive enagagement,'' was commenting on a statement by Foreign
Minister Roelof F. Botha that American foreign policy was responsible for the
continuation of violence in his country. ''This proposition is laughable,'' Mr.
Crocker said, in comments to reporters here via satellite. ''We all know what
the real reasons are for violence in South Africa.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 10, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS;
'Get Off His Back,' Nixon Urges...

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: PARSIPPANY, N.J., Dec. 9


Former President Richard M. Nixon said today that President Reagan's critics
should ''get off his back'' and allow him to continue his ''quest for peace''
with the Soviet Union.

Mr. Nixon, addressing a breakfast meeting here of Republican governors and
governors-elect, called the controversy over arms sales to Iran and diversion of
profits to the contras the ''sideshow in Washington'' that could ''weaken'' the
President in his dealings with the Soviet Union.

''We must look instead at the main ring, which is the larger question of
Soviet-American relations and peace in the world,'' said Mr. Nixon, who spoke
without notes. ''It is time to get off his back so that the President does not
lose two precious years in his quest for peace.''

The audience, which included the governors' spouses and top aides, gave the
former President a standing ovation. They crowded around afterward to have their
pictures taken with the man who resigned the Presidency in disgrace 12 years ago
after being implicated in the Watergate coverup.

'A Lesson in History'

''This is a man who has known every single important leader in the world for the
last 30 years and still talks to them,'' Governor Kean said. ''Listening to him
is a lesson in history.''

Gov. John H. Sununu of New Hampshire said, ''I wish someone had videotaped that
so it could be shown at every high school in the country.''

Mr. Nixon had been invited to give the address on foreign policy in a private
session at the Republican Governors' Conference before the current controversy
erupted.

Because of intense interest in his reflections, he permitted an associate, Roger
Stone, a partner in the suburban Washington consulting firm of Black, Manifort &
Stone, to take notes on his remarks and brief the press afterward. This story is
based on Mr. Stone's briefing and interviews with governors who were present.

Comparisons Are Discouraged

Mr. Nixon said comparisons between the Iran affair and Watergate are unfair.

''As I have written in my memoirs, Watergate was handled abysmally,'' Mr. Nixon
said. ''President Reagan is handling this crisis expeditiously.''

Mr. Nixon said he had talked to Mr. Regan on the telephone several times
recently and that Mr. Reagan said he was unaware of the diversion of proceeds
from the Iran arms sales to the Nicaraguan contras.

''And I believe him,'' Mr. Nixon told the group.

Mr. Nixon said the Middle East was the ''most dangerous'' situation in the world
today and described it as a place where American and Soviet interests collide -
with the United States wanting peace and the Russians wanting the Middle East.

He described the President as ''a big picture'' man who has had success in
delegating responsibility and in restoring ''strength and spirit'' to America.

No Mistake on Goals

He argued that ''there was not a mistake'' in Mr. Reagan's goals, which he
described as developing a relationship with groups in Iran that were less
hostile to the United States, doing ''whatever is necessary'' to get American
hostages back and aiding the contras at a time when Congress had denied such
aid.

But there was a mistake, he said, in Mr. Reagan's subordinates' execution of
those goals.

Mr. Nixon said the worst thing that could result from the current furor is if
the President's ability to conduct foreign policy were restricted.

Foreign policy must be made by the President and not by the State Department,
Mr. Nixon asserted, keeping in mind that he must get the support and consent of
Congress. And the President should be allowed to use those ''players'' in whom
he has confidence, Mr. Nixon said, recalling his use of his national security
adviser, Henry A. Kissinger, as a negotiator with the Chinese.

Had foreign policy been conducted soley by the State Department, he asserted,
there would have been no opening to China, no conclusion to the war in Vietnam
and no return of American prisoners of war.

Support for 'Star Wars'

Although Mr. Nixon described the Strategic Defense Initiative as
''indispensable'' as a bargaining chip, he said he thought it would be the
middle of the next century before the ''Star Wars'' space shield could be made
''leak-proof.'' He said, however, that that in 5 or 10 years the United States
could use such a system to protect its missile sites.

Mr. Nixon said that nuclear weapons have taken the profit out of war and there
can no longer be any winners and losers. The United States and the Soviet Union
will never be friends, he said, but they cannot afford to be enemies.

Although he said he does not believe there is ''a grand compromise in the
cards,'' Mr. Nixon predicted another summit meeting in Washington this spring.

Mr. Nixon said he thinks the Russians understand that they must deal with
President Reagan because not only will he be in office for two more years but
because they recognize that the next President will need two or three years to
get the internal support to negotiate an agreement with the Russians.

Because of pressures on the Soviet economy, he said, they ''cannot wait four or
five years for arms control agreements.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 10, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ACCUSED TERRORITST HELPING TO SUPPLY THE CONTRAS

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1639 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Dec. 9


Three veterans of the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba, all with long ties to
the Central Intelligence Agency and one of them an accused international
terrorist, have emerged as key figures in the clandestine air network that
delivered tons of weapons and ammunition to the anti-Sandinista rebels in
Nicaragua.

One of the veterans, Luis Posada Carriles, a 58-year-old expert in guerrilla
warfare and demolitions, escaped from a Venezuelan prison in August 1985 after
being held for nearly 10 years on charges of masterminding a bombing that
destroyed a Cuban airliner and killed 73 people. The case is still pending in
Venezuela.

According to American crew members of the planes that carried the rebel war
materiel, the three Bay of Pigs veterans were instrumental in setting up the
headquarters for the supply operation in San Salvador and in coordinating cargo
drops to rebel units operating inside Nicaragua.

Critics regard Mr. Posada, who has devoted much of his life to trying to
undermine the Communist Government of Fidel Castro, as a terrorist and say his
involvement with United States-backed Nicaraguan rebels seems starkly at odds
with the Reagan Administration's campaign against international terrorism.
Supporters, however, regard Mr. Posada as a dedicated Cuban nationalist and
question the validity of the bombing charges.

U.S. Admits No Role

Reagan Administration officials have refused to acknowledge Mr. Posada's
participation in the rebel supply operation. Administration officials have
acknowledged that the United States monitored the operation, but they say it did
not organize, finance or direct it. However, many of those whose participation
has so far become known have had long relationships with United States
intelligence services and military forces.

One of the Bay of Pigs veterans, Felix Ismael Rodriguez, who is 45 years old and
an expert in guerrilla warfare, went to El Salvador in 1984 to train helicopter
crews in aerial ambush and pursuit tactics, which friends said he learned on
C.I.A. operations in South Vietnam.

The American crewmen say Mr. Rodriguez, who was known in El Salvador as Max
Gomez, helped them get permission to operate out of the main base of the
Salvadoran Air Force near the capital of El Salvador and served as liaison
between them and senior Salvadoran military officers. The Americans say Mr.
Rodriguez also obtained Salvadoran Air Force identification cards for them.

The American airmen say Mr. Posada, who used the alias Ramon Medina, was in
charge of such administrative matters as housing, ground transportation and
daily living expenses and was referred to as ''the caretaker.'' Friends recall
that in some Cuban exile groups that organized raids against Cuba in the 1960's,
Mr. Posada was in charge of supplies, including explosives.

Field Liaison With Contras

The third Bay of Pigs veteran, Rafael Quintero, who is believed to be in his
middle to late 40's, met with contra field commanders to determine what supplies
they needed and where they wanted them dropped, then transmitted the information
to the headquarters at Ilopango, the American fliers said.

The American airmen said Mr. Quintero regularly shuttled between Miami, San
Salvador and the capitals of Costa Rica and Honduras and was given the nickname
''The Traveler.'' They say he also used the code name Ralph.

Cuban-American friends here say Mr. Quintero has worked on a number of C.I.A.
projects over the years throughout Latin America and possibly also in Africa. In
1983 Mr. Quintero testified in a Washington court that he had accepted an
advance of $30,000 against a fee of $1 million from a former C.I.A. agent, Edwin
P. Wilson, to assassinate a Libyan dissident in Egypt, but later changed his
mind.

The crew members said Mr. Rodriguez had not originally been a part of the rebel
supply operation, but that William J. Cooper, the chief pilot, had turned to Mr.
Rodriguez for help because of his ''local contacts'' and that Mr. Rodriguez and
the two other Bay of Pigs veterans soon became important members of the team.

A Connection to Bush

The airmen said tension arose between Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Cooper as to who was
in charge and that Mr. Cooper seemed intimidated by assertions from Mr.
Rodriguez that he was a friend of Vice President Bush. Mr. Bush has referred to
Mr. Rodriguez as ''a patriot'' and said he met with him three times, most
recently at a reception in Miami on May 20 to mark Cuba's independence.

According to many accounts, Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Posada worked for about a year
at the Ilopango air base. They were often seen in the company of military and
civilian officials of the United States and El Salvador as well as members of
the contra forces. At least once, according to a United States Embassy spokesman
in El Salvador, Mr. Rodriguez had lunch with the United States Ambassador, Edwin
G. Corr.

Mr. Rodriguez was decorated by the Salvadoran Government for his work with the
Salvadoran Air Force and one foreigner who has closely studied the Salvadoran
military said Mr. Rodriguez had ''probably done more than anyone to improve the
military and hurt the guerrillas.''

Yet officials of both the United States and El Salvador as well as rebel leaders
deny any formal connection with either Mr. Rodriguez or Mr. Posada.

The presence of Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Posada in El Salvador and their work on
the contra resupply operation was made public by Eugene Hasenfus, a 45-year-old
American who parachuted from a supply plane that was shot down in Nicaragua in
early October. Mr. Cooper and two others died in the crash. Mr. Hasenfus has
been sentenced to 30 years in prison by a Nicaraguan military court.

Ex-Official Corroborates

David A. Phillips, a retired C.I.A. official who was in charge of the agency's
Latin American operations until 1975, said in an interview that the ''stories in
the press'' about Mr. Posada ''seem pretty accurate,'' adding, ''I couldn't
think of anything to dispute, including the parts saying he was connected to the
agency.''

A spokesman for the C.I.A. would not say whether the three men had ever worked
for the agency.

Friends of Mr. Rodriguez describe him as a dedicated anti-Communist and say they
believe he worked without salary in Central America. Sometimes, the friends
said, they paid for airline tickets so that he could visit his wife and two
grown children here. There have been persistent rumors that Mr. Posada's escape
from the Venezuelan jail and his travel across the Caribbean to El Salvador were
financed by wealthy Cuban-Americans in Miami.

In 1984 a group of Cuban-Americans here formed a committee to raise money for
Mr. Posada, Dr. Orlando Bosch, a Miami pediatrician and two others jailed in the
Cuban airline bombing. The group appealed to the United Nations and Amnesty
International to urge Venezuela to bring the proceedings to a conclusion.

Dr. Armando Cruz and Dr. Alberto Hernandez, two physicians who have been
identified in the past with the committee, refused through their secretaries to
speak to a journalist. Sila Cuervo, a Bay of Pigs veteran who has also been
identified with the committee, hung up shortly after a journalist identified
himself.

A Search of Phone Records

Mr. Cuervo is the godfather of one of Mr. Posada's sons and, according to
records obtained from the Salvadoran telephone company, received at least two
calls from a telephone in one of two safehouses used by the American air crews
in El Salvador and frequented by Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Posada. The telephone
company records show a number of calls to friends and relatives of Mr. Rodriguez
and Mr. Posada in Miami from the safehouses.

Friends and relatives say they have spoken to Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Posada by
telephone in the last few weeks and that they are trying to keep out of the
public eye; some have spoken to Mr. Rodriguez in the last few days. He is
believed to be in the United States, possibly Miami. The two others are believed
to be in Central America.

After the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, Mr. Rodriguez, Mr. Posada
and about 200 other participants were given commissions in the United States
Army. As many as 100 of the invasion veterans, including some who became army
officers, continued to work closely with the C.I.A. on hundreds of attempts to
destroy Mr. Castro's regime.

In 1967 Mr. Rodriguez was part of a United States Army Special Forces team in
Bolivia that helped track down Che Guevara, the Argentine-born revolutionary
colleague of Mr. Castro.

Service in Vietnam

In Vietnam, friends say, Mr. Rodriguez worked in helicopters of the C.I.A.'s
proprietary airline, Air America, and was shot down five times. In the mid-70's,
friends say, he began receiving a United States Government disabiity pension.

In 1979 and 1980, Mr. Rodriguez worked as an arms broker in Miami and later, for
about two years, served as an adviser to the Argentine military.

Donald P. Gregg, the national security adviser to Mr. Bush and a former C.I.A.
official, has said that he recommended Mr. Rodriguez for a job with the
Salvadoran Air Force at Mr. Rodriguez's request. How Mr. Posada came to join Mr.
Rodriguez in the rebel supply operation is not clear.

After officer training at Fort Benning, friends say, Mr. Posada spent most of
the 1960's in raids and sabotage attacks against Cuba under the direction of the
C.I.A. station in Miami. In the late 1960's and early 1970's he served as an
counterinsurgency advisor to the Venezuelan Army and eventually became chief of
operations for its national police.

In 1974 he opened a private security agency in Venezuela and also, according to
one Miami friend, began manufacturing silencers for handguns. He was arrested in
October 1976 on charges of blowing up the Cuban airliner.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DIRECTOR'S WORDS RECALLED AT TRIAL IN FILM DEATHS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 423 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 10


Told the special effects explosions had come ''pretty close'' to the helicopter
in a scene filmed before the fatal crash of the aircraft in the filming of
''Twilight Zone: The Movie,'' the director, John Landis, responded, ''You
haven't seen nothing yet,'' a witness testified today.

Explosions in the next scene disabled the helicopter, sending it plummeting to
the ground, stricking and killing the actor Vic Morrow and two children who were
crossing a river in the filming of the Vietnam War scene.

Mr. Landis is on trial for involuntary manslaughter in connection with the
deaths on July 23, 1982. Co-defendants in the trial are George Folsey Jr., the
film's associate producer; Dan Allingham, the unit production manager; Paul
Stewart, the special effects coordinator, and Dorcey Wingo, the helicopter
pilot. The trial is now in its 15th week in Los Angeles Superior Court.

Cynthia Nigh, who was employed by the film makers as a production secretary,
gave the testimony on Mr. Landis's comments. She said he directed the remarks in
passing to members of the helicopter crew, who were discussing the explosions
below the aircraft in a scene they had just completed.

'That Was Pretty Close'

''One of the stunt guys yelled over to Landis, 'Hey, that was pretty close,' or
something to that effect,'' Miss Nigh testified. She said Mr. Landis ''was
wandering off.''

Miss Nigh testified that Mr. Landis turned back to them and said, ''If you think
that was big, you haven't seen nothing yet.''

Miss Nigh added that Mr. Landis meant to say in his remarks, ''It was a
spectacular show.'' But the Los Angeles Deputy District Attorney, Lea Purwin
D'Agostino, asserted that Miss Nigh had never stated in any previous interview
with investigators anything to the effect that Mr. Landis was talking about a
''spectacular show.''

On several occasions today, Mrs. D'Agostino showed Miss Nigh previous statements
she gave to investigators, most of which appeared to be more incriminating
against the defendants than the testimony she gave today.

Mrs. D'Agostino suggested that Miss Nigh, who testified she was once engaged to
marry Mr. Allingham, was a reluctant witness because she considered Mr. Landis,
Mr. Folsey and Mr. Allingham to be ''family.'' Miss Nigh did not dispute the
statement.

At another point, Miss Nigh recalled a conversation she heard before the
filming. She said she heard one of the defendants, Mr. Folsey, jokingly remark,
''We'll probably be thrown in jail,'' for employing children in the movie
illegally.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A. RECRUITING ON CAMPUSES: A RESURGENT DEBATE

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: AMHERST, Mass, Dec. 9


After a post-Vietnam decade of relative hospitality for the Central Intelligence
Agency on college campuses, the issue of recruiting by the agency among
graduating seniors is once again raising protests from students who object to
the C.I.A.'s role in world affairs.

In conflict, according to those on both sides of the issue, is the role of
universities as centers of open debate and the moral questions raised by giving
aid to an agency whose actions some students, administrators and faculty members
depict as immoral.

At the University of Massachusetts, the issue has locked the campus in an
increasingly bitter struggle.

''The C.I.A. comes to this campus to recruit able-bodied men and women for
invasions, subjugation and control of other countries, beyond normal diplomatic
means,'' said Gregory John Fink, a member of the Radical Student Union, who was
arrested when protesters occupied a building on Nov. 14. The junior accused the
university of ''complicity'' in giving the agency space on campus for job
interviews and other help.

Deeper Problems Seen

But the issue as seen by the administration is to maintain on campus an
''openness to ideas, no matter how repugnant, in a civil, sane manner,'' said
Dennis L. Madson, vice chancellor.

Joseph D. Duffey, the chancellor, said that ending C.I.A. recruitment here would
lead to deeper problems. He challenges opponents to ''find the criteria by which
you could make a decision to exclude the C.I.A., without excluding others.''

''It's an issue, as with most real issues, of conflicting moral questions,'' Mr.
Duffey said. The dispute here, which has led to 71 arrests in recent weeks, has
widened into a debate over whether civil disobedience by protesters is an
appropriate response to allegations of law breaking by the C.I.A., and whether
the administration has been willing to discuss the issue, or has used excessive
force in its handling of the dispute.

But the underlying issue has caused protests on other campuses as well, among
them the University of Colorado at Boulder, the University of Michigan at Ann
Arbor, Hunter College in New York City, and, early last year, at Brown
University in Providence, R.I.

A spokesman for the C.I.A. acknowledged that there was some increase in the
number of protests.

''It's purely a function of people's interest in various aspects of U.S. foreign
policy,'' said Kathy Pherson, who noted recent unrest on campuses regarding
events in Central America.

Inquiries About C.I.A. Work

While the number of protests has gone up and down over the years, according to
Ms. Pherson, ''in terms of people on campus wanting to interview with the
C.I.A., there has never been a lack of people to talk to.'' The agency has
received about 150,000 expressions of interest each year, she said. She would
not say how many come from campuses.

At the University of Massachusetts, as at most campuses, the issue has grown
beyond the handful of students who seek interviews.

A group of counter-demonstrators has been active. ''America should be protected
by the best and the brightest, and you find those on college campuses,'' said a
leader of that group, W. Gregory Rothman, a sophomore from Harrisburg, Pa.

Those students and the administration would like the question to center on
whether the university should limit who recruits here, and on appropriate forms
of protest. The administration has organized two public forums for Thursday on
those questions.

Arrests in Two Protests

The protests prompted the arrest of 11 students on Nov. 14, and 60 more people,
including Abbie Hoffman and Amy Carter, on Nov. 24.

Chancellor Duffey has repeatedly described student actions as ''antics,'' and
the protesters as ''moral bullies,'' descriptions that have angered some members
of the faculty.

''When a man in a three-piece suit comes to campus and in a calm and reasoned
way recruits people, that's an antic too, of a different sort, that is much more
serious,'' Robert Paul Wolff, a professor of philosophy, complained this
afternoon in a meeting between several faculty members and Mr. Duffey. A letter
signed by 70 members of the faculty said the agency had committed ''war
crimes.''

Several faculty members expressed concern about the use of the state police,
equipped with mace and dogs, in the Nov. 24 demonstration. It was the first time
in 17 years that state police have been called to the campus for that purpose,
according to the University, but Mr. Duffey said the arrests had been made by
campus police. He saidthe state police was called in simply to assure that buses
carrying the protesters away would not be blocked.

Complaints of Police Brutality

Students have alleged police brutality, which the administration denies. The
chairman of a faculty observation group, Michael Wolff, said: ''We were very
unhappy with what happened. Nobody saw excessive force used, but I think there
was some un-necessary pain.''

Mr. Duffey contended that ''for a healthy teen-ager to insist, kicking, that he
or she be carried from a building is not always civil disobedience.'' In an
interview, he said that a protester requiring the police to carry him out was
''provocative.''

''There is a legitimate opportunity for protest and discussion, and there are
rules any democracy must have,'' Mr. Duffy said at the meeting. ''The rules
define the limits,'' he said, adding that the rights of 12 students who wanted
interviews had been violated.

For all the fury in some quarters, only a few hundred of the 25,000 students
here have been involved in the protests.

Where the majority opinion lies is uncertain. When the meeting in the
chancellor's office turned to how the university should express itself on moral
issues, someone suggested a plebiscite. Then Elisabeth O. Selkirk, head of the
lingusitics department, who expressed herself strongly on the need to bar the
C.I.A. from the campus, added, ''Question is, are we bound by the results?
That's the troublesome part.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Joseph D. Duffey; Photo of Gergory John Fink (NYT/Steve
Miller); Photo of W. Gregory Rothman and Tony C. Rudy

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AID FOR CONTRAS: THE CUBANS OF MIAMI SEND IT WITH GUSTO

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 983 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Dec. 10


In the last three years, the big, fervently anti-Communist Cuban-American
population here has provided the Nicaraguan rebels with combat advisers, medical
teams and more than $1.5 million in medical equipment and supplies, food and
clothing, its leaders say.

In the style of Bob Hope and his Vietnam entertainment troupes, a popular
Cuban-American comic, Guillermo Alvarez Guedes, spent two days in mid-October
performing at rebel camps and hospitals near the Honduran border.

Many Cuban-Americans say they see the struggle of the Nicaraguan rebels, also
known as contras, as an extension of their own fight against the Communist
Government of Fidel Castro in Cuba.

''If you do something against Nicaragua it is going to be bad for Castro because
he is helping them,'' said Dr. Manuel Alzugaray, a 41-year-old orthopedic
surgeon who has been a leader in organizing medical aid to the rebels and has
made 29 trips to treat rebel soldiers in the field.

''Castro is the cancer,'' he said. ''You have to hit him.'' #750,000 Cubans in
Miami The efforts of some of the more than 750,000 Cuban-Americans in Miami to
help the Nicaraguan rebels have drawn new attention in the midst of disclosures
on the United States sale of arms to Iran and the diversion of profits to aid
the contras.

The Cuban-Americans here stress that their aid to the rebels has been nonlethal
and has violated no laws.

The Cuban-American population has been delighted with President Reagan's strong
backing for the Nicaraguan rebels and his denunciations of Mr. Castro, and it
has overwhelmingly rallied behind him as the crisis over the arms sales and
shipments has deepened.

At a rally of several thousand Cuban-Americans on Monday night, speakers
repeatedly delivered the message that Mr. Reagan's intention to fight Communism
in Nicaragua and elsewhere was far more important than any mistakes that might
have been made.

''Nicaragua Is the Issue, Not Iran,'' said a placard handwritten in English that
bobbed in the cheering crowd.

A Defense Fund for North

This morning a Cuban-American organization called Concerned Citizens for
Democracy, Inc., announced the start of a national campaign to raise $500,000
for the defense of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, the National Security Council
aide who had been closely identified with aid to the contras and was dismissed
by President Reagan when the diversion of money was made public.

Carlos M. Perez, a wealthy banana importer who heads the organization, said the
fund had been created without consulting Colonel North or other Washington
officials ''in the event that he is charged with breaking a law, in the event
that he needs it.''

The activities of the Cuban-American combat advisers in Nicaragua raise
questions regarding Federal laws that prohibit civilians from aiding or joining
a war against a country that is not formally at war with the United States. But
United States Justice Department officials say the laws were broadly drawn
shortly after the turn of the century and have led to only a handful of
prosecutions.

At least a dozen Cuban-Americans have gone into combat with the rebels,
according to members of the population familiar with military operations in
Nicaragua. At least one of the Cuban-Americans has died in Nicaragua, half a
dozen have been wounded and two have been captured by Sandinista soldiers.

Treating Wounded Rebels

According to Dr. Alzugaray, nearly 30 Cuban-American doctors, nurses and
technicians have treated wounded rebel soldiers and their civilian supporters at
jungle camps at the Honduran-Nicaraguan border.

One of the first big shipments of aid from the Miami supporters was about
$100,000 worth of medical supplies and equipment delivered in late 1983,
according to Jose J. Basulto, a building contractor who is active in the Bay of
Pigs Veterans Association, 2506 Brigade, which includes men who took part in the
unsuccessful invasion of Cuba in 1961.

Three Bay of Pigs veterans are said to have played key roles in the clandestine
weapons shipments to the contras that appear to have been financed by the arms
sales to Iran. Their involvement has been widely applauded by Cuban-Americans.

Since the first medical shipment, veterans of the 2506 Brigade have continued to
contribute, but Dr. Alzugaray has taken a leading role and says he has helped
funnel about $1.5 million in medical supplies and equipment to the contras from
several Cuban-American groups.

Supplies Flown to Contras

Dr. Alzugaray said a local Cuban-American-owned air cargo company, which he
would not identify, had flown the last of half a dozen loads of supplies to the
rebels in June 1985, a few months before $27 million in United States
nonmilitary aid began flowing to the rebels. Dr. Alzugaray said the air cargo
company charged only the cost of the fuel for the flights.

Juan Perez-Franco, a 57-year-old insurance agency owner who parachuted into Cuba
in the 1961 invasion and is president of the veterans' association, said his
organization had given the rebels $50,000 worth of boots, uniforms, canteens and
clothing and had helped Cuban-Americans join up with the rebels as advisers.

Mr. Perez-Franco said there were ''more than 10 and less than 50''
Cuban-Americans operating with the rebels on the southern front at the
Nicaraguan border with Costa Rica. He said another half dozen had served in the
region earlier and returned to Miami.

Mr. Perez-Franco said he did not know precisely what the advisers did in the
combat zone. He said it was up to individuals to decide whether they wanted to
carry weapons, but he emphasized that the brigade had not sent weapons or
ammunition to Nicaragua.

''All the help we give to the contras is nonlethal,'' he said. One
Cuban-American who recently returned from Nicaragua said he had helped train
rebels and gone into combat with them armed with an M-16 rifle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ADMIRAL SAYS PHILIPPINE BASES ARE ESSENTIAL

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Dec. 10


The commander of the United States Pacific Fleet said today that if the United
States lost its naval and air bases in the Philippines, it ''would be turning
over our friends and allies to Soviet political and military domination in that
region.''

There were ''no good alternatives'' to those bases, the commander, Adm. James A.
Lyons Jr., said, calling them the ''key to our remaining a western Pacific
power.''

More broadly, Admiral Lyons, in a talk with Tokyo-based American reporters,
cautioned that the Philippines was ''our No. 1 problem in the western Pacific.''
While saying he was optimistic about that country's future, he asserted that
President Corazon C. Aquino needed ''some quick successes'' to maintain social
and economic stability.

''If democracy does not prevail in the Philippines,'' he said, ''that to me
would be one of the most destabilizing factors in this part of the world.''

The admiral's remarks were among the stronger warnings from a senior military
officer about the importance of the Philippine bases to overall American and
Asian security interests.

Potential danger from an American military withdrawal loomed especially large
because of an expanding Soviet presence across the South China Sea at the former
United States base in Cam Ranh Bay, Vietnam, Admiral Lyons said. That buildup is
part of a strengthening of the entire Soviet Pacific Fleet, a process long under
way that the American naval commander said had become steadily ''more
aggressive.''

Admiral Lyons said it was desirable for the United States and China to extend
recent moves toward military cooperation, including port calls by American
warships. He urged increased sales of American military equipment to China,
insisting that closer ties ''should not be viewed, and is not intended, to be a
threat to anyone.''

The admiral said the United States and China, which fought against each other in
the Korean War, now share similar views on the need for ''stability and peaceful
reunification'' of North and South Korea. By contrast, he said, a recent
closeness between North Korea and the Soviet Union could cause trouble.

''I would not want North Korea to sense that they have this Soviet umbrella
which would give them more freedom to take preciptious actions which would be
destabilizing,'' he said.

Admiral Lyons, who is based in Hawaii and is ending a trip through Japan and
other western Pacific countries, talked at length about the agreement that gives
the United States use of the bases in the Philippines until 1991. The bases,
Subic Bay Naval Base and Clark Air Base, are the largest American installations
of their kind outside the United States.

The Manila Government has not announced its intentions about the bases, but Mrs.
Aquino said in her election campaign early this year that a new arrangement must
be negotiated to her country's greatest advantage.

The United States, recognizing the possibility that it could lose Subic Bay and
Clark, has studied fallback positions in the Pacific, including Guam, the
Micronesian island group of Palau and the northern Mariana Islands. But military
commanders are unenthusiastic about them all, and Admiral Lyons asserted flatly
that ''no good alternatives'' to the Philippines existed.

Without the Philippine bases, which lie north of Manila, ''I would need in
certain categories two to three times the amount of forces I have today,'' he
said. ''And we all know that ain't going to happen.''

It was essential, he argued, for Japan and other Asian nations to protect
regional stability by increasing aid to the Aquino Government. His command, he
said, intends to send a hospital ship to the Philippines in March that could
treat as many as 1,000 people a day.

''She has many problems facing her; she needs some quick successes,'' he said.
''I felt this was something the man and woman on the street could feel and
see.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

$50,000 PRIZES SET UP FOR PROMISING SCHOLARS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 708 words


A group of new prizes of $50,000 apiece will be awarded to outstanding American
graduate students and other promising researchers starting in 1988, an officer
of the American Nobel Anniversary Committee said yesterday.

The officer, Dr. Henry A. Singer, said a corporation had offered $250,000 in an
anonymous gift to begin endowing the awards, which will be called the American
Nobel Laureate Fellowships.

Winners of the fellowships, to be given every two years, are to be chosen by
committees of Nobel Prize winners in the United States. The prizes will be
unconnected with the Nobel Foundation in Sweden, but the foundation has approved
the idea, said Dr. Singer, who is executive officer of the American Nobel
Anniversary Committee, which is planning the prize program.

Like Nobel Prizes, the new American awards will be given in chemistry, physics,
medicine and economics, and will be among the most lucrative academic prizes
anywhere.

No Plans for Peace Prize

Unlike the real Nobels, there will be no American Nobel Laureate Fellowship in
literature, and there are no immediate plans for a peace prize.

''Peace is an uncertain one,'' Dr. Singer said in an interview. ''It's a lot
harder to identify. Science is much easier.''

But he added, ''If we find a donor who wants to help us with peace, that would
be great - if they help set the criteria.''

The new American Nobel Laureate Fellowships, Dr. Singer said, are intended to
recognize potential, give a few extraordinary researchers more leisure to pursue
their work and perhaps propel a few young people toward Nobel Prizes.

Dr. Singer said he had hoped to announce the new fellowships at a black-tie
dinner in New York Tuesday night that was attended by 16 American Nobel
laureates and hundreds of other guests, but word of the $250,000 grant came a
bit too late. ''It wasn't until the night of the dinner that I got the
confirmation,'' Dr. Singer said yesterday.

Dr. Singer - a psychologist and organizational consultant who has been
associated with the American Nobel Anniversary Committee, an association of
Nobel laureates, since the 1940's - said he hoped additional contributions would
soon raise the new awards' endowment to $1 million, or enough to finance four
prizes every two years.

Criteria to Be Determined

The prizes are to be awarded at a projected biannual dinner for American Nobel
laureates. The criteria for the new awards are to be determined at a special
conference in Tarrytown, N.Y., next October.

Tuesday night's dinner, which coincided with the 90th anniversay of the death of
Alfred Nobel on Dec. 10, 1896, was financed by corporate contributions. The
chairmen were Warren M. Anderson, chairman of Union Carbide Corporation, and
Henry A. Kissinger, who was awarded the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize with Le Duc Tho
of North Vietnam.

Other corporations, besides Union Carbide, that supported the dinner at the New
York Hilton included Johnson & Johnson, Dow Chemical, A.T.&T., I.B.M., Xerox and
General Electric.

Speakers included the actress Liv Ullmann, representing Unicef, which won the
Nobel Peace Prize in 1965; Vernon A. Walters, chief United States delegate to
the United Nations, and the actor Gregory Peck, who read William Faulkner's
famous 1949 Nobel Prize acceptance speech.

Several of the Nobel Prize winners at the party were asked by a reporter if they
knew of any colleagues who should have won Nobels but never have.

Miss Ullmann, thinking of peace prizes, cited Doctors Without Borders, a French
relief agency. ''I think they should have won,'' she said. ''And I also think
the International Rescue Committee.''

Dr. Isidor I. Rabi, who won the 1944 Prize in Physics, mentioned, among other
Nobel-worthy physicists, Prof. Chien-Shiung Wu of Columbia University.

Dr. Rosalyn S. Yalow, who won the 1977 Prize in Medicine, named Dr. William H.
Oldendorf, a fellow researcher with the Veterans Administration.

Mr. Kissinger said he could not think offhand of anyone who should have won and
did not, but he mentioned Richard M. Nixon as a peacemaker whose achievements
had been insufficiently appreciated.

''Whatever I deserved, Nixon certainly deserved - at least as much, if not
more,'' Mr. Kissinger said of his prize.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
Assessing the 5th Amendment Issue

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 987 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Two great issues now swirling about this city - the flow of Government
information to the public and the constitutional right not to have to testify
against one's self -have long been on the mind of Erwin N. Griswold.

The two issues have arisen anew because three former Government servants - Vice
Adm. John M. Poindexter, President Reagan's national security adviser; Lieut.
Col. Oliver L. North, an aide on the National Security Council, and Maj. Gen.
Richard V. Secord of the Air Force - have gone before Congressional committees
investigating the Iran-Nicaragua arms dispute and refused to answer questions on
the ground that the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution protects them from
having to give testimony that might implicate them in criminal wrongdoing.

How does this seeming clash between a constitutional right and the desire of a
free society to have a free flow of information strike Mr. Griswold, an
outspoken 82-year-old constitutional scholar, lawyer and former Solicitor
General?

'Tactical Purposes'

''It seems to me that these people have pleaded the Fifth for tactical
purposes,'' he said, adding that the three apparently wanted a promise of
immunity ''from whatever source can give it to them'' before they will talk.

Did the refusal to testify clash with the Constitution's provisions for free
speech and free press?

''I just don't see this as presenting any kind of First Amendment issue,'' Mr.
Griswold said.  ''It's obvious they haven't disclosed enough,'' he added. ''But
I think much of the story will come out eventually, and whether it is today,
tomorrow or after New Year's really doesn't matter.''

Views of Long Standing

Mr. Griswold's views on the Fifth Amendment are far from new.

At the height of the McCarthy era, while he was dean of the Harvard Law School,
he delivered a highly publicized speech in which he called the constitutional
right against self-incrimination ''one of the great landmarks in man's long
struggle to make himself civilized.''

He later wrote a book, ''The Fifth Amendment Today,'' that is considered a
classic on the subject.

His views on the need of the public to know certain Government information date
at least to 1934, when he wrote an article in the Harvard Law Review about the
difficulties and unfairness of being governed by agencies that did not publish
their rules.

The next year the Government began publishing the Federal Register, a daily
gazette of information about rules and procedures on dozens of Federal
institutions, ranging from the Agriculture Department to the Veterans
Administration.

But Mr. Griswold has never been committed to the principle that the public has
an unlimited right to know what goes on behind closed doors.

While he was Solicitor General, serving as the Justice Department's chief lawyer
at the Supreme Court, he argued two cases that have had a substantial effect on
the legal theories underlying what the public has a right to know.

Perhaps the most famous of these was the Pentagon Papers case. Mr. Griswold
represented the United States in the landmark lawsuit in which the Justice
Department sought to stop The New York Times and The Washington Post from
publishing an archive of Federal documents chronicling American involvement in
the Vietnam War.

At the time, Mr. Griswold wrote a legal brief asserting that publication of the
papers ''could have the effect of causing immediate and irreparable harm to the
security of the United States.''

He now says he ''didn't ever have great enthusiasm for the Government's case
simply because the Government had no real legal ground to stand on.''

The Government did not even know exactly what documents the newspapers had at
the time, he explained. And, in hindsight, he has concluded that the publication
of the papers caused no harm.

On the Fairness Doctrine

As Solicitor General, Mr. Griswold also argued in another landmark case
involving the First Amendment that the Government had the constitutional
authority to require radio and television stations to broadcast opposing
viewpoints. The Supreme Court concurred with that view when in 1969 it upheld
the so-called fairness doctrine.

In the 14 years since he left the post of Solicitor General, Mr. Griswold has
been a partner in the Washington office of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue. Although
he is well past the age when most lawyers have retired, he continues to plead
cases in courts around the country.

And he continues to speak out, with a sharp wit and hard logic, on issues that
concern him. Which should come as no suprise to anyone familiar with his life
record.

To recall just one example of his outspokenness, when he testified before the
Senate Judiciary Committee in opposition to President Roosevelt's attempt to
''pack'' the Supreme Court in 1937, Mr. Griswold suggested that one way to get
rid of judges would be to shoot them and another would be to keep them on the
payroll but not count their votes.

A Tough Critic

Mr. Griswold has a lifelong affiliation with the Republican Party. But he is a
tough critic of the Reagan Administration.

A member of the Civil Rights Commission from 1961 to 1967, he calls the present
commission ''a sham.'' In his view, the commission is ''not doing any of the
really constructive work to bring about a useful and permanent improvement in
race relations and equality of opportunity in the country.''

As Mr. Griswold sees things, William Bradford Reynolds, who is the Assistant
Attorney General for Civil Rights, ''is trying to undo a good deal of the
progress that was made over a good many years and without warrant.''

As for international affairs, Mr. Griswold is an active member of the Lawyers
Alliance for Nuclear Arms Control. He has also met with Soviet lawyers and
judges and traveled to the Soviet Union ''to try to find ways to develop greater
trust and mutual understanding between us and them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Erwin Griswold

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 839 words


THE GREAT AMERICAN MAGAZINE:

An Inside History of Life. By Loudon Wainwright. Illustrated. 443 pages. Alfred
A. Knopf. $19.95.

ONE might simply argue that there's something self-contradictory about a
400-page text devoted to a magazine that depended on pictures for its
extraordinary success. Yet this seems somehow unfair to Loudon Wainwright's
informal, sometimes lively unofficial history, ''The Great American Magazine: An
Inside History of Life,'' published 50 years after the publication's founding
and 14 years after its demise.

After all, as Mr. Wainwright reminds us, language was vital to Life magazine.
With little room for text, the right words were all the more important to find,
and some of the book's most amusing passages describe the agonies that search
involved, whether through the efforts of inarticulate editors to communicate
with their reporters or through the pathetic struggles of those writers to whom
prose sometimes came with difficulty. And then, of course, there were the memos
that kept flowing through the Time-Life Building, memos that as often as not
came from the magazine's founding father, Henry Luce, who greeted the success of
his enterprise by attempting ever more hopelessly to define it.

After all, ''The Great American Magazine'' is full of talented people working
under stressful conditions bound to provoke unusual behavior. And often enough
this behavior took the form of language. Not only is Mr. Wainwright's book full
of Mr. Luce's memos, but it also depends for long passages on diaries kept by
several of Life's managing editors, particularly the legendary John Shaw
Billings, a ''big, intimidating, sometimes distant man'' regarded ''by his staff
as a kind of god who had answers for just about everything tucked away somewhere
in his formidable intelligence.''

Curiously enough, several of these awesome leaders reveal in their diaries a
startling sense of worthlessness about themselves and anger often directed,
predictably enough, at Mr. Luce. Such contradictions, combined with Mr.
Wainwright's accounts of overlong hours on the job, strained marriages and heavy
drinking, lend a vivid if not always appealing sense of the dedication it took
to produce Life magazine. One recalls it as fun to look at. It was not always
fun to turn out.

And after all, Mr. Wainwright knows Life magazine through more than just the
pictures it ran. He was an important part of its history, having started there
as an office boy in 1949 and having continued on and off to work there as
reporter, bureau correspondent, writer, editor and columnist until the magazine
closed as a weekly in 1972. (Until his retirement in 1985 he was an editor on
the new monthly Life, for which he continues to write a column.) And although he
is liberal in mentioning Life's many excesses and shortcomings - as well as,
entertainingly, the wealth of satirical comment it aroused, such as Bernard De
Voto's remark that Life relied on a ''formula that called for equal parts of the
decapitated Chinaman, the flogged Negro, the surgically explored peritoneum, and
the rapidly slipping chemise'' - nonetheless Mr. Wainwright is clearly still
devoted to the magazine.

Perhaps too devoted? If it is not the self-contradiction of writing over 400
pages about a picture magazine, then maybe it is the author's overinvolvement
with his subject that is the problem. For something has to account for why a
reader gets impatient with ''The Great American Magazine'' -why the Luce memos
grow tedious, why the diary entries become banal and why the detail seems
attenuated, particularly late in the story, when time seems to stretch out and
separate chapters get devoted to Life's acquisition of the first astronauts'
stories, to the assassination of President Kennedy, to the decision to run
pictures of Americans who died during one particular week in Vietnam and to
Clifford Irving's nearly successful forgery of Howard Hughes's autobiography.
Perhaps the trouble is simply that Mr. Wainwright cares for Life more than he
makes us care.

As it becomes all too clear in his story, Life was born because of the
development of the candid camera, and it died when television learned to offer a
version of the magazine that moved. Perhaps, as he speculates, there was the
additional problem that for too many years the price was set too low and could
not be raised without losing buyers. But essentially it was television that
killed the picture magazines, and while it may have been sad, there was nothing
very tragic about it.

Yet Mr. Wainwright mourns what he describes at one point as the ''big,
sprawling, squalling, tender, shocking, sentimental, pompous, blunt, cheeky,
silly, melodramatic, devastating, caring journal'' that ''constantly surprised''
and ''stirred'' with ''its beauty and power.'' That seems a little excessive to
a reader who recalls Life with little more than nostalgic affection. Such excess
alienates. It makes one finally wonder whether a picture magazine is worth 400
pages of text.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Loudon Wainwright (Enrico Ferrorelli)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PRETORIA IMPOSES HARSH NEW RULES AIMED AT UNREST

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words

DATELINE: PRETORIA, South Africa, Dec. 11


The Government tightened its six-month-old emergency decree today, outlawing
more forms of political expression and imposing near total censorship on news
reports about the nation's black revolt.

The maximum punishment for violating the restrictions is a fine equivalent to
$9,000 or 10 years in prison.

The 24 pages of new regulations evoked widespread expressions of outrage by both
blacks and whites.

Boycotts Are Barred

The regulations make it illegal and subversive to become embroiled in unrest, to
resist or oppose the Government in its enforcement of the emergency decree, to
take part in consumer, rent, school or other boycotts, to establish alternative
forms of rule such as street committees and so-called people's courts that have
sprung up in some segregated black townships, or to campaign against compulsory
military conscription for whites.

Reporters, both South African and foreign, are forbidden to publish unauthorized
accounts of violence, deployments of security forces, boycotts, ''restricted''
meetings, the setting up of alternative forms of rule or speeches by people
identified by the authorities as hostile.

Previous regulations barring journalists from witnessing conflict remain in
force, as do those barring television coverage of protest and violence.

At the same time, local black police auxiliaries, who have been accused of
brutality by their opponents, are now included with the army and police as
''security forces,'' meaning that their actions may not be reported without
official approval.

Court Coverage Restricted

Moreover, the regulations make it an offense to report without authorization on
the detention of government opponents or their subsequent release. Existing
rules permit detention without trial.

In a reversal of the nation's avowed espousal of judicial independence, the new
regulations also place restrictions on press coverage of court cases involving
political detainees.

''This is a desperate action by desperate people who demonstrate that they are
unfit to govern,'' The Pretoria News said in an editorial. Some critics called
the censorship draconian and emblematic of a totalitarian society.

The Foreign Correspondents Association of South Africa called the measures ''one
of the severest systems of censorship in the world'' and said they had ''made it
impossible to report fully and fairly on a social conflict of great
significance.''

Since June 12, South Africa has been governed by an emergency decree that
prohibited reporters from witnessing violent protest and required them to
refrain from publishing articles about the nation's racial upheaval without
official authorization.

Political commentators and others here said the new regulations seemed designed
not only to further stifle press reporting, but also to outlaw and silence the
kinds of protest available to a black majority deprived of a voice in the
running of the country.

The United Democratic Front, the biggest nonparliamentary opposition movement,
condemned the regulations as dictatorial and said it would seek to have them
overturned in court.

The authorities have not offered an explanation for the regulations beyond
saying that they are designed to combat a ''revolutionary onslaught.''

Press 'Imbalances' Cited

Interviewed on state-run television tonight, senior government officials
indicated that measures reflected in part what were depicted as imbalances in
South African press coverage.

Kobus Neethling of the Bureau for Information, the Government's main propaganda
arm, cited a Government analysis of South African newspapers last month
purporting to show that coverage of the crisis was largely negative toward the
authorities and largely positive toward their adversaries, notably the outlawed
African National Congress.

David Steward, the bureau's director, asked how the Government could be expected
to ''restore law and order'' and pursue its policies of cautious racial changes
when press reporting was so hostile. He compared South African press coverage of
the unrest to American press coverage of Vietnam, which, he said, had
contributed to the outcome of the conflict.

Mr. Steward said the South African press had been used as part of a
revolutionary thrust. ''The whole purpose of revolutionary warfare,'' he said,
''is to mobilize the people by using the media'' so as to break down the
credibility of the state.

Roelf Meyer, Deputy Minister for Law and Order, said hostile foreign reaction to
the new measures ''is playing into the hands of the radical element'' seeking to
overthrow the Government.

Death Toll Is 2,300

Since September 1984 South Africa has been seized by the worst convulsion of
racial upheaval in its recent history. In that period, under two successive
emergency decrees, 30,000 people have been detained without trial for varying
periods and some 2,300 people have been killed, the vast majority of them black.

The authorities have dispatched thousands of soldiers to black townships to
support the regular police and have formed local black police units to ease
pressure on regular forces.

Yet while many anti-apartheid campaigners are in detention - particularly those
running so-called street committees as an alternative form of local rule - the
crisis has not eased.

In several parts of the country, blacks are boycotting bus services, municipal
rent payments or white-owned stores; the nation's black educational system is
locked in crisis with scores of high schools closed and black educators
demanding a takeover of schools; and protest against the emergency decree has
spilled into liberal white groups such as the Black Sash and the End
Conscription Campaign.

The authorities have sought to depict these protests as part of a coordinated
strategy by adversaries perceived as ''revolutionary.''

A Shiift in Strategy

The Government's strategy now seems to have shifted. The vast deployment of
security forces in black townships has, campaigners concede, quelled some
protest. According to the South African Institute of Race Relations today, the
newest emergency decree has reduced the daily tally of killings from 6.31 in
June to 2.27.

Moreover, almost half the fatalities this year, the institute said, were the
result of conflict between rival blacks divided by their attitudes toward the
white authorities.

The intention now, commentators said, seems to be to stifle the alternative
displays of disaffection - such as boycotts and the pursuit of what campaigners
call people's power - that have increasingly come to replace the more familiar
images of direct conflict between protesters and the authorities.

The regulations were promulgated five days before the start of a campaign by the
United Democratic Front called ''Christmas Against the Emergency,'' part of
which was to be a consumer boycott to underline the notion that, for many
blacks, Christmas holds no joy.

There is widespread speculation that the authorities may call elections next
year, but the new regulations forbid attacks on the Government for the manner in
which it enforces the emergency decree. ''Elections,'' the anti-Government
Pretoria News said, ''will become farces without open public debate. The
fundamental democratic check on authority of scrutiny by an informed public will
vanish.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

EDITOR-NOTE: South African press restrictions now prohibit journalists from
transmitting dispatches on any security actions, protests, detentions or
''subversive statements'' without clearance by Government censors.

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA DROPS 2 FROM CABINET; PREMIER LOSES FOREIGN AFFAIRS JOBS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 458 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 11


The Government of Cambodia, struggling to cope with a widening guerrilla war and
severe economic problems, has dismissed its Ministers of Defense and Planning,
according to a radio announcement in Phnom Penh.

In the highest-level Government shuffle in five years, Prime Minister Hun Sen
has also lost two jobs, those of Foreign Minister and chairman of the party's
foreign affairs commission, the radio said Wednesday. The Khmer-language
domestic broadcast was monitored and translated here.

The dismissals, which the Cambodian announcement said took place on Dec. 3, come
just before a crucial Communist Party congress in Vietnam. Hanoi installed the
Phnom Penh Government in 1979, and Vietnamese and Cambodian troops there have
been battling three resistance armies ever since.

Mr. Hun Sen's foreign affairs responsibilities have been divided, the radio
said, between Kong Korm, who takes over as Foreign Minister, and Yos Son, who
becomes chairman of the Communist Party Central Committee's foreign relations
commission.

Mr. Kong Korm, a Deputy Foreign Minister and former Ambassador to Hanoi, had
recently been in charge of foreign journalists and other infrequent Western
visitors. He is described as a French-speaking former professor who might be a
more acceptable international figure than Mr. Hun Sen in any negotiations on
Cambodia's future.

Gets Almost No Western Aid

The impoverished country gets almost no Western assistance because of the
Vietnamese occupation. China and Cambodia's non-Communist neighbors have been
looking for a formula to negotiate a withdrawal of Vietnamese troops.

Prime Minister Hun Sen, who has made a series of foreign trips over the last few
years, is known for his abrasive style. Now 35 years old, he is a former Khmer
Rouge official who defected to the Vietnamese in 1977 and became Foreign
Minister in January 1979. He was named Prime Minister in January 1985 after the
mysterious death in Moscow of his predecessor, Chan Si.

He was thought to be a powerful figure in Cambodia, possibly wielding more
day-to-day influence than Heng Samrin, the Communist Party leader, according to
Michael Vickery, an Australian-based American historian of modern Cambodia who
visited the country this year.

The Phnom Penh broadcast said Defense Minister Bou Thang had been replaced by
his deputy, Koy Buntha, the Chief of Staff of the Army and a former chairman of
the military committee of Battambang Province, where the guerrilla war has been
intense.

The radio said Planning Minister Chea Soth would be replaced by Chea Chanto, who
had been deputy director of the National Bank and Foreign Trade Bank.

Both Mr. Bou Thang and Mr. Chea Soth apparently retained their places in the
party politburo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS;
CANDIDATES FOR PROSECUTOR REPORTED

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1338 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 11


The three-judge panel searching for a special prosecutor in the Iran arms
investigation has submitted a short list of candidates to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation for a preliminary security check, according to Government
officials knowledgeable about the search.

Federal law-enforcement officials said the list was referred to the F.B.I.
Director, William H. Webster, and included some of the nation's best-known
lawyers, including Harold R. Tyler Jr. of New York, a former Federal judge.

Another source said he understood the panel's roster included Lawrence E. Walsh
of Oklahoma City, a former president of the American Bar Association who served
as Deputy Attorney General in the Eisenhower Administration. Mr. Tyler and Mr.
Walsh have declined to comment on the reports.

Meese's Actions Questioned

In another development related to the investigation, the chairman of the House
Judiciary Committee, Peter W. Rodino Jr. of New Jersey, made public a strongly
worded seven-page letter today that questions the actions of Attorney General
Edwin Meese 3d in the Iran arms deal.

The letter, addressed to Mr. Meese, asked for all documents related to the
department's handling of the investigation. It also asked Mr. Meese to answer
more than 40 specific questions about his knowledge of the arms sale to Iran and
the subsequent diversion of millions of dollars in profits to Nicaraguan rebel
groups.

In an interview, a Federal appeals court judge who is a member of the selection
panel, George E. MacKinnon of Washington, said the Iran arms investigation was
the most important case referred to the three-judge panel since it was created
under the 1978 Ethics in Government Act.

''None of them have even approached the magnitude and complexity of this case,
and it's getting more complex,'' he said, explaining why the panel would not
rush to choose the special prosecutor, known formally as an independent counsel.


Selection Several Days Away

Government officials said the panel, which has already reviewed more than 40
candidates, would probably not make a final selection for several days, perhaps
a week or longer, because of the time needed for the F.B.I. to conduct its
background checks.

Judge MacKinnon, who serves on the United States Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit, would not comment when asked which lawyers were
being considered for the post. He said the list of candidates was ''changing day
to day.''

Officials said the panel was insistent that the prosecutor receive a top-secret
security clearance, which normally requires a three-week background check by the
F.B.I. The judges are said to have asked Mr. Webster to expedite the process.

The panel, officials said, is seriously considering a request by Senate
Democrats that the special prosecutor be provided with a mandate to study all
allegations of illegal support to Nicaraguan rebel groups, not just those
charges tied to the Iran arms deal.

Democrats Issue Petition

In a petition to the panel this week, Democrats on the Senate Judiciary
Committee asked that the prosecutor be granted sweeping powers.

According to Congressional aides, the senators want the independent counsel to
study charges that private citizens who had no ties to the Iran arms deal
illegally provided military gear to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras.

In his letter to Mr. Meese, Representative Rodino said he was ''concerned''
about the role of Mr. Meese and the Justice Department in the Iran arms inquiry.

Mr. Rodino raised several questions about the Attorney General's public
statements on the case, including his assertion last month that the President,
the Vice President and the Director of Central Intelligence had no advance
knowledge of the diversion of money to the rebels.

''How could you reach such conclusions regarding any of these individuals prior
to the completion of the invetigation which you stated you were still
conducting?'' Mr. Rodino wrote. ''Why did you publicly comment on the substance
of an ongoing investigation?''

The lawmaker asked several other questions about Mr. Meese's own knowledge of
the weapons sale and the subsequent diversion of the profits.

Reply 'in Due Course'

Terry Eastland, the Attorney General's chief spokesman, said the department had
not seen the letter and would have no immediate comment. ''We will answer it in
due course and in the appropriate fashion,'' he said.

Government officials knowledgeable about the selection of the independent
counsel said the three-judge panel had considered an array of candidates this
week, including some lawyers who have previously served as special prosecutors
under the 1978 law.

Two sources close to Mr. Tyler, a former Federal judge in Manhattan, said he was
approached for the post earlier this week but turned it down.

A Federal law-enforcement official said it was hoped that Mr. Tyler might still
be persuaded to become the prosecutor. Sources close to Mr. Tyler said he was
interested in the post but felt that it would conflict with his responsibilities
to his law firm.

Mr. Tyler, 64 years old, has not returned repeated phone calls this week.

A Negotiator at Paris Talks

Reached by telephone on Wednesday night, Mr. Walsh refused to comment when asked
if he had been approached for the post. Government officials said Mr. Walsh's
age - he is 74 - might prevent his appointment, but others lawyers described him
as energetic and still very active in legal affairs.

Mr. Walsh, who also once served as a Federal judge in New York, was an American
negotiator at the Vietnam peace talks in Paris in the late 1960's.

Government officials said Mr. Walsh might be a more controversial candidate than
Mr. Tyler, however. During the Nixon Administration, Mr. Walsh served as
chairman of an American Bar Association's committee on the judiciary, which
twice endorsed Clement F. Haynsworth's nomination for the Supreme Court.

Mr. Haynsworth was rejected by the Senate, and Mr. Walsh's role on the bar
association panel generated deep disenchantment among many fellow lawyers.

Goal: 'Complete Objectivity'

An official knowledgeable about the selection process said the panel was
searching for a nationally known lawyer of such ''complete objectivity that the
public, the Department of Justice and the people being investigated will
immediately recognize that they have someone making decisions who is completely
objective.''

The official said he understood that more than 40 candidates had either applied
for the job or been referred to the panel. The panel, he said, would probably
not consider the lawyers who had applied for the job, even though some of them
are ''prominent.''

He said the judges were believed to be primarily interested in former
prosecutors, although they would also consider retired judges. The hope, the
official said, is that the independent counsel will have ''substantial
prosecutorial experience, although judges, ex-judges, might fulfill the same
qualification: that they be able to recognize a criminal case when they see
it.''

Several other lawyers have been mentioned in legal circles as candidates for the
post. Among them are Griffin B. Bell of Atlanta, Attorney General under
President Carter; Lloyd N. Cutler of Washington, Mr. Carter's former counsel,
and Warren M. Christopher, former Deputy Secretary of State.

Justice Department officials said they thought it unlikely that the panel would
choose Judge Herbert J. Stern of Federal District Court in Newark, although his
name has repeatedly emerged in the selection process.

Appointment of Judge Stern, they noted, would probably violate a requirement of
the 1978 law that bars selection of a lawyer who has ''recently'' held
Government office. Judge Stern is leaving the bench this year.

The other members of the selection panel are Judge Walter R. Mansfield of the
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York, and Lewis R. Morgan of the
Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, in Atlanta.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 13, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS;
AIDE TO BUSH SAYS NEITHER KNEW OF FRIEND'S LINK TO CONTRA ARMS

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1149 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 12


Vice President Bush's national security adviser, Donald P. Gregg, said today
that neither he nor Mr. Bush knew until August that Mr. Gregg's protege, a
former employee of the Central Intelligence Agency, was deeply involved in
''private'' arms shipments to the rebels in Nicaragua.

Mr. Gregg's friendship with the protege, Felix Rodriguez, which dates to 1970,
and his own long service in the C.I.A. have fostered wide speculation that he,
and possibly Mr. Bush, were among the Reagan Administration's links to a
clandestine arms-supply network.

But Mr. Gregg insisted today, in the only interview he has given since the
existence of the arms-supply network became known, that neither he nor Mr. Bush
had any links with the network beyond knowing Mr. Rodriguez and that they had
known nothing of the diversion to the rebels of some profits from arms sales to
Iran.

Ends Weeks of Silence

The Vice-Presidential aide's agreement to an interview, after weeks of refusing
to answer press queries, had the approval of senior members of Mr. Bush's staff.
It indicated that the Vice President felt compelled to take new steps to lessen
the political damage caused by repeated suggestions that he and Mr. Gregg were
hiding something.

In the interview, Mr. Gregg acknowledged that he introduced Mr. Rodriguez to Mr.
Bush and to senior State and Defense Department officials in January 1985. The
officials obtained a job for Mr. Rodriguez, who used the alias Max Gomez, with
the air force of El Salvador, Mr. Gregg said, and Mr. Rodriguez advised the
Salvadorans on anti-guerrilla tactics.

Mr. Gregg said that in addition to Mr. Bush, he introduced Mr. Rodriguez at that
time to Thomas R. Pickering, then the United States Ambassador in El Salvador;
Langhorne A. Motley, then the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs, and Nestor D. Sanchez, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Inter-American Affairs. In May, Mr. Gregg said, Mr. Rodriguez met with Mr. Bush
and Edwin G. Corr, the Ambassador to El Salvador, in the Vice President's
office.

Several American officials have said Mr. Corr closely monitored the supply
network's operations from his office in San Salvador, but he has denied that he
''supervised'' the flights.

In August, Mr. Gregg declared, he received a telephone call from Mr. Rodriguez -
one in a long series - in which Mr. Rodriguez expressed concern about the
continuity of supplies to the contras, as the Nicaraguan rebels are known. Mr.
Gregg said that shortly afterward he held a meeting in his office in the
Executive Office Building between Mr. Rodriguez and C.I.A. officials.

According to Mr. Gregg, Mr. Rodriguez expressed concern that the private network
might be disbanded before official American military aid, newly authorized by
Congress, could begin to be delivered.

Asked whether he inquired of Mr. Rodriguez, a Cuban-American veteran of the Bay
of Pigs invasion, how long he had been involved in the arms shipments, exactly
what he did and whom he reported to, Mr. Gregg replied: ''No, I did not. I saw
my role as putting him together with the knowledgable people, and I did nothing
at all beyond that.''

Called Dedicated Anti-Communist

''I find it quite understandable that he should have become involved,'' Mr.
Gregg said. ''He was down there, he's a dedicated anti-Communist, and a lot of
this arms-supply stuff was going on. He knew some of the people, I'm sure. I
don't feel he pulled the wool over my eyes. We still talk a lot; we're still
fast friends.''

Mr. Rodriguez's activities were first disclosed after one of the supply
network's cargo planes was shot down over Nicaragua on Oct. 5, about two months
after the meeting in Mr. Gregg's office.

American crewmen said Mr. Rodriguez, a burly 45-year-old, had helped get them
permission to operate flights from the Ilopango military air base near El
Salvador's capital, had obtained false identity cards for them from the
Salvadoran Air Force and had done other favors for them.

Shortly thereafter, it was disclosed that Mr. Gregg had interceded for Mr.
Rodriguez and had introduced him to Mr. Bush, who met with him three times in
all, twice in his Washington office and once at a rally in Miami.

The Vice President publicly described the Cuban-American as a ''patriot.'' The
revelations raised questions about the possibility that Mr. Bush, a former
Director of Central Intelligence, had been involved in the diversion of funds
from the Iran arms sales.

Mr. Bush's chances for the 1988 Republican Presidential nomination may have been
damaged as a result.

Involvement Is Denied

In an hour-long conversation, Mr. Gregg categorically denied that he or Mr. Bush
had had ''any involvement whatsoever'' in raising funds for the contras, in the
diversion of arms sale revenues, or in the operations of the clandestine supply
network in Central America.

Mr. Gregg worked for the C.I.A. from 1951 to 1979, when he joined the National
Security Council staff. He retained his links to the agency until August 1982,
when he went to work for Mr. Bush. He said he had made it ''an informal rule not
to reach back to my agency career while working for the Vice President'' - a
rule he said he had broken only once, in his continuing relationship with Mr.
Rodriguez.

''Felix knows more about low-intensity insurgency than almost anyone else
alive,'' he said.

Mr. Gregg displayed an autographed color photograph of Mr. Rodriguez standing
next to a small helicopter in El Salvador. He said the two men talked often on
the telephone and sometimes exchanged letters. Mr. Rodriguez, he said, has left
Central America and is now recovering from a serious hernia operation somewhere
in southern Florida.

''I have a Felix file right there in my desk,'' Mr. Gregg added, ''and every bit
of paper in it relates exclusively to El Salvador.''

Worked for C.I.A. in Vietnam

Between 1970 and 1972, Mr. Gregg headed C.I.A. operations in the area of South
Vietnam around Saigon, which was known as III Corps. In those years, he said,
Mr. Rodriguez developed under his direction a system using low-flying
helicopters, warplanes and small airborne squads for destroying entrenched
Vietcong positions.

At that time, Mr. Gregg continued, his boss was the C.I.A. station chief in
Saigon, Theodore G. Shackley. Now retired from the agency, Mr. Shackley played a
key early role in setting up arms transfers to Iran, but Mr. Gregg said he had
not maintained close contact with Mr. Shackley, seeing him only occasionally at
weddings and other such events, and had no knowledge of Mr. Shackley's links to
the Iranians.

Mr. Gregg also denied knowing several key figures in the arms-supply network -
Rafael Quintero and Luis Posada Carriles, two other Bay of Pigs veterans who
have worked for the C.I.A., and retired Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord, one of the
organizers of the network.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Donald P. Gregg (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 13, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

South Africa Blinds Itself

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 403 words


The Pretoria regime's Christmas gift to itself is a press purged of unwelcome
news. Its 24-page censorship proclamation goes further than requiring clearance
for stories dealing with security or ''subversive'' statements. Also forbidden
is any indication, such as blank spaces, showing busy scissors at work. That may
please the Government and its supporters. But for everybody else, no news is
terrible news. It is the willful self-blinding of a country stumbling on a
precipice.

Certainly censorship won't stifle rebellion by a black majority clamoring for
rudimentary rights. Instead it will give wings to rumor and credibility to
exaggeration, and feed suspicions that Pretoria is hiding brutal use of
emergency-rule nightsticks. The regime insists the new rules are not intended to
limit debate, except when the debate concerns the national emergency. How on
earth is that emergency to be sensibly discussed by muffling what was once the
freest press in Africa?

The demise of that tradition was somberly recorded with perhaps excessive
pessimism by The Johannesburg Star: ''This is just possibly the last issue of
any relatively free newspaper you will read in South Africa.'' The Sowetan, a
daily published by blacks in Johannesburg, called the regulations the final nail
in the coffin of press freedom. ''Well, that's it,'' wrote The Pretoria News.
''Today South Africa joins such sophist autocracies as Zambia, Mozambique,
Tanzania, Paraguay, China and its arch-foe, Soviet Russia.''

Abroad, censorship won't brighten headlines about South Africa or shrink the
distance from Pretoria and the Western democracies among which it yearns to be
counted. A year ago, remember, Pretoria curbed television coverage of racial
conflict, on the theory just reiterated by the chief censor - that media
coverage ''lost'' the Vietnam War. But even without those pictures, Congress
overrode a Presidential veto, approving sanctions against South Africa.

This time, censorship has internal purposes. It is intended to end
black-organized boycotts and hide from view such embarrassments as the
anti-conscription campaign by South Africa's white youth. It is meant to convey
the impression of a determined leadership stamping out internal ''subversion,''
and moving against unruly neighbors.

Instead of resolute, however, the Pretoria rulers appear only intense. Nothing
will better become this innovation than its end.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 13, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK;
How Many Larry Davises?

BYLINE: By Don Wycliff

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 461 words


Larry Davis allegedly shot six police officers during a gun battle last month.
Shavod Jones shot a police officer in Central Park last summer and left him
paralyzed. James Ramseur, now serving time for rape, was one of Bernhard Goetz's
victims in the subway shootings two years ago.

All three, and millions of others less notorious, are among the legion of young
black men who terrify urban neighborhoods, cause despair to their loved ones and
behave as their own worst enemies. If few become as notorious as Larry Davis,
it's probably because so many die first. Homicide, often at the hands of another
young black, is the leading cause of death for black men between 15 and 24.

The need to do something about such young men is a concern now because so little
was done for them when they were children. Indeed, their behavior vividly
recalls Daniel Patrick Moynihan's warning in 1965:

''A community that allows a large number of young men to grow up in broken
families, dominated by women, never acquiring any stable relationship to male
authority, never acquiring any set of rational expectations about the future -
that community asks for and gets chaos. Crime, violence, unrest, disorder -most
particularly the furious, unrestrained lashing out at the whole social structure
- that is not only to be expected; it is very near to inevitable. And it is
richly deserved.''

Mr. Moynihan was speaking to all America, not just the black community, for
blacks have never set the terms for their participation in this society. But
what to do now? The best responses are ones the nation already has rejected or
is in the process of rejecting for reasons that have nothing to do with the
plight of young black males.

Compulsory military service used to pluck some of these young men from their
accustomed surroundings, carry them off to strange new places and force them to
adjust and grow up. It provided what many young black men never experience:
exhaustive physical training, stern discipline, male authority figures, a sense
of camaraderie and group purpose, rewards for jobs well done. Maybe most
important, the military sent the message that a young man was needed by American
society.

The Job Corps attempted to replicate the military's success in a less intensive
way, and for thousands it was a success. It still is, though on a vastly reduced
scale because of Federal budget limitations.

The draft was eliminated under anti-Vietnam War pressure. The Job Corps could
eventually die off entirely for lack of Federal money. No one in Washington is
rushing forward with alternatives that would open new avenues to maturation and
responsible adulthood for young urban black males.

How many Larry Davises, Shavod Joneses and James Ramseurs will it take?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 13, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Col. Richard S. Stark, An Actor and Novelist

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 225 words


Col. Richard Salisbury Stark, U.S.M.C.R., retired, who also had a long career in
films, radio and on television, died of a heart attack yesterday at his home in
Sotogrande, Spain. He was 75 years old and also maintained a residence in
Alexandria, Va.

Colonel Stark was an officer in the Marine Corps Reserve for 30 years. He was on
active duty in the Pacific during World War II and returned to active duty in
1966 to serve in Vietnam and later as officer in charge of the New York
Information Office for the Marine Corps until his retirement in 1973.

As Dick Stark, he performed as a child actor from 1916 to 1921, appearing in
such films as ''The Wedding March,'' ''Hearts of Humanity'' and ''Out of the
Wreck.'' He appeared on the stage in Max Reinhardt's production of ''A Midsummer
Night's Dream'' and was active in radio from 1935 to 1966. He also wrote a
number of novels, some of which were later made into films.

He was born in Grand Rapids, Mich., and was a graduate of Cornell University in
1934. He later earned an architectural degree at Pratt Institute in 1957.

He is survived by his wife, the former Jane Troxell; a son from an earlier
marriage, Morgan Babcock Stark, of Manhattan; a stepson, Jay Treadwell, of Chevy
Chase, Md., and four grandchildren.

A memorial service will be held in Washington, at a time to be scheduled.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUBURBS ABSORB MORE IMMIGRANTS, MOSTLY THE AFFLUENT AND EDUCATED

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1424 words

DATELINE: UNIVERSAL CITY, Tex.


Many new immigrants are bypassing congested central cities and settling in
affluent suburban neighborhoods, skipping what historically has been the first
and most difficult step of becoming assimilated into American life, recent
studies show.

Many of these legal immigrants are members of ethnic or racial minorities -
Asian, black and Hispanic - who are well-educated and have above-average
incomes.

Great numbers of recent immigrants arrive speaking fluent English and holding
advanced degrees in the professions and business. Negotiating Hurdles in U.S.
Indeed, Leon F. Bouvier and Robert W. Gardner, in a new study for the Population
Reference Bureau in Washington, wrote that because of current laws and
regulations ''generally only the better educated and better trained can hope to
pay for and negotiate the hurdles that lie in the path of someone wishing to
immigrate legally to the United States.''

According to population surveys conducted by the Census Bureau from 1975 to
1985, almost half the 4.7 million Asian, Hispanic and non-Hispanic black people
who moved to the United States from abroad in that 10-year period settled in
suburban and non-metropolitan areas rather than in the central cities.

Frequently, as in the case of Stephen and Angela Yang here, they do not live in
compounds among their own, as earlier immigrant minority groups did, but spread
out into communities alongside white Americans.

Degree in Business Law

The Yangs are Taiwanese who live with their two young sons in this suburb of San
Antonio.

Mr. Yang, who is 43 years old, holds a degree in international business law from
Chinese Cultural University in Taiwan. His wife, 33, holds a degree in art from
Christian College in Taiwan.

The couple arrived here only three years ago and began selling Oriental
furniture and jewelry on a commercial strip shared by insurance agencies and
fast-food stores.

They settled in easily with the business community and now have three prospering
stores in the area.

The spreading of minority immigrants through the population is considered
important in part because Census Bureau estimates show that if American
fertility rates remain at a low of 1.8 births per woman, immigration will
account for all the nation's population growth within 45 years.

''With legal immigration remaining at 500,000 annually,'' Mr. Bouvier and Mr.
Gardner noted, ''just under 60 percent of the population in the year 2080 would
be non-Hispanic whites, down from 80 percent in 1980.''

Fewer Europeans Arriving

In contrast to the past, when most of those who moved to the United States were
from northern Europe, the 570,000 legal immigrants in 1985 were 11 percent
European, 46 percent Asian, 37 percent Latin American, 2 percent Canadian and 3
percent African.

In addition, the number of illegal entries into this country has been rising. No
one knows how many there are, but the Immigration and Naturalization Service
made an ''educated guess'' that 500,000 entered this year alone. Congress passed
a law this year intended to slow illegal entry by making it a crime to hire
aliens without proper credentials. But there is controversy as to how much
success the system will have.

Mr. Bouvier and Mr. Gardner said in their study for the Population Reference
Bureau, a private research agency, that pressures for immigration of
dark-skinned peoples, especially from depressed Latin countries, were likely to
grow in the future.

Acceptance Across Country

For the most part, the legal immigrants settling in affluent areas report little
opposition from native whites.

There have been frequent conflicts between native Americans and Asian and Latin
refugees admitted to the United States as a result of military and political
upheavals since the Vietnam War; for example, Vietnamese and Texans have fought
over Gulf Coast fishing waters.

But the refugees made up only a small portion of the minority people admitted -
68,000 out of 570,000 in 1985, for example. And the refugees, in contrast to
those admitted under the regular immigration laws, were mostly poor and
uneducated. Nevertheless, many of these, too, have since quickly adapted to the
American culture and are now prospering.

At the same time, according to recent census surveys, it is mostly American-born
members of minorities - poor black and Hispanic people - who remain
unassimilated in growing urban concentrations of unemployment, crime and
inferior housing as the legal immigrants settle immediately in areas where
employment opportunities are greatest and incomes are highest.

The way foreign immigrants with dark skin have spread out through the population
lends support to the contention of some social scientists that the continued
isolation of large numbers of the black and Hispanic poor in the central cities
is more a result of class than of race. In urban centers virtually all the
blacks, and many of the Hispanic people, are native to this country.

''Over the past decade, census data indicate that the concentration of poor
blacks and Hispanics in poverty areas rose by some 40 percent,'' said Richard P.
Nathan, professor of public and international affairs at Princeton University,
who conducted a study of population and incomes in the nation's 100 largest
cities.

''As avenues of opportunity have opened up for upwardly mobile and educated
members of racial minority groups to move to suburbs and better-off urban
neighborhoods, the people left behind in the ghetto, the hidden city, are more
isolated,'' he said.

By contrast, many of the immigrants from minority groups fit easily into the
larger, more prosperous society. The figures show a large portion of
non-Hispanic black immigrants, though comparatively small in numbers, settling
in the suburbs and earning incomes above the average for all Americans.

Trend in South and West

So far, a greater proportion of the new immigrants in the South and West are
settling in the suburbs than are those in the Northeast and Middle West,
according to the census estimates obtained and analyzed by Prof. John D.
Kasarda, chairman of the sociology department at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill.

As the immigration patterns have changed, California has replaced New York City
as the nation's chief ''melting pot.'' In California, the Asian and Hispanic
immigrants tend to live in various kinds of communities, in and out of the
cities. In the East and Middle West, most of the immigration goes to New York
City, Chicago and other large cities that have long-established ethnic enclaves.

But, even in these places, integration of suburbs by immigrants is substantial.
In the Northeast, about 292,000 immigrants from ethnic or racial minorities
settled in suburban and nonmetropolitan areas, while 676,000 settled in the
cities. In the Middle West the ratio was 174,000 outside the cities to 261,000
within the cities.

In the South, which includes Texas and Florida, with their large numbers of
Hispanic Americans, 727,000 members of ethnic or racial minorities settled
outside the cities to 602,000 within. In the West the ratio was 985,000 outside
to 949,000 within.

Yang Family Settles In

Here in San Antonio, with a metropolitan area of more than a million people,
about half the population is Hispanic; the Yangs are among about 15,000 Asians.

There are also large communities of military people, both active and retired,
because several bases are situated there. Mr. Yang, seated in his suburban
furniture store, said it was the military population that attracted him to San
Antonio.

''I like them - they say 'yes, sir' and 'no, sir,' to me,'' he said with a
little laugh and the emphasis on ''me.''

Making his way through ornate and lacquered furniture from several countries,
Mr. Yang retrieved a picture made on the day he opened the store. It showed his
parents, brothers, sisters and their children who came from various parts of the
United States, a family that started in China and moved in stages to this
country.

Most legal immigrants come under that provision of the law that permits
naturalized citizens to bring in members of their family, and that is one reason
why Asians, with strong family ties, are predominant among foreigners arriving
in this country.

But with relatively few in the San Antonio area, they are little noticed except
once a year when the city sponsors an Asian festival.

''But we don't even have a Chinatown - we just live all over,'' Mr. Yang said,
his arm sweeping in the vast metropolitan area.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of percent of the 2,864,406 people who legally immigrated from 1981
to 1985 and where they come from (Immigration and Naturalization Service); Photo
of Angela and Stephen Yang showing jewelry to Susie Cavanzos at their store in
Universal City, Tex. (NYT/Craig Stafford) (Page 44)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS;
WALSH FORMER U.S. JUDGE, LEADS CANDIDATES FOR SPECIAL PROSECUTOR

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1552 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 13


A former Federal judge in New York who once served as president of the American
Bar Association has emerged as the leading candidate to become the special
prosecutor in the Iran arms investigation, according to people knowledgeable
with the search.

They said that a three-judge panel would probably appoint the former A.B.A.
president, Lawrence E. Walsh, to the job as long as there is no problem with
various background checks. They stressed that the appointment could still fall
through and that it might not be final for several days.

One Government official said he understood that Mr. Walsh had been tentatively
offered the job and had tentatively accepted. Reached by phone at his home in
Oklahoma City, Mr. Walsh would not comment on the reports. ''I'd like to help
you, but I can't,'' he said.

Reagan May Ask Aides to Talk

The development came as aides said that President Reagan is considering making a
direct and public appeal next week to Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter and Lieut.
Col. Oliver L. North to divulge details of their involvement in the Iran arms
operation.

The move by Mr. Reagan has been discussed with senior aides, but no decision has
yet been made. It would be the most recent step in a series of actions designed
to persuade the nation that the White House was not seeking to cover up the
potential scandal and that the President was committed to disclosing all the
details.

There were these other developments today:

* Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader in the outgoing Senate, said
the Iran-Nicaragua affair was ''just plain stupid.'' He urged Mr. Reagan to call
a summit meeting of the European allies and ''lay all the cards on the table.''
[Page 21.]

* The Justice Department, which initially drew praise for its handling of the
investigation, is coming under scrutiny by legislators and others who ask
whether it should now share blame for the situation. [Page 20.] All the
developments come amid growing discontent and frustration within Congress about
the level of Administration cooperation in unravelling the details of the arms
sale to Iran and the diversion of funds to Nicaraguan rebels. Public-opinion
polls show that many Americans do not believe Mr. Reagan when he says he had no
knowledge of the diversion of funds until he was informed at the end of November
by the Attorney General.

One of Many Options

The possibility of a public appeal to Admiral Poindexter and Colonel North is
one of several options that have been discussed by the President with his aides,
but no decision has been made. They would be part of an effort to convince the
nation that the White House is not seeking to cover up.

''Everybody is still struggling to find a thing to do,'' an official said.

Although the President has acknowledged that he cannot compel them to give up
their rights, the feeling among White House aides is that he can use leverage as
the Commander in Chief.

The President has said that he favors full disclosure of the circumstances under
which arms were sold to Iran and the proceeds diverted to Nicaraguan rebels.

''There is profound frustration at the appearance that we are not cooperating,''
a White House official said. ''We are trying to deal with that.''

Such discussion over how to deal with the refusal of Admiral Poindester and
Colonel North to testify reinforced the White House's assertion that they are
the only ones identified thus far with the secret diversion of funds to the
Nicaraguan rebels.

Meanwhile, advisers of the President said he told the White House chief of
staff, Donald T. Regan, last week that he wanted him to remain. There had been
calls from Republicans and from the President's friends that Mr. Regan resign.

A White House official said ''a number of options are being weighed designed to
accelerate the process of making the facts public.''

The key option, he said, is an appeal by the President to Admiral Poindexter and
to Colonel North to waive their Fifth Amendment protection and to divulge what
they they know about the Iran-Nicaragua matter.

Another official said that internal debate within the White House centered on
the fact that the two men were military officers on active duty under Mr. Reagan
as the Commander in Chief. An official said that while there was debate over how
to frame the appeal, a consensus seemed to be emerging that the military
officers should tell what they know ''in the interests of the public good.''

But the President apparently does not have legal authority to order an officer
to abandon his Fifth Amendment privilege.

Both the military and civilians are protected by the Fifth Amendment, and the
Uniform Code of Military Justice recognizes this protection.

The Supreme Court has said that governments may not dismiss or otherwise
penalize their employees for exercising their Fifth Amendment rights.

Eugene R. Fidell, a Washington lawyer expert in military law, said it would be
illegal for the President or a superior officer to order an officer to abandon
those rights.

''The President could try to apply pressure on them, but they would be
completely within their rights and not subject to any penalty for declining to
comply,'' he said.

Choices for the President

The President could force an officer to testify, Mr. Fidell said, by granting
limited immunity from prosecution on the basis of his testimony or getting a
court to do so. But such a move may raise concerns about interfering with the
jurisdiction of the special prosecutor who is being selected.

Another option would be for the President to remove all threat of prosecution by
granting Colonel North, for example, a full pardon in advance.

Meanwhile, Representative David E. Bonior, a Michigan Democrat who is the chief
deputy whip in the new House, said that the Iran-Nicaragua affair threatened to
emerge as a scandal ''deeper and wider'' than Watergate, and could be ended only
by stopping aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras.

''The contra war is a cancer on this Presidency,'' Mr. Bonior said in the
Democrats' weekly radio address. ''Watergate was horrible, but Mr. President,
this scandal has deeper and wider ramifications for it touches on the power to
declare war - the most awesome decision any leader or nation can make.''

Mr. Bonior noted that Mr. Reagan had acknolwedged last week that ''mistakes were
made'' and that he had pledged to ''set things right.'' But, the legislator
added, ''more is required.''

''I am asking you to put an end to the contra war,'' Mr. Bonior said.

Mr. Reagan, in his own weekly radio broadcast, added nothing further on the
Iran-Nicaragua affair.

Role of Prosecutor

Mr. Walsh, 74 years old, a Republican, has served as a senior Justice Department
official, a Federal judge in Manhattan and president of the Bar Association, the
nation's largest lawyers organization. From 1961 to 1981, he was a partner in
the New York law firm of Davis, Polk & Wardwell.

If chosen as the special prosecutor -the formal title is independent counsel -
Mr. Walsh would be assigned to investigate what has become the worst crisis of
the Reagan Presidency.

He would be asked to determine whether Federal law was violated by Reagan
Administration officials and others who were involved in the sale of weapons to
Iran and the subsequent diversion of millions of dollars in profits to groups of
Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras.

Mr. Walsh would be the seventh independent counsel appointed under the 1978
Ethics in Government Act, which was designed to remove the Justice Department
from investigating senior government officials accused of crimes. The statute
resulted from the Watergate scandals.

Several other lawyers had been identified in legal circles as candidates for the
post, including Harold R. Tyler Jr., a prominent New York lawyer who also served
as a Federal judge.

It was unclear who might serve in the post if Mr. Walsh is not appointed by the
three-member panel, which is made up of senior Federal judges from New York,
Washington and Atlanta. Two of the judges were reached by telephone but refused
to comment.

Calls Case Most Important

In an interview last week, a Federal appeals court judge who is a member of the
panel, George E. MacKinnon of Washington, said the Iran arms investiation was
the most important case referred to the three-judge panel since it was created.

''None of them have even approached the magnitude and complexity of this case,''
he said, ''and it's getting more complex.''

Over his career, Mr. Walsh has held more than a dozen government jobs and has
long ties to New York State. When he was 26, he was a deputy assistant to Thomas
E. Dewey, then the Manhattan District Attorney. He followed Mr. Dewey to Albany
and was counsel to the Government in 1950 and 1951.

In 1954, he was appointed to the Federal bench and oversaw several important
cases, including those involving claims growing out of the sinking of the Andrea
Doria and the reorganization of the Hudson and Manhattan Railroad Company. Four
years later, President Eisenhower appointed Mr. Walsh as Deputy Attorney
General.

In the late 1960's, he served as deputy chief of the United States delegation to
the Vietnam peace talks in Paris. Mr. Walsh was president of the A.B.A. in 1975
and 1976.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Reagan admiring a teddy bear given to him by members
of the Downtown Athletic Club (NYT/Jose R. Lopez) (Page 22)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FRIENDS AND FOES OF CONTRAS RALLY AT FLORIDA BASE

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: MARY ESTHER, Fla., Dec. 13


With signs, slogans and flags, two groups came together in opposition here today
at the gate of Hurlburt Field.

The Air Force base has been reported to be the site where guerrillas fighting
the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua are being trained by the United States
armed forces.

On one side of a highway in front of the base were about 200 people organized by
Pledge of Resistance, a two-year-old group that claims 80,000 members. The group
has pledged a campaign of civil disobedience and demonstrations against American
intervention in Central America.

Eleven of them crossed the base property line at the gate and were detained by
the military police. Stephen Slade, national director of Pledge of Resistance,
said this form of protest may become more common.

A Group on the Other Side

Across the highway were another 200 people - members of the Air Commando
Association, families of retired soldiers and local citizens.

''Down here, we support the program,'' said Harry C. Aderholt, a retired Air
Force brigadier general who is president of the Air Commandos. The group,
organized in the 1960's and headquartered in the Fort Walton Beach area here in
the Florida panhandle, says it has almost 2,000 active or retired Special Forces
members who oppose Communism by sending humanitarian aid to peasants in
Guatemala and El Salvador.

General Aderholt said emphatically that his group sent no aid to the Nicaraguan
rebels, but added, ''I personally am for covert aid, overt aid, or anything else
which will keep the Communists out of Central America.''

''These people,'' he said, jerking his head toward the Pledge of Resistance
demonstrators, ''are professional protesters.''

The Washington Post reported two weeks ago that a small contra force was in the
midst of a six-week training program at Hurlburt.

The base command has declined to comment on the report, referring questions to
the State Department. A State Department spokesman, Bruce Ammerman, said today
that ''we have said from the beginning, since Congress voted the $100 million
for assistance to the resistance, that we are not going to discuss the
operational aspects.'' Over the summer Congress approved $100 million in aid to
the contras, including $70 million in military assistance.

This area, the site of many military bases, has a history as a staging ground.
Five of the streets on Hurlburt Field are named for men killed in the abortive
attempt in 1980 to rescue the hostages at the United States Embassy in Teheran.
The team that undertook an unsuccessful raid in 1970 at Son Tay Prison in North
Vietnam were also trained here.

''Whatever is going on at this base or at Eglin Air Force Base, it is part of
our Government policy and we should support it,'' said Marge Mann, wife of an
Air Force colonel who has retired here. She carried a sign that said, ''Contra
Aid Protesters, Go Home!''

Among their founding members, the Air Commandos count Richard V. Secord, a
retired Air Force major general who reportedly had a role in the unfolding
arrangements by which arms were sold to Iran and some of the proceeds
transferred to the contras.

An Appeal to Drivers

The two groups here displayed a polarized but peaceful view of each other.
''Please keep your windows rolled up - they're passing out Communist
propaganda,'' a member of the Air Commandos warned drivers as a Pledge of
Resistance member sought to pass out leaflets on the highway.

But there were military veterans among the ranks of Pledge of Resistance, too,
and their signs carried such messages as ''Rambo Tactics Are Not the Answer''
and ''Stop Reagan's War in Central America.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of pro-contra demonstrators across the street from anti-contra
demonstrators outside Hurlburt Field (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRETORIA'S NEW LINE;
Rules Adopted in Name of Democracy Appear Only to Erode It Even More

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 26, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1147 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG, Dec. 13


When South Africa's white rulers sought Friday to justify their newest and most
draconian tightening of emergency rule, they did so in a manner that seemed to
some critics to defeat the very goals they sought to pursue.

By casting the outlawed

African National Congress as the direct cause of a form of rule that is stifling
South Africa's limited democracy, the authorities tacitly promoted the insurgent
movement to the status of apartheid's principal antagonist. And that seemed to
defeat the Government's prime goal: the emasculation of the congress.

The status barely tallies with the record of a movement whose principal gain
seems to have been to capitalize on a nation's agony by presenting itself as the
sole source of hope and redemption. The message, by many accounts, has been well
received in the nation's segregated black townships, if only because 38 years of
Afrikaner rule have eroded the alternatives.

It is perhaps indicative of black desperation that the military campaign of the
African National Congress - low-key, sporadic and hardly a threat in any
conventional sense - is seen by its supporters as heroic.

At the same time, the proclamation of the new measures - designed in part as a
psychological counterblow to black protest - seemed a tacit acknowledgement that
earlier tough emergency measures in force since June 12 had failed to win black
quiescence.

A Purported Policy Statement

The centerpiece of the Government's case, as presented to reporters, is a
slender, blue-bound document entitled ''A.N.C. Planning 1987,'' said to be a
congress policy statement obtained by Pretoria's intelligence services. So far,
only the authorities have attested to its authenticity.

The document, said to represent official African National Congress strategy,
purports to prove that the organization, based in Lusaka, Zambia, seeks to
combine military activity with a psychological war designed ''to reinforce the
confidence of our people in the ability to emerge victorious'' and a political
war designed to mobilize mass resistance to apartheid through such organizations
as the United Democratic Front.

According to the document, the congress seeks to promote the idea of ''people
power,'' to divide and enervate the white minority and to harness black township
protest as a quasi-military force led by congress representatives to press a
''people's war.''

But the document says the United Democratic Front - the country's biggest
nonparliamentary opposition movement, which subscribes to the same political
charter as the African National Congress - has failed to fulfill the role
ascribed to it by the congress as a force of political mobilization. It dwells,
too, on a military strategy that has ''not come anywhere near the achievement of
the objectives we set ourselves.''

If that is the case, a reporter asked a Goverment minister, without receiving an
attributable answer, why all the fuss?

A Comparison With Vietnam

Militarily and politically, according to the the official line, South Africa is
not frightened of the congress but does not underestimate its ability to turn
domestic protest to its own goals, which encompass the end of apartheid and the
creation of a new social and economic order. That is said to explain the
crackdown.

According to Dave Steward, a principal Government propagandist, there is a
comparison between South African press reporting of the crisis in South Africa
and American press reporting of Vietnam.

Mr. Steward said on nationwide television the other day that the American press
contributed directly to the outcome in Vietnam. The inference is that the
Government does not intend to allow the same thing to happen here.

The regulations seem to dwell at length on a perceived role of the South African
press, in particular, in promoting the ''revolutionary onslaught.'' At a first
reading, it seems possible to report the mere fact that a boycott of, say,
white-owned stores is taking place. But it is unlawful to seek to gauge the
success of the boycott, or to report how people might be cajoled or intimidated
or enticed into supporting it.

The Government's reasoning seems to be that if news of a protest disappears,
then that protest will find no echo that might encourage others to take part, or
give heart to those who are already participating.

Crackdowns and Reforms

The regulations also expand the official definition of subversion, making it
unlawful to advocate such forms of protest as boycotts, which are regarded by
some as a peaceful way of pressing demands in a land where normal parliamentary
channels are not available to the majority of the people.

In a conflict in part dependent on who holds the psychological initiative, the
Government's view is that enforced public silence about protest will erode the
will of the protesters to proceed in the absence of visible and acclaimed
advances.

Mr. Steward indicated the other day that the Government would then be able to
proceed with its program of cautious racial change.

But the regulations also bar all but officially authorized reporting of actions
by the security forces. Those forces, including local black auxiliary police
forces in segregated black townships, may thus operate beyond public scrutiny,
presumably with greater freedom to pursue the raids that have led to 22,000
detentions since the newest state of emergency was declared on June 12.

Since September 1984, about 2,300 people, the vast majority of them black, have
died in protest and violence. More than ever, under the new restrictions, the
chronicling and interpretation of such slaughter will be ordered by the white
authorities.

Closing Nonrevolutionary Options

In the view of some of the Government's opponents, the very ascendancy of the
supposed ''revolutionary climate'' is rooted in the increasing restrictions on
nonrevolutionary alternatives. In the 27 months since the start of the crisis,
the avenues of black protest - public meetings, say, or black funeral rallies -
have been steadily closed or narrowed, while the white authorities have shown
themselves more and more embattled, a mood encouraged by foreign punishments
such as divestment of South African holdings and other economic sanctions.

After President P. W. Botha went on nationwide television Friday night to
justify the clampdown by reference to the purported African National Congress
threat of terror and murder, Colin Eglin, leader of the opposition in the
segregated, white chamber of Parliament, said reports of impending violence and
terror should be taken seriously.

Nonethless, he said, Mr. Botha's justification for the crackdown was
unconvincing.

''What was still missing,'' Mr. Eglin said, ''was any convincing statement that
he or his Government had any meaningful plan to bring about a political solution
to the problems of this country.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dave Steward (Reuters)

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECRET FILES OPENED TO PUBLIC

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 60, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 263 words


People who believe they might have been the subject of New York City Police
Department political surveillance during the 1960's can now apply for any secret
files kept under their names.

Under a settlement reached in Federal District Court in 1980 but not upheld
until earlier this year, the Police Department must release all information
collected by its Bureau of Special Services.

The files are believed to date from 1904 to Dec. 1, 1986. The files from 1955 to
date encompass about 1.2 million documents, photographs, films and tapes on
about 250,000 individuals and groups. No estimates are available on the amount
of pre-1955 material.

The files are expected to contain voluminous newspaper clippings, notes and
photographs about the activities of Vietnam War and civil-rights activists in
New York City. Material from current investigations or data that would pose a
danger to someone, such as an informer, would not be included in the files that
are released.

The settlement orders that up until Dec. 1, 1987, requests can be filed with the
Police Department in Room 152-A at 1 Police Plaza in Manhattan for records
dating back to 1960.

For records from 1955 to 1960, requests must be made by June 1, 1987. Requests
for records from 1904 to 1955, must be made to the city archivist under the
state Freedom of Information law, as must all record requests from 1955 to the
present filed after the deadlines.

Before the deadlines, an individual or organization can request only its own
file. Afterward, files will be made available to anyone who requests them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
Sweet Land of Mystery

BYLINE: By JAMES RESTON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 25, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


By now we know quite a lot about the effects of the Iranian scandal, but very
little attention has been paid to the deeper causes of these bizarre events.

This is not merely a question of whether the moolah from the mullahs in Iran
went to the contras in Nicaragua, or what was going on upstairs, downstairs and
backstairs in the White House, but a fundamental question about how we elect
Presidents, choose their assistants and decide on the ends and means of our
official public relations and foreign relations.

To begin with politics, since we are starting another national campaign, it is
now clear that we have a tendency to pick candidates who can wow the voters on
television rather than Presidents who can govern the country. Mr. Reagan is a
reminder that the qualities for these two jobs are not necessarily the same.

That is one of the deeper causes of our present troubles. A second cause is that
we choose their assistants in the Cabinet and the White House in a rather
absent-minded fashion, and confirm them in the Senate with almost equal
indifference.

Sometimes we put them in key jobs such as the National Security Council without
the senators' ever having a look at them, except on television, and then dispose
of them like Kleenex. We have had five national security advisers under
President Reagan in less than six years, the fourth of whom, Admiral Poindexter,
was pursuing democracy with guns abroad while mocking it with disinformation
policies at home.

A related question, asked by James Bryce in his classic book ''The American
Commonwealth'' almost a hundred years ago is: ''Why don't the best men go into
politics?'' The answer much of the time is that they're uninvited, underpaid and
bypassed in favor of political hacks, ideological zealots or Presidential
cronies.

Then there's the problem of not using to their full capacity in key jobs many of
the most experienced people who are available and who might give some continuity
to our policies from one administration to another.

This country has a professional foreign service that is equal if not superior to
any in the world, but now that it is most needed it is least used, particularly
by the present Administration, whose appointments to most of the major embassies
and the National Security Council have been, to put it mildly, a disgrace.

Every other major democracy, for example, chooses political cabinet members, as
we do, but they recognize that there are some guiding principles that endure
regardless of which party governs the executive.

Accordingly, they have in each major department a ''permanent under secretary''
who knows how to say, politely of course, ''Wait a minute.''

It's hard to imagine that if we had had such characters serving the President,
the Cabinet and the National Security Council that one of them wouldn't have
suggested that sending weapons to terrorists to stamp out terror and end the
Iran-Iraq war wasn't a particularly good idea.

So much for the machinery around here, which needs some new connecting rods. The
philosophy of our foreign policy is an even more difficult and troublesome
problem.

For the fertility of the human mind and body is changing the world faster than
we can change ourselves and our institutions. We are not clear in either
political party whether we are trying mainly to defend the nation or the
civilization of all the free nations and those who are ''yearning to be free.''

From Woodrow Wilson at Geneva, Franklin Roosevelt at Yalta and Harry Truman at
Potsdam, to John Kennedy at the Bay of Pigs, Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon in
Vietnam and Ronald Reagan at Reykjavik there has been fundamental confusion over
the methods and objectives of our policy - all confounded by the menace of
Moscow and party squabbles in Washington.

This is not the sort of thing that can be handled by Ron, Don and Pat, upstairs
in the White House, who think more about tomorrow's headlines and the next
election than about the next century.

The problem requires a basic reappraisal by the best minds in the land and by
both parties, which are not the same thing, about where we're going and what
sort of people can lead us in this sweet land of mystery.

It must begin now before the people start laughing at the wrong places and
tossing chairs from the balcony. This will be tough if Admiral Poindexter and
Colonel North, who are both still in uniform, won't talk and their Commander in
Chief won't ask. But as they say in the television recruiting ads, ''The
military is a good place to start.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEARNING ON THE JOB

BYLINE: BY A.M. ROSENTHAL; A.M. Rosenthal, associate editor of The Times, will
write an Op-Ed page column twice a week beginning in January. He was executive
editor of The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 41, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5054 words


I HAVE BEEN THINKING A LOT about something that happened to me when I was The
Times's correspondent in India, long ago just yesterday. I had been based in New
Delhi for some time and, feeling full of India and myself, went in one day to
talk to the Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, a man I admired a great deal.
Smart and sassy, I asked him a question about a very sensitive subject, India's
occupation of Kashmir. I wanted to goad him a little and I succeeded; it didn't
take much, this man of intellect and power was a sensitive fellow. He looked at
me, jumped up, smacked his bald pate in magnificent irritation and shouted,
''Rosenthal, you have been in this country for four years and you have not
learned one damned thing yet!''

I was a reporter for about 20 years, then an editor for about 20, and now that I
am about to start writing again for a living I've been thinking - I've been a
newspaperman for more than 40 years, have I learned one damned thing yet?

I've decided that yes, I have indeed learned a few things. Some had to do with
newspapering, some with the world; a couple were about flowers, a few about The
Times and one or two about myself. All told, eight or nine things or roughly one
every five years, which is not too bad when you think about it.

THE VERY FIRST DAY I WAS ON THE JOB AS A reporter - a real reporter, with a
press card in my pocket and a light in my heart - I learned all about the First
Amendment. It was a Saturday and I was sitting in The Times's newsroom when an
assistant city editor walked over, told me that there had been a murder or a
suicide at the Mayflower Hotel in midtown and why didn't I go over and see what
it was all about. Yes, sir! I rushed out, jumped on a bus, got to the hotel,
asked an elevator operator where the trouble was. Ninth floor, he told me and up
I went. A push of the buzzer and the door opened. Standing there was a police
detective. He was twelve and a half feet tall. I started to walk in and he put
his hand into my face. That hand was just a bit larger than a basketball.
''Where are you going, kid?'' he said.''I'm a reporter,'' I said. ''Times. I
want to see the body.''

He looked at me, up and down, slowly. ''Beat it,'' he proposed.

Beat it? I hadn't realized anybody talked to Times reporters that way. I knew
there had to be some misunderstanding. So I smiled, pulled out my press card and
showed it to him. He took it, read it carefully front and back, handed it back
and said: ''Shove it in your ear.''

Shove it in my ear? I could not comprehend what was taking place. ''But I'm from
The Times,'' I explained. ''A reporter from The New York Times. Don't you want
me to get the story right?'' ''Listen, Four Eyes,'' he said, ''I don't care if
you drop dead.'' Then he slammed the door in my face and there I stood, staring
at that door. I slunk off to a pay phone in the lobby and called the special
reporters' number that had been confided to me -LAckawanna 4-1090, I've never
forgotten it - and confessed to the clerk on the city desk that I had not only
been unable to crack the case but had never even seen the corpse.

''Don't worry about it kid,'' he said. ''We got it already from the A.P. They
called police headquarters and got the story. Come on in.'' Right there at the
Mayflower I learned my first lesson about the First Amendment. The First
Amendment means I have the right to ask anybody any question I wish. And anybody
has the right to tell me to shove it in my ear. I have been involved in First
Amendment cases for more than 20 years but when I began as a reporter I was not
answering any call to protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.
I was not even thinking about the Constitution of the United States. All I was
thinking about was the pleasure and joy of newspapering, of the wonderful zest
of being able to run around, see things, find out what was going on, write about
it, see it in print and actually get paid every single week - $27 to start with,
not bad, and pretty soon becoming what I heard my mother describe me on the
phone to a friend of hers: a $60-a-week man.

That was what the newspaper business meant to me then and mostly still does -
the delight of discovery, the exhilaration of writing a story and the quick
gratification of seeing it in the paper; ink, ink, ink, even if it does rub off
on your fingers just a tiny bit. We newspaper people are given to talking and
writing about journalistic philosophy and I certainly have done my share and am
about to commit more.

But newspapering is not a philosophy, it is a way of spending a lifetime and
most of us in it know that if you really don't love it, love the whole mixture
of searching, finding and telling, love the strange daily rhythm where you have
to climb higher and higher during the day instead of slackening off as the day
goes on as normal people do, if you don't have a sensation of apprehension when
you set out to find a story and a swagger when you sit down to write it, you are
in the wrong business. You can make more money as a dentist and cops won't tell
you to shove it in your ear.

So after that detective kindly taught me that important lesson about the First
Amendment, instead of being grateful and pondering its meaning, I forgot all
about constitutional matters and went on having a wonderful time being a
reporter and blessing my good fortune. Obviously this sense of euphoria about
newspapering is somewhat naive and even in the early years I knew that one day
it would diminish and eventually disappear. I knew it was just a question of
time. It still is. For a while I was on general assignment, not knowing when I
arrived in the morning what I would be assigned to cover, which struck me as
something like walking into a candy store every day and having the owner say
close your eyes and open your mouth, sonny.

AFTER A COUPLE OF YEARS I GOT MY FIRST byline on a story, a masterpiece of
journalism about a battleship returning to New York whose lead I can still
recite word for word and, as friends and family can attest, often do.
Masterpiece.

Then I was assigned to The Times's brand-new United Nations bureau at the
brand-new United Nations to help out for a couple of weeks. I managed to stay
rather longer - nine years.

Four Eyes strolled happily in the corridors of power, pausing for a chat here
with Gromyko, a quip with Adlai Stevenson, a cup of tea with Eleanor Roosevelt,
dispensing a word of advice to the British, a gesture of succor to the
Yugoslavs, now and then a stern word to the Ukrainians, a supportive clap on the
back to the Indonesians, still enslaved by the fierce Dutch.

Moslem and Jew met at his salon in a Waverly Place walk-up and disarmament
specialists were only too happy to see Four Eyes purse his lips and then lean
forward to hear him analyze nuclear arms control proposals in diplomatic safe
houses in the Waldorf Towers. Witty, wise, sharply analytic but compassionate
withal, he sipped drinks with foreign ministers at the bar in the delegates'
lounge on the East River and then, with born insouciance pocketed the cocktail
glasses for the greater benefit of international understanding on Waverly Place.
But I am loathe to leave the impression that it was only the United Nations that
profited from my years of reporting there. I, too, benefited, through learning.

I learned, most lastingly, that there is a secret agreement between the United
States and the Soviet Union, revealed here for the first time. It is a simple
but lucid treaty holding that when one side does something particularly
fatheaded and self-destructive the other will respond by shooting itself in the
foot within a period of from 17 to 30 days. Amid all the broken agreements and
smashed promises, this particular understanding has never been violated, which
should be warming and buoying to us all.

INDIA THEN - FOUR YEARS OF living, traveling, looking, writing India. Those four
years I wandered in Pakistan, too, and in Afghanistan and Nepal.

For the first time in my life, in Saigon, I heard mortarfire and thought I might
die, in fear under a table on the Boulevard Gallieni.

I saw Rangoon and the deep hidden lakes of New Guinea and I saw the running down
of the British flag in Kuala Lumpur and the Dutch flag in Hollandia.

Oh, but it was mostly India, India where friends became friends for life, where
I saw poverty that burned my eyes, but where I also saw a fierce endeavor to
change it, if only a bit. India was where I wrote and studied and lived with my
family, which grew from two to three sons in New Delhi, and who were staunch
adventurers all during a decade of traipsing around the world. And in a
political sense, too, India was my home. It was there that I saw a nation being
built on a belief that I felt to be true and of the utmost importance to all who
held freedom dear - that economic progress could be achieved in political
liberty in the poorest of nations and that despotism was a stick with which to
beat the poor and not a system to lift them. Nehru kept India free, from the
Communist left and the religious right, and free from his own party's wheedling
demands that he become a ruler instead of a Prime Minister, even free from his
own tendency to give everybody, including his country, a good thwacking.

Then Poland, almost but not entirely destroyed by the Germans; rubble,
nightmares, a terrible bruise of a nation, almost but not entirely silenced by
the Communists. Poland, where I was sickened by the Government but whose people
taught me once and always that there are nations that will bleed and die and
bleed again, and again, forever, to breathe free; not all nations and peoples,
just some, may they be praised.

I was expelled from Poland. They said I was probing into their internal affairs.
They did not call me a spy but during the last few days a variety of entrapments
were attempted. A number of decent people were ordered to ask me questions about
a Polish military attache who had recently defected to the West but whose name
had not appeared in print and of whom they never would have heard. Two days
before I was to leave, a Polish Member of Parliament, a brave good man, slowed
as he was walking down the stairs of my hotel and I was walking up. Without
stopping, he said quickly that I would be asked to take a packet out of the
country and not to do it.

That evening, a man I had not seen in more than a year came to my hotel room,
said he knew I was leaving and it was terrible but would I kindly take this
little package of letters and just put it under the front seat of the car I was
to drive to Vienna. When I refused, I did not even bother to denounce him
because I knew he was doing what the secret police had told him to do and I was
going and he was staying in the country. I was the lucky one and I let it go at
that.

Then a year in Geneva. It was a city so crushingly boring journalistically that
I stunned the foreign desk in New York by making an offer, instantly accepted,
to cover the madhouse war in the Congo for a while.

Two lovely years in Japan then, made entrancing by the realization that, unlike
the Poles and the Indians, the Japanese really did not need me to worry about
them. They were making money, making love, jumping ahead economically like jolly
frogs, paying hardly a nickel for their own defense. They obviously had it made.
All I had to do was poke around, watch in fascination and just write about it,
trying to forget that the Cossacks were bound to get me for having such a good
time.

To my astonishment, a sweet-talking, sweet-hearted Mississippian named Turner
Catledge, the managing editor of The Times, carted me off from my steambath in
Tokyo to become metropolitan editor. All I had wanted to do until then was to go
on being a reporter abroad and after due time wind up a columnist telling the
world what to do. I took the job figuring it would be an interesting experience
- and that after a few years I would get my reward and become a columnist.

Sure enough, it was an interesting experience being metropolitan editor of The
Times, in precisely the same way as being simmered in a saucepan for a few years
is terribly interesting. And sure enough, I am about to give the world lucid
instructions in a column, although it did take roughly a quarter of a century
longer than I had anticipated. I had quite a vivid time of it as an editor in
various incarnations and relished most of it, although it must be said that as
an editor I rarely felt quite so keenly as I had as a foreign correspondent that
I was having such a good time that it was almost unfair to take money for it.

I learned this and that during my editing years. I learned that the world is not
simply a dirty little conspiracy as the vendettists of the far left and far
right love to announce because it affords the delicious shivers of hatred. I
learned that news is not a baseball game played in innings. I learned never to
move a person's chair without expecting trouble because people really detest
unexpected change, and that there is no such thing as a no-cal corned beef
sandwich.

And mostly I learned - and relearned and relearned day after day - what it was
about this country that meant so much to me and where I stood politically and
what I believed. A lot of it went back in a way to that police detective
standing in the doorway of the Mayflower Hotel - he could tell me to shove my
questions in my ear but in this country I didn't have to. In this country, not
in very many others.

NOT LONG AGO, a German magazine writer came to my office to interview me and he
asked me what it was like to be a member of the Ruling Elite of the United
States; that is what the man said. I told him that it did not feel an awful lot
different from when I was eating ketchup sandwiches at college. He stared at me
and I explained that I went to a free college, had a dime a day for carfare and
maybe a quarter left over for lunch. I told him the boys at my college quickly
discovered that each had independently invented a great culinary dish, the
ketchup sandwich. Bread was a nickel and ketchup was stark free. That left me
with 15 or 20 cents for a paper and a Pepsi (bigger bottle then than Coke) or to
otherwise invest in the American economy.

I tried to explain myself to him, myself, not this roundish man sitting in a
fine study behind a great office, whom he had classified in advance as a member
of the Ruling Elite, subspecies journalist.

I told him about my father, a Jewish farmer born in Russia who had emigrated to
Canada because he loathed czarism; for the rest of his life he regarded
Bolshevism and the Soviet Government as just another manifestation of Russia's
history of despotism. Poor man, somehow he could not see the fine distinctions.

My father loved Canada, adored the years farming, fur trading in northern
reaches. But he could not make a living there, so he and my mother brought their
brood (five bright and zestful daughters and me, the youngest) to the United
States, got a job as a housepainter, fell off a scaffold and died when I was 13.
My mother lived long. But she saw four of the girls die, one by one, in their
young womanhood. This drained her strong soul.

I went to the City College of New York. It was tough, free and excellent and had
all the social cachet of poison ivy. I told the writer from Germany this, and
that I got a job as a reporter on The Times not despite the fact that I had gone
to City College but because of it. At this free university I had learned enough
about books and writing and enough about putting a story together in the
steel-walled basement dungeon office of the four-page college weekly that the
city editor, even though he wore a gold Phi Beta Kappa key from Yale or Columbia
or some such place - as a student, all ''pay schools'' were equally remote and
unattainable to me - decided that I was quite good enough for The Times.

The gentleman from Bonn said that was interesting but how did I feel about being
a member of the Ruling Elite. Great, I told him, just great, goodbye.

A British correspondent got a little closer. One day when I had just become
managing editor I set off on a trip abroad to spread the happy news among the
crowned heads of Europe. I picked up a copy of The Times of London outside my
hotel door and there on the front page saw a reference to a story inside: ''Up
from the slums of the Bronx to the Editor's Chair.'' Uh oh, I said to myself,
they are singing my song.

And inside, sure enough, there was a long story by the paper's Washington
correspondent, a fine reporter whom I had known in India. He was trying to
explain to his British readers exactly how this strange phenomenon had come
about, how a poor boy from the Bronx, with all the social background and clout
of a gardener at a Buckingham Palace reception, had become the editor of the
leading American newspaper. He wrote it with warmth and wit but as if he were
describing to his reader the strange practices of Ugandan tribesmen.

There was for me a particular poignancy reading this story because the writer
had told me once in India that he could never become editor of The Times of
London because he was a Roman Catholic and had gone to a red-brick college, not
Oxford or Cambridge. So I sent him a cable thanking him and explaining that
Mosholu Parkway, the neighborhood in the Bronx where I had lived, was not a slum
but a fine place with trees, something like Belgravia.

There is a clear-line connection in all this - the cop, the right to ask, be
refused, ask again, to write and speak - to the fact that I got to work for and
become part of The Times, and what I feel and where I stand. It is a connection
of emotion, sentiment, yearning, belief - all things that are not nebulous but
the very essence of a person's reality.

I suppose that what it all adds up to is that the freedom to write and the
freedom to think and speak what I think is as important to me as air because I
know that with them, living in the grace of liberty in this country, I can
achieve whatever I am capable of achieving. What is just as important, I can
realize that whatever I fail to achieve or to create is my own fault, the result
of my own shortcomings and not traceable to imposed restrictions and limits. I
guess that is why I have told almost every reporter and editor I have hired that
The Times is a tough paper to work for, because if we fail to present the news
fully and intelligently and with sophistication there are no rationalizations to
fall back on - there is enough space and enough money, there are no taboos on
subject, no pressures from wicked publishers and boards of directors and a world
of land, sea and mind in which to roam.

Most people are loving sometimes, harsh at others, gentle, cranky, up, down. But
there is an area of professional life where I believe it is almost immoral - a
strong word - for an editor or publisher to be gentle or nice or sweet, and that
is when it comes to fighting to protect the First Amendment guarantees. The
free-press provision of the First Amendment is a license, not to make money, but
to write and print freely; like all licenses, it requires payment.

Everybody has a hero and one of mine is a man I never met, Federal Judge Harold
R. Medina. Years ago, he sent a message to a bunch of publishers and he laced
into them. He let them have it for a tendency to allow judges to decide the
conduct of the press. He said that editors should be editors, judges should be
judges. He said newspaper people were too prone to accept a restriction here, a
restriction there. I don't have his exact words but I remember his final bit of
advice: ''Fight like hell every inch of the way.''

When I read what he had to say I sent him a telegram: ''Dear Judge Medina, I
love you. Abe Rosenthal.''

That's the price of the license: fight like hell every inch of the way, against
any attempt at press restrictions, particularly the ones that sound nice and
reasonable -most newspersons are courageous enough to resist the hard-fisted
ones. It is the nice and reasonable ones, the ones that a lot of their peers are
ready to accept to be accommodating and not make such a big fuss all the time,
that are the ones that have to be fought like hell, every inch of the way.

So I am against all restrictions on freedom of the printed word, against laws on
obscenity, pornography, national security. That does not mean we have to fill
our columns with dirty words or dirty pictures or lessons on how to track United
States submarines. It does mean that just as I would not wish an organ of
government - or a bunch of editors and publishers in committee assembled - to
censor The Times, so I would not agree to restrictions on another journal's
standards of what is publishable, detestable though I might find them.

The test of accepting the true meaning of the press provisions of the First
Amendment is willingness to see them protect the right of some ''journalists''
to be vulgar lying scoundrels. I do accept libel laws, narrowly interpreted, as
appropriate redress for the private person and I know that may be a philosophic
inconsistency. So I am not a philosopher.

It was former Associate Justice Hugo L. Black of the Supreme Court who drilled
it into my mind that if you accepted a restriction that was logical to you, why
soon everybody would be choosing a favorite limitation. At lunch one day,
Justice Black was talking with a group of editors, some of whom dearly wanted to
be seen as reasonable men, and were making the point that perhaps the press was
too ''absolutist'' in its stance.

That great man from Alabama pulled a little black pamphlet from his pocket, the
Constitution of the United States, tapped it and said, ''All I know is that it
says there shall be no laws abridging the freedom of the press; not some, not
just a few, but no laws.'' Editors and publishers need people like that around
to remind them that the concept of a constitutionally free press is an unusual
one and a delicate plant that has to be protected, not just from the enemies of
the press but sometimes from ourselves.

I MUST SAY THAT FOR a man who has complained a lot about the courts I seem to
number a disproportionate number of judges among my heroes. Fact is that at one
of those hands-across-the-sea conferences on press and society in England not
long ago I found I had a lot more in common with the most conservative American
judges there than with some of my liberal British editor friends. The American
judges recognized that I had constitutional guarantees, the British editors knew
they had none.

At dinner one night near London one of the senior British judges attending the
meeting was very kind about The Times, of New York, and suggested that we
publish an edition in England. I said that from what I had heard at the
conference we would be in and out of court all the time on one contempt charge
or another.

''Oh, no, not at all,'' he said. ''That would never happen to such an important
paper.''

I preened a bit; not such a bad old boy. And then he said: ''Why, you see, after
the second time we would just sequester all your assets and that would
straighten things out, wouldn't it?''

Quite often people ask me whether or not I'm under a lot of pressure -
advertisers, top public officials, that kind of thing. I did get an awful lot of
complaints as managing editor and executive editor, from people I never heard of
and from very important folk, too. But if you can't handle complaints - listen
to them and then decide what to do, if anything - then you shouldn't be an
executive editor or any other variety of editor.

But that is not pressure; my definition of pressure is a complaint accompanied
by a threat. Once, an advertiser opening a new branch of his business complained
with vivid rage to me and the publisher of the paper, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger,
that we were not giving him enough attention or supporting his campaign for
ordinance changes, or something of the sort, and that by God unless we did he
would pull his ads out of the paper. We looked at each other, knew we had a sad
case on our hands, and left. He did pull his ads out of the paper. The business
closed, years later. Thus was justice served.

I had lots of complaints from officials in Government - Nixon people, Johnson
people, Carter people, Reagan people. Nobody tried to exert pressure under my
definition, except once, and that was out in the open. Two or three times, when
officials of the Government asked me to delay a story on national security
grounds, I agreed, believing that the requests were legitimate. On all occasions
we got our journalistic face smeared because the story was promptly printed
elsewhere. But, without getting too self-righteous about it, you cannot make a
call involving security or a person's reputation or your own concept of fairness
on the ground that somebody might do otherwise and beat you.

A couple or three other times Government officials asked for a delay - never a
change - and we declined. No roof fell in.  There was one time when the
Government did try to apply pressure, under my definition of pressure as
complaint backed by threat of action. We had begun printing the vast compendium
of documents about the conduct of the Vietnam War that came to be known as the
Pentagon Papers. That was in 1971. Taken together, they showed the vast gap
between the reports of the Government about the war and what various
Administrations knew to be the much harder truth and bleaker future. Almost all
carried secret classifications but they contained neither military security
information nor material about operations that were less than a couple of years
old.

Yet the very presence of these thousands of pages of classified documents in my
office was a little scary. At first I had visions of hundreds of radical college
students gathered in a basement somewhere and they were saying listen, I will be
the chief of staff today and hey, you can be the C.I.A. and we will knock out
these crazy papers and send them to The Times. But we determined that they were
not a hoax and knew we had to print them or face ourselves the realization that
we were the concealers of information vital to the understanding of the war.

The day we printed the second installment, we received a telegram from the
office of Attorney General John N. Mitchell ordering us to cease under penalty
of law. We debated throughout the night and decided to go ahead because at that
point, before any court action had been taken, the Attorney General was to us
just another lawyer. So we told him to put it in his own ear. The next morning
The New York Times carried a headline saying ''Mitchell Seeks to Halt Series on
Vietnam but Times Refuses.'' That page, engraved on a plaque, hangs on my office
wall. If the headline had read, ''. . . and Times (Continued on Page 92)
Agrees,'' the history of this paper, I believe, and of American journalism,
might have changed.

For one thing, I would quietly have left and while that might not have been a
disaster to American journalism it certainly would have affected my standard of
living. Perhaps quite as important, it would have meant we were accepting the
principle that the American Government could tell American newspapers and
television what to print and broadcast. We fought it in the courts and it was a
roller coaster of emotion for us all until the Supreme Court ruled in our favor.
It was a battle, but it was out in the open. I have never believed that there
was a conspiracy against the press. I have just believed that every American
Government quite detested the press and wished we would go away. Far, far away,
until summoned.  I never expected the Administrations in Washington to unbosom
themselves to us and give us information, voluntarily, that put them in a bad
light. General Motors does not do that and newspapers and networks are
notoriously closemouthed about their own affairs. But the social contract in
this country requires that the Government, although it does not have to tell the
full truth, cannot set out on a campaign of lying to the people.

I believe that contract was violated during the Vietnam War and when I read in
The Washington Post a couple of months ago that some of our brains in the
Government had sat down and planned a little disinformation campaign, I was not
only angry but terribly sad. I don't know when the damage will be repaired, but
one day it will be and I hope that we will have learned our lesson as a nation
and that our Government will leave that kind of garbage to the Russians who
really are much better at it and who don't have quite the same social contract
with their people.

SO I HAVE LEARNED AFTER 40-odd years as reporter and editor that freedom to
write and talk and think is bread and air and water to me. And as I have
traveled around the world as a foreign correspondent and as an editor another
conviction has been built into me. That is that if freedom is important to me it
is important to all others - or at least they should be given a chance to say
they really would prefer a government built on gulags and re-education camps.

That sounds fairly innocuous, doesn't it? But it keeps getting me into trouble.
Because I am sick at heart and soul when I find Americans living under the sweet
blessings of freedom deciding that tyranny is quite good enough for others. Then
I say so and I get into fights with the admirers of Castro and the admirers of
Pinochet, and those who make excuses for a Korean dictator and those who make
excuses for racists of the first, second and third worlds. I usually say so and
sometimes the result is that I am attacked in print, would you believe it? It is
at times like that that I feel rather closer to the cop at the Mayflower than I
do to Justice Black.

On flowers - it wasn't until about 10 years ago that I first put a plant in
soil, and gardening seized me. I have learned that if you plant flowers, you see
the world more clearly. I don't know why. As I said, I am not a philosopher.

So that is what I have learned in 40 years as a reporter and editor. I expect to
write a column for another 40 years and then I will be back to fill everybody in
on what else I have discovered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of A.M. Rosenthal with Jacob Malik in 1950 (NYT); Photos of
Robert Elegant, James Greenfield, John Hlavacek and U.P. Rosenthal with Nehru in
1956, A.M. Rosenthal in 1976 and a Times's headline from 1971 (Richard Avedon)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHAMPIONING THE NEW MUSIC

BYLINE: BY LINDA BLANDFORD; Linda Blandford, a columnist for The Guardian of
London, is the author of ''Scenes From Orchestra Life.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 74, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3233 words


STUTTGART, SAARBRUCKEN, BONN: the meat-and-potatoes circuit of German music. One
of its busier and more respected conductors these days is a 42-year-old
American. At a time of heightened anti-Americanism in Europe, he is about to
take over as general music director of Bonn - conducting its symphony orchestra
and in charge of its festivals, music programming and opera house - and this in
West Germany's capital, Beethoven's birthplace, no less. To do so, he leaves his
post as music director of the $60-million-a-year state opera house in Stuttgart.
And yet, his musical ''home'' is with the American Composers Orchestra, a
pioneering group founded a decade ago in a smoky jazz bar in Greenwich Village.
On January 11, Dennis Russell Davies, a founder and music director of the now
highly respected A.C.O., will conduct the first concert of its season in
Carnegie Hall.

For a conductor associated with new music - usually the graveyard of
international success - Davies holds some weighty jobs. In addition to Stuttgart
and now Bonn, he is the first classical-music program director of the Saratoga
Performing Arts Center, summer home of the Philadelphia Orchestra. He runs the
Cabrillo festival in Aptos, Calif., and one in Saarbrucken, and devotes both to
new music. A career such as his grows slowly, almost stealthily. A coup such as
the world premiere in Stuttgart of William Bolcom's ''Songs of Innocence and
Experience'' (with an expanded orchestra and chorus and classical, rock and jazz
vocal soloists - over 200 participants in all) causes a rather mild splash. It
was a huge surprise to some when he received such an American plum as the
Saratoga appointment in 1985. He left his calling card in his first season -
three programs juxtaposing Richard Wagner with Philip Glass. The Saratoga post
should not have been so unexpected. He is credited with building the St. Paul
Chamber Orchestra from 1972 to 1980. He was 28 years old when he went there, and
he brought to the job all the high-minded, relentless purpose of both his youth
and his own nature. (''Orchestra builder?'' he says. ''That's flattering. You
get called a lot worse things than that.'') It was his successor, Pinchas
Zukerman, though, who made the orchestra famous. ''It was hard,'' says Davies,
''looking at his big success with an orchestra I had had enormous praise with.
But it was important for me to recognize and deal with the ephemeral quality of
success.''

Virtue, for once, was rewarded. Davies went on from St. Paul to become the only
American running a German opera house. He was first brought to Stuttgart's
attention by composer Hans Werner Henze, whom he met at the Juilliard School of
music. ''I conducted a piece of his with the Juilliard Ensemble,'' Davies says,
''and he took note. 'We'll work together again,' he said. Everyone says that -
it's always a surprise when someone means it.''

Davies persuaded Stuttgart to commission Glass's ''Akhnaten''; he mounted
''Satyagraha'' there, too. But no one builds a reputation running an opera house
on premieres alone: Davies has conducted Mozart, Wagner, Weber, Beethoven, Verdi
and Richard Strauss. Does he not feel out of his depth in this great ''museum''
of Western music, in this layered world of tradition and knowledge? ''No,'' says
the conductor, ''and the self-confidence I feel in Europe is born of the fact
that the music written in my country during the last 75 years is every bit as
important as any music produced in this century in what was the center of
Western musical culture.''

I T IS NOT SURPRISING, then, that the small-budget American Composers Orchestra
is so close to his heart. To see him at work with the A.C.O. is to glimpse still
the intense Juilliard student of the late 1960's, passionately committed to new
and living music. The factory foreman's son from Toledo, Ohio - the outsider
from middle America - who bounded around the conducting class of the fabled
teacher, Jean Morel, says: ''I want to have success as much as the next person
does. I want people to scream and throw their hats in the air as they do for
others. I like flashy pieces. But I really feel there's other music that's
beautiful and important. And it's a curious situation if essentially American
artists play before American audiences only music written in another time, in
another country.''

And it is here, in the old and stuffy Carroll Studios on Manhattan's West 41st
Street, that I first see him at work, rehearsing the A.C.O. for one of its
Carnegie Hall concerts. There is the inevitable contradiction: the glamor
attached to a first performance, the elegance and aspirations versus the sheer
drudgery of working out what it is supposed to sound like, note by note.

The young, big talents freelancing in the sections attack the music's complex
runs and rhythms. The old-timers next to them keep pace bar by bar. For the
standard $17.50 an hour for the three-hour rehearsal session, the heavy New York
musicians play this hard, new, knotty music with a will - with a mission. The
A.C.O. is savoring its unaccustomed success. It has now moved from the safe,
clubby space of Alice Tully Hall to Carnegie, and subscriptions have quadrupled.

New music, with all its connotations of earnest shabbiness and dandruff,
suddenly has excitement about it. Full houses for Philip Glass, Steve Reich and
the Kronos Quartet herald a new era: popularity and serious new music are
compatible, after all. There is even money in it. The A.C.O. has itself, at
Davies's urging, commissioned a $25,000 violin concerto from Glass, who, not
that long ago, was driving a taxi to support himself. Now he has records on the
classical best-seller lists.

''That indefatigable champion of the best in new American music'' is how the
Times music critic John Rockwell describes Davies. On the face of it, he is
oddly cast as a shining knight. His domed and balding head shines beneath the
harsh light; his long, thin, fly-away hair hangs around his neck; his ears are
too large, his beard too patchy. And yet, there is a dark, bristling energy to
him. He has the easy way of the midwesterner who grew up in blue-collar Toledo,
but also the deep brooding of his Welsh mining heritage.

His is not the glossy middle age of some conductors, all Italian silk and soft
leather. He is a bounding, downtown figure in cotton jeans, running shoes,
T-shirt, punk jacket. At an age when most young conductors are longing to show
what they can do with the Brahms Second Symphony, only an oddity would have
dreamed up an orchestra to play American music.

Many at the A.C.O. remember him at the Juilliard School 18 years ago - that
oddball who played Ives and worked under Luciano Berio, the Italian avant-garde
composer, with the Juilliard Ensemble. ''Why would anybody think of Ives's Third
Symphony as 'new music,' '' Davies asks, ''a piece Mahler saw and immediately
took back to Europe with him?'' As he sees it, all music has to be given a
chance - old, new, good, bad. ''In any age, people are constantly trying to find
their common ground, to relate one to another,'' he says. ''We simply have to
have the music of our own time. Artists are the only ones that leave any
permanent proof of human good.''

O N THE SUNDAY morning of the A.C.O. concert, Davies is having breakfast at the
Red Flame coffee shop on 57th Street. He delights in the Americanness of
everything: the surly waiter, the eggs, bacon, hash browns, the wrong toast,
slopped coffee, bits of the Sunday papers everywhere. Different, indeed, from
the orderly, gray world of Stuttgart.

This is freedom from the labyrinthine politics of a subsidized state opera
house, the Mercedes prosperity, the wartime bombing that destroyed not only
buildings but the city's heart. Davies, who was at Juilliard, out of harm's way,
during the Vietnam protests, has not been untouched by the complex, moral
questions of this other world. He is moved by the number of members of the
Stuttgart orchestra who, in retirement speeches, allude to years in POW camps or
at the front. ''I kept my own draft deferment because I felt I needed to keep
practicing and playing,'' says Davies. ''These people spent years when they
could only dream of music. It takes enormous courage to come back and rebuild a
life. Every one of those people in front of me has a life, a tragedy of their
own - it has brought another level of understanding to me.''

It is not surprising that he has grown close - both musically and personally -
to Hans Werner Henze, that most political of composers. His years abroad have
taught Davies something of the complexity of civilizations. He sees music in the
broadest sense and can accept Henze's drawing-room Communism as easily as he
does the dedication to peace, Oriental gamelans, Esperanto and Ives of the
composer Lou Harrison, another personal and musical friend. Henze, the smooth,
Italianate German; Harrison, the naif from the West Coast: Davies embraces it
all. The servant's impartial vision or the idealist's open mind? Detachment or
breadth? Some of both, perhaps.

The problem with rehearsals, Davies thinks, over the remains of breakfast, is
time: There is never enough of it. No matter how much the conductor cares, how
painstakingly he rehearses, the composers care more. This afternoon's program is
both as difficult and anarchic, in some way, as music itself is in our time.
Henry Hadley's ''Scherzo Diabolique'' captures a wild taxi ride around Chicago
in the 1930's. ''It's attractive, it's flashy,'' Davies says.

Roger Sessions's rarely heard Fourth Symphony is fiendishly hard, cerebral,
cold, abstract, compelling. Lou Harrison's piano concerto, a world premiere
written for superstar Keith Jarrett, is big, sweeping, sentimental, owing
something to the Orient - and something more practical to the Skaggs Foundation,
which paid for the parts, and to Henry and Sidney Cowell, who gave the composer
a nine-foot Steinway. Composers need a certain wily way with patrons, as they
always have, of course.

The other world premiere this afternoon is ''Challenger,'' Meyer Kupferman's ode
to the space shuttle that later came to a tragic end. Kupferman is, by any
standard, successful: 10 or so premieres a year, recordings, grants,
commissions, awards, a publisher. And will he, at 60 years of age, make much
more than $15,000 from all of it this year? Probably not. New music may be more
commercial now, but all is relative, and besides, little ever filters down to
the infantrymen. Very few composers in the world today earn their living by
their music.

However, in this age of teaching positions, academic chairs, the Rockefeller
Foundation and composers-in-residence, man does not have to die for his art.
There are fallbacks, and they are not without their own satisfactions. How many
generations of students have explored music, and have learned to love it, from
Meyer Kupferman? How many have passed by his wise, warm eyes in his 35 years as
professor of music at Sarah Lawrence College. He is the picture of a West Side,
old-time artist - faded jeans, black shirt, cracked brown shoes, red bandana
beneath long silvery hair. This is the day of his child's birth; his nerves
shake. Will it live? Will it survive?

''There is a richness and variety to a concert like this,'' Davies says.
''Something extra is required of me. It makes extraordinary demands, gives me a
chance to sweat and grow. Whether these pieces are going to take a permanent
place in the repertory is a question that can't be answered for years, and most
of them won't. But then, most of Mozart's work hasn't either.''

The A.C.O. is on stage. ''Can you give a big cue there?'' calls a piccolo. ''I
can't, I'm too busy,'' Davies answers, pulling from the air some idea of
cohesion, imposing some discipline upon the chaotic percussion part of
Kupferman's piece. Davies's strength is in being able to support and absorb it
all. Is it that he simply is not discerning about musical styles or that he is
large-minded, able to bow before the music he conducts? Either way, his is
meticulous, patient work, everything thought through - no relying on the bravura
of the moment for him. The notion that the composers of new music should be
grateful merely for being played, for the minimal rehearsal time before the
conductor gets on with the big, showy Romantic symphony - that is not Davies's
way. It is not his personality that is being celebrated, although that is not to
say he is without ego. There is a certain lofty arrogance in the perfect
servant. He is unflappable; the conspiratorial wink and quick sympathetic smile
are his rehearsing trademarks.

He is professional to a degree: his voice is dark and charming, and yet he is
impenetrable. He nurses the idea that within him is great temperament (''I know
how I feel''). Yet he presents to everyone this unchanging facade. ''There was
very little discussion in our house about the why of things,'' he says at one
point, recalling the small family home in Toledo, his father's 45 years' service
in one factory, his own early years as a piano prodigy. ''There was just doing
things.''

What he has, unlike most conductors, is a sense of music as a living, growing
force. ''As I left the hall yesterday, out of the sky comes Meyer Kupferman,
score in hand,'' recounts Davies. ''I'd just put in a very hard three-hour
rehearsal, spent 15 minutes with him afterwards, and now I was thinking of my
cheeseburger. I just wanted to say, 'Come on, man, I'll do it better tomorrow.'
And now I think of crossing 57th Street and having a composer descend on me out
of the trees - and I know I wouldn't swap that piece of insanity for anything.''

A N ICY MIST HANGS over the forest around Stuttgart. Summer is late. On the
Schlossgarten pond, next to the state opera house, flocks of ducks call into the
still, gray morning. In the distance, a neon-lit Mercedes symbol twinkles on top
of the railway station - ''Our Lady of the Mercedes,'' as the local cynics have
it. The imposing opera house is the setting for Doric columns, with Greek sages
upon them, imposing stone stairs and, at night, local burghers in velvet gowns
and well-cut suits who climb up into the mass of light in the old-fashioned
foyer.

Dennis Russell Davies, Herr General Music Director, sits in his office counting
off the days, the performances he has conducted since the American Composers
Orchestra date in New York: an ''Idomeneo,'' ''Don Giovanni,'' ''The Marriage of
Figaro,'' ''Tristan and Isolde,'' ''Akhnaten,'' ''Fidelio,'' ''Madame
Butterfly'' - it is as if years, not weeks, have passed since the Kupferman and
Harrison premieres in Carnegie Hall.

Nothing could be further from those informal days in New York. In Stuttgart,
passive-faced administrators and clerks scuttle through the dull corridors, up
and down staircases, around corners, over bridges. Those who work here are civil
servants in the European mold. They are mindful, cautious, literal. Herr Davies
drives his motorcycle around Stuttgart and jogs around the park. ''Maybe I'm so
American,'' he suggests, as we sit in his apartment, ''that I am exotic to
them.'' Beige drapes, beige carpets, a monochrome surface - and on the wall, his
pictures of Muhammad Ali, Aaron Copland, Bruno Maderna, his three New Wave
teen-age children who are back in New York with their mother (a separation he
prefers not to discuss).

Perhaps it is not so odd that he is here in Germany, after all. Davies is not
one of those matinee-idol conductors, all charisma and instinct, who, if
necessary, rely on their own personalities to carry the orchestra and music
along. There is something serious, dry, unremitting about him, just as there is
about those musicians to whom he is close -pianist Alfred Brendel, cellist Janos
Starker, tenor Paul Sperry, ''thinking'' men all. Davies may not set a piece on
fire, but nor will he burn out. (''It's the difference sometimes,'' as the
Juilliard Quartet founder Robert Mann remarks, ''between a mousy housewife who
raises a beautiful family and a gorgeous whore who strumpets her way down 42nd
Street.'') The Germans admire good housekeeping.

Tonight, Davies will conduct the five-hour Henze opera ''Konig Hirsch.'' This is
the world premiere in the original edition. Written in 1953, it was cut savagely
in its first mounting. (How could that happen? ''Somebody puts on an opera,''
Henze says later. ''That's an act of goodwill in itself. One tries not to make a
fuss.'') Henze has lived in Italy for years, but he is a totally German
composer. His music fills halls in Berlin, the country's music capital. (''The
greatest German living composer?'' Henze laughs. ''No, no - the greatest German
neurotic composer.'') He is a homosexual, a member of the Communist Party, an
expatriate and a major musical force in Germany.

No conducting career is built without its champions. Davies has always had his,
however unobtrusive, from his early days when a Toledo businessman paid for his
Juilliard education. (''I never met him and I never spent a nickel more than I
needed,'' says Davies.) Luciano Berio at Juilliard led him to European composers
such as Bruno Maderna. Maderna, ailing with cancer, approved of Davies's taking
over for him in Amsterdam as conductor of a new production of ''Pelleas and
Melisande.'' Thus are careers made.

This season, Davies is presenting in Stuttgart yet another German premiere:
''The Kaiser From Atlantis,'' an opera written and rehearsed 43 years ago in
Theresenstadt by Viktor Ullmann. Ullmann perished afterwards in Auschwitz, as
did the librettist Peter Kien and most of the original singers. The delicate
juxtaposition - Jew, German, American -is not lost on the Germans who have their
own silent understanding of the fragility of society. Not by chance did the
Baader-Meinhof gang strike out against the bourgeoisie of Stuttgart.

At 6 o'clock, with the sober-faced audience attentively in place, Dennis Russell
Davies gives the downbeat for ''Konig Hirsch.'' The music is richly inventive, a
glittering tapestry of styles, exactly Davies's forte. His beat is precise; he
is watchful, attentive, calm, totally involved. A visionary conductor, eyes
closed, would lose his place in a second. And yet, as the evening unfolds, there
are disturbing undercurrents: the lavish splendor, the queasy, decadent
atmosphere - transvestism, violence, domination, sexual corruption. How naive
and pure seem the consumptive deaths and murders of grand opera next to such
Grand Guignol. It is, though, another important critical success for Davies.

He has earned it. He came here with his Berlitz German and his family. Now he is
facing another new life, another strange town. Conductors want different things
from a career. Some want praise and ballyhoo; Davies wants to challenge, to
believe. He tells the following story as he stands by the cold pond, all these
miles from home.

Davies was conducting a ''Tristan and Isolde'' in the opera house at Stuttgart;
at the end of the first act, a technical and musical struggle in itself, he
turned to bow, glory in his heart. Two young men in the front row booed straight
into his face. ''I can still taste the shock, the sense of being physically
attacked,'' he recalls. What he says next reveals all: ''You know what is
wonderful about booers? That they can care so passionately about music in the
abstract.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dennis Russell Davies conducting the American Composers
Orchestra in New York City (Steve J. Sherman)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: DECEMBER 14, 1986

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words


Fiction
            Weeks
This   Last    On
Week   Week  List
1         1     6 WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.)
                  Iran during the month following the Shah's
                  departure.
2         2    14 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.)
                  Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman who
                  grew up in a small Maine town.
3         3    20 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                  $19.95.) Without using nuclear weapons, the West
                  staves off the Russians in World War III.
4         4     7 A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf,
                  $18.95.) Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a
                  brutal double murder.
5         6    11 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton
                  Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family relationships in
                  South Carolina's low country and New York City.
6         5     9 HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &
                  Schuster, $18.95.) A top New York model encounters
                  three of Los Angeles's most dynamic men.
7         8     9 FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,
                  $16.95.) In the fifth volume of the ''Foundation''
                  series, the hero continues his search for the lost
                  planet Earth.
8         7     7 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                  Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                  Vietnam.
9        10    10 THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) Continuing the saga of a
                  turn-of-the-century New York family begun in
                  ''Evergreen.''
10*       9    22 WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) A rich orphan comes of age while she
                  travels the world.
11       11    15 THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random
                  House, $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and
                  greed mark a young woman's life in 18th-century
                  England and France.
12             22 LAST OF THE BREED, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam,
                  $17.95.) The adventures of a United States Air
                  Force major in Siberia.
13       12     7 PERFUME, by Patrick Suskind. (Knopf, $16.95.)
                  An olfactory vampire kills people to steal their
                  scents.
14*      13    12 THE BEET QUEEN, by Louise Erdrich. (Holt, $16.95.)
                  Forty years in a small North Dakota town near an
                  Indian reservation.
15       15     4 THE MIRROR OF HER DREAMS, by Stephen R. Donaldson.
                  (Del Rey/Ballantine, $19.95.) First of two novels
                  about Mordant, a strange land where reality is
                  intertwined with illusion.

                  Nonfiction
1         1     6 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                  Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                  recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.
2         2    32 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday,
                  $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from the
                  television star and father of five.
3         3    10 HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.)
                  From Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized
                  biography of Frank Sinatra.
4         6    12 MCMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi.
                  (Warner, $16.95.) The autobiography of the
                  quarterback for the Chicago Bears.
5         5     4 WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Putnam,
                  $14.95; $16.95 after Dec. 25.) A new collection of
                  columns by the journalist and television
                  personality.
6        14     2 THE CHRISTMAS DAY KITTEN, by James Herriot.
                  (St. Martin's, $9.95.) An illustrated story for
                  children.
7        10    30 JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot.
                  (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire
                  veterinarian about his favorite animal.
8         4     3 PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon
                  Eisenhower. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A biography
                  of the wife of the 37th President written by her
                  daughter.
9        11    40 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random
                  House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic
                  in pictures and rhyme; the first Dr. Seuss book for
                  adults.
10*       9     3 LIFE: The First Fifty Years, 1936-1986. (Little,
                  Brown, $50.) The past half-century as seen in the
                  magazine's photographs.
11        8     7 ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Random House,
                  $18.95.) The comedian's autobiography, beginning
                  with her impoverished childhood in Hollywood.
12        7     7 DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland with
                  Greg Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The ballerina
                  recalls her checkered career.
13             11 ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden with
                  Dave Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations on
                  football by the television commentator and former
                  Oakland Raiders coach.
14       15    10 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow,
                  $19.95.) The crisis in the American automobile
                  industry and Japan's role in it.
15       13     7 DREAMGIRL, by Mary Wilson with Patricia Romanowski
                  and Ahrgus Juilliard. (St. Martin's, $16.95.) A
                  former member of the Supremes describes her time
                  with the group.

                  Advice, How-to and
                  Miscellaneous
1         1     7 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff
                  Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at
                  moderate cost.
2         5    44 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow,
                  $14.95.) A television chef's inexpensive dishes.
3         2    13 MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM, by
                  Susan Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.)
                  How to cope with overbearing men.
4         4     7 BE HAPPY YOU ARE LOVED, by Robert H. Schuller.
                  (Nelson, $15.95.) Inspiration from a California
                  clergyman.
5         3    30 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton,
                  $15.95.) A regimen based on the Vanderbilt
                  University Weight Management Program.


And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

BEARING THE CROSS: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference, by David J. Garrow. (Morrow, $19.95.) Short on
interpretation and long on facts, Mr. Garrow's biography is the indispensable
source for the life of the driven, courageous leader who changed the South and
the nation.

TO ARM A NATION: Rebuilding America's Endangered Defenses, by Richard Halloran.
(Macmillan, $21.95.) The military pyramid is sound at the bottom but a mess at
the top, according to a New York Times correspondent who proposes extensive
reforms.

GOLDEN DAYS, by Carolyn See. (McGraw-Hill, $15.95.) A cheerful, bright-eyed,
comic novel about the good life in California during and after a nuclear
holocaust. Some nerve has Ms. See!

FIDEL: A Critical Portrait, by Tad Szulc. (Morrow, $19.95.) A veteran
journalist's inquiry into the roots of personality, of Mr. Castro's charisma,
his leadership, his obsession with total power.

THE COMPLETE PROSE OF MARIANNE MOORE, edited by Patricia C. Willis. (Elisabeth
Sifton/Viking, $24.95.) Dazzling work and lots of it (723 pages), revealing
Moore's generous enthusiasms, her wide-ranging authority, her deeply serious
humor and her solid critical powers.

LILLIAN HELLMAN: The Image, the Woman, by William Wright. (Simon & Schuster,
$18.95.) For a wonder, this biography has no political ax to grind and concerns
itself with the discernible facts.

Its verdict: Hellman was a truly remarkable woman, but not nearly so remarkable
as she insisted on pretending.

EMILY DICKINSON, by Cynthia Griffin Wolff. (Knopf, $25.) Close to nothing
happened in Dickinson's life; this engrossing book finds the drama in the
poetry, verse that struggles to get even with God.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI PARTY OPENS KEY PARLEY TODAY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 862 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 14


Vietnam's Communist leaders meet this week in a crucial party congress that they
say will have to set a new course for the country if Hanoi is to overcome
debilitating economic and political problems.

The party congress, the third since the unification of the country in 1975, is
expected to start naming a new generation of national leaders, the first in half
a century. Vietnam, one of the world's poorest countries - partly through its
own mistakes, its leaders concede - may also commit itself to new economic
policies.

''The Vietnamese people are at a new stage of their revolution,'' an announcer
for the Voice of Vietnam said Saturday, as she described preparations for the
congress, which opens Monday.

''A festival atmosphere is prevailing in Hanoi,'' she said. Six huge artificial
lotus blooms have been constructed downtown, she added, and ''500 new products
have been named to honor the Sixth Party Congress.'' #20 Foreign Delegations
Tonight the voice of Vietnam reported the arrival of more than 20 foreign
delegations, including one from the Communist Party of the United States and one
representing the El Salvador leftist guerrilla front.

Behind the scenes, preparations have been less joyous, according to the
Vietnamese news reports. The official radio announced that hundreds of thousands
of petitions have come in from citizens around the country, citing problems in
need of attention.

''The party continues to secure many important achievements,'' a domestic
broadcast said on Dec. 7. ''But it has been and is meeting with numerous great
difficulties and committing many serious shortcomings that erode the people's
confidence.

''Although there have been many motivation drives to build up the party against
negativism, they have failed to bring about the desired results,'' the program,
reviewing articles in the magazine Tap Chi Cong San, said. The broadcast was
monitored and translated by the British Broadcasting Corporation.

''The scourge of corruption continues to develop widely in various forms,'' it
said. ''Party discipline and state law has deteriorated to an unprecedented
degree.''

'Odious' Trends Attacked

A week earlier, an editorial in the Vietnamese Army newspaper Quan Doi Nhan Dan
bitterly attacked what it called ''odious'' trends in society. It went on to
spell out the problem.

''These negative phenomena,'' it said, ''consist of acts of speculation for
gainful purpose, corruption and graft, misappropriation of public property,
officialism, arrogance, bribe-taking, and undisciplined lifestyle, liberalism,
lack of responsibility, disrespect for the law, disruption of order, lack of
civilization, disregard for fine customs, and more.''

The possible role of the army in forcing change has been a matter of speculation
in Southeast Asia and among scholars in the United States. Regular readers of
Vietnamese military publications say there may be growing military
dissatisfaction with the country's underdevelopment and with the conduct of the
nine-year-old war in Cambodia.

The name of Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, the strategist in wars against both the French
and Americans, has reappeared after a period of some obscurity. Some diplomats
in Hanoi said they believed that General Giap, who apparently questioned the
Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia, may now be among the candidates to succeed Pham
Van Dong as Prime Minister.

The Prime Minister, who is 80 years old and very frail, has indicated he wants
to retire.

Party Leader to Be Chosen

The most important development expected at the congress will be the announcement
of a new party leader to follow Le Duan, a contemporary and successor of Ho Chi
Minh. Mr. Duan, who died in July, was temporarily replaced by Truong Chinh, 79.
Observers now think Mr. Chinh may intend to stay on.

In series of tough speeches this fall, Mr. Chinh, a former leftist radical whose
forced collectivization program was thought to have resulted in many deaths in
the 1950's, joined those calling for ''renovation'' of the economy.

Among other figures mentioned often enough in Vietnamese news reports to suggest
they may be on the rise are Nguyen Van Linh, a southerner who was removed from
the Politburo in 1982 and then reinstated last year without explanation, and Vo
Van Kiet, the country's embattled economic planner, whose earlier changes met
resistance.

Vo Chi Tong, now Deputy Prime Minister and the author of popular agricultural
policies that rewarded farmers' initiative, is another possible candidate for
Prime Minister or other top post.

Sharp Change Unlikely

But diplomats caution against expecting too sharp a change in policy from the
party congress. The country's Communist Party, with 1.8 million members, remains
at heart ideologically orthodox, an orthodoxy solidified and never seriously
challenged through two wars.

In addition, most new leaders likely to emerge this week are men well into their
60's or 70's.

Only in peacetime, and only in the last year or two, has there been any
noticeable display of public discontent in Vietnam, north as well as south. The
depth and danger of this discontent is now being acknowledged in Hanoi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, DECEMBER 15, 1986


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 950 words


International

A3-16 Oliver North helped a conservative political action committee mount a
campaign to defeat Congressional opponents of military aid to the Nicaraguan
rebels, people familiar with the effort said.

Page A1

Michael K. Deaver has re-emerged as a key adviser to the White House in its
efforts to control the damage from the Iran crisis. He appears to be trying to
replace Donald T. Regan as chief of staff.

A12

Panel plans to question Regan

A1

The growing role of military officers in the National Security Council may be
scrutinized by the commission appointed by President Reagan to examine the
N.S.C., according to an agency spokesman.

A13

The Nicaraguan rebels' prospects were being re-evaluated even before the Iran
arms controversy began to unfold, as American officials last month questioned
ambassadors and others about their effectiveness.

A16

Nicaragua has arrested an American on suspicion of espionage. Sam Nesley Hall, a
self-styled counterterrorist, is said to be the brother of Representative Tony
P. Hall, Democrat of Ohio.

A1

A tight web of dummy companies in two Swiss cities were apparently used as
fronts to mask the diversion of Iran arms payments to the Nicaraguan rebels,
according to emerging evidence.

A14

Tracing the Iran money flow

A1

A Soviet mock invasion of Iran was conducted by Moscow six year ago, according
to a Pentagon evaluation and Government officials.

A12

Soviet officials are trying to rebuild from the debris of the Chernobyl
disaster. Among the accomplishments are 800 new homes that have been built to
house 2,000 of the 135,000 displaced.

A4

Vietnam's leaders will meet this week in a crucial Communist Party congress to
try to overcome economic and political problems in the country.

A9

An austerity budget for Norway is expected to win narrow approval, which would
give the fragile Government of Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland a victory in
its toughest parliamentary test.

A5

South African police killed a suspected insurgent from the outlawed African
National Congress and two police officers were wounded in a land-mind explosion,
the authorities said.

A3

54 dead in Pakistan clashes

A1

Power of Kenya's leader grows

A3

Sri Lanka rebels clash

A6

Brazil lax in AIDS treatment

A11



National

A18-20, B16-19

Trying to fly around the world without stopping or refueling, the Voyager
airplane took off yesterday. The plane is being studied to solve the problem of
carrying heavy loads in light aircraft.

A1

Concerns about U.S. competitiveness in the world economy are likely to shape
political and legislative efforts over the next two years. There is a conviction
that the United States is losing ground.

B18

Racial incidents on college campuses around the country have educators and civil
rights leaders increasingly worried. Experts say the incidents seem to show a
pattern of bigotry.

A18

Large and small changes in Dallas give it the feeling of a town turned on its
head. Tough economic times, shifting demographics and generational changes are
rupturing its once-remarkable continuity.

A18

The Democratic Leadership Council, which just concluded a conference, is cheered
by the conviction that the Democrats are resurgent and that its centrist wing
will set the tone for the ascendency.

B19

The prosperity of Richland, Wash. and two nearby towns is threatened by the
planned shutdown of the Hanford nuclear reactor. The Hanford site pays workers
well and employs almost 14,000 people.

A18

Pacific Coast hills can take a pedestrian's breath away. To ease the climb,
Seattle plans to build escalators and moving sidewalks. Tacoma is dropping its
escalators in favor of a concrete stairway.

A18

Southern pine beetles have crippled the lumber industry in the South and
prompted a dispute about whether to replace damaged timber in the Sam Houston
National Forest or let nature take its course.

A20

41 institutions received 14.2 million in awards made by the National Endowment
for the Humanities. The educational and cultural institutions were selected from
209 applicants.

B17

Christmas is shoplifting season. Retail experts say that shoplifting generally
rises about 5 to 10 percent during the holiday season, and amateur thieves are
to blame.

D1

Washington Talk

B14

Hiring for 1988 is in full swing Questioner of White House Regional

B1-13

Governor Cuomo ruled out cuts in a proposed $8.3 billion plan to rebuild New
York City's subway, bus and commuter-rail lines. Republicans are seeking cuts to
avoid an increase in gasoline taxes.

B10

In exchange for housing for low- and middle-income people elsewhere, the Koch
administration is offering developers a valuable piece of East Side, city-owned
property on a barter basis.

B1

Two men were arrested in connection with the murder of a woman whose body was
found in the swimming pool of her New Canaan, Conn., home. One was charged with
felony murder, the other with larceny.

B2

A fire left more than 50 homeless in West New York, N.J., yesterday, according
to officials. The fire in the four-story apartment complex spread from the
boiler room. No serious injuries were reported.

D15

More than 80 muggings have occurred near the train station in Stamford, Conn.,
this year, prompting the police to form an undercover team to patrol commuter
parking lots and other high-risk areas.

B1

Cuomo weighs new panel

B1

New York's unsung heroes

B1

Blasting cap explodes at clinic

B3

Historic Quaker house reopens

B7

4 found dead; son held as suspect

B8

School board orders bus probe

B11

Neediest Cases

B13


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 16, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, DECEMBER 16, 1986

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 899 words


International

A3-17

The U.S. has supplied Iraq with mili-tary intelligence about Iran periodically
over the last two years in order to avoid an Iranian victory in the war between
the two nations, officials said.

Page A1

Donald T. Regan and Edwin Meese 3d will testify before the Senate Intelligence
Committee this week. Caspar W. Weinberger and George P. Shultz will also appear
this week, the panel's chairman announced.

A15

A virtual overhaul of the N.S.C. is planned by the incoming National Security
Council director Frank C. Carlucci, Administration officials said. They said he
has already selected key aides.

A15

A prominent Panamanian lawyer played a key role in setting up three companies
that apparently served as financial vehicles in the supply network for the
Nicaraguan rebels.

A16



Swiss freeze bank accounts

A17


An American captured in Nicaragua Friday and charged with espionage will be
tried before the same people's tribunal that last month sentenced Eugene
Hasenfus to a 30-year jail term, a spokesman said.

A14



Plane downing: Bush staff knew

A14


Ethnic rioting in Karachi left 70 more people dead as the clashes spread to new
sections of the Pakistani city and army troops used tear gas and gunfire to
enforce the widespread curfew.

A9

Jean-Bedel Bokassa went on trial yesterday for charges ranging from killing
schoolchildren to procuring human bodies for cannibalistic meals. He is the
former emperor of the Central African Republic.

A3

A letter urging President Reagan to reverse the Administration's decision to
exceed the limits of the second strategic arms treaty was sent by a 57 members
of the Senate.

A12

News analysis: The Soviet Union is frustrated at its inability to exploit cracks
in the Atlantic alliance since the Iceland summit and the eruption of a U.S.
political controversy, officials said.

A13



Vietnam party congress opens

A6


Use of guns worries Canada

A11





National

A20-32, B11-15


No additional coverage of nursing home care will be included in any health
insurance plan for catastrophic illness, Reagan Administration officials have
tentatively decided.

A1

A ban on direct corporate spending in political campaigns is unconstitutional as
applied to small, nonprofit advocacy groups organized as corporations, the
Supreme Court ruled in a 5-4 decision.

B11

A Kansas City, Mo., renewal plan has been announced by civic leaders. The $126
million project includes plans to restore historic building, and bring in shops,
offices and entertainment attractions.

A20

A judge awarded fundamentalist parents $50,521.59 as reimbursement for expenses
incurred in challenging a public school reading program in Tennessee. They said
the readings were ''anti-Christian.''

A20

The defense in the McMartin case says a crucial document was found in a former
prosecutor's files. The defense says it shows the woman who first complained of
molestation at the school was mentally unstable.

A21

At the ''Twilight Zone'' trial, a state child care worker testified that the
film's location manager had been unusually interested in where he would be
stationed for the movie's ultimately fatal scene.

A23

Increasing black voting strength is the aim of a growing number of lawsuits
filed in North Carolina by the N.A.A.C.P. and other groups who say election
boundaries dilute their power.

B13

The U.S. military set a safety record in aviation in the fiscal year 1986
despite an increase in major accidents in the Navy, according to the Defense
Department.

A28

Naval submarines are going deeper and deeper into the Arctic Ocean, a new
frontier for warfare. Submarines have navigated under the ice to surface at the
North Pole, and an Arctic expedition is planned.

B15



Salary increase urged for judges

A1


California Journal

A20


Legal aid agency loses president

A26


Wedtech seeks to reorganize

A30



Washington Talk

B12


Soon, return of MX debate

On allowing soldiers to sue

Regional

B1-10


Carnegie Hall reopened last night after seven months of renovation. The gala
program marking the occasion included Zubin Mehta, Frank Sinatra, the New York
Philharmonic and Vladimir Horowitz.

A1

One of the largest conversions of rental apartments to cooperatives in New York
City's history began last night when the first of the 3,800 apartments of the
Lincoln Towers complex on West End Avenue went on sale.

B1

In reacting to a homeless shelter, the residents of the Park Slope section of
Brooklyn are dealing with what many other New Yorkers may soon face -the opening
of shelters in their communities.

B1

Class rank is being challenged in Great Neck, L.I., by students, parents and
teachers who see it as detrimental to education. The school board may do away
with it at North High School.

B6

The aim of a new commission on corruption would be to expose questionable
practices, but not to conduct criminal investigations, said Governor Cuomo, who
might soon soon appoint such a panel.

B10



School chief criticizes system

A1


News analysis: The move for a corruption panel

B1


Cuomo's choices for judgeships

B3


Attorney raises issue in case

B3


Attempted bomber is sought

B4


Witness says he deserves death

B9



Neediest Cases

B8


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 16, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SHAKE-UP IN VIETNAM IS EXPECTED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 413 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 15


Vietnam's leaders opened the Communist Party's sixth congress today with
statements that the Communist Party and the Vietnamese Government had made
serious mistakes and that it was time to ''purify'' both institutions.

The party chief, Truong Chinh, 79 years old, declared that ''bold'' changes were
needed in managing the economy, which he said had not improved despite plans and
promises.

Sources in the Government and the foreign diplomatic corps said they expected
Mr. Chinh as well as Pham Van Dong, the Council of Ministers Chairman, and Le
Duc Tho, a leading member of the Politburo, to resign during the congress.

There was no official confirmation that there would be a leadership change,
which normally would be announced at the closing session Thursday. Nevertheless,
an official closely involved with the congress said, ''It is definite.''

Western Press Covering Event

The party congress, the first that Western news organizations have been allowed
to cover, involves 1,129 delegates representing the party's 1.8 million members.

Mr. Chinh told delegates that goals set by the fifth party congress four years
ago had not been achieved.

A Politburo member, Vo Van Kiet, said unemployment, waste and shortages of raw
materials characterized a situation ''rife with difficulties.''

Grain production must be increased, he said, and a 70-percent increase in
exports will be needed in the next five years to balance the cost of imports.

Mr. Kiet stressed the importance of the Soviet Union and other Communist nations
in economic plans but added, ''Vietnam will also strive to better relations with
the capitalist countries of the world.''

No Capitalist Tools

Although advocating changes that would include the elimination of state
subsidies, neither Mr. Kiet nor Mr. Chinh called for significant
capitalist-style economic measures like those adopted in China and Hungary.

Dau Ngoc Xuan, deputy chairman of the State Planning Commission, said at a news
conference that most outside aid would continue to come from the Soviet bloc but
that Vietnam would welcome Western aid and investment, including joint ventures.

He said that there was a place for the private economy, especially in
agriculture, small handicrafts and forestry.

In recent years, Vietnam has used some Western-style incentives. Some proved
successful in agriculture, but others failed because of poor planning, the
stubbornness of old-style bureaucrats and lack of resources.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 16, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS: FIRST HINT ON HASENFUS;
BUSH STAFF GOT CALLS ABOUT CONTRA PLANE

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1199 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 15


A day before the Nicaraguan Government announced the downing of a rebel supply
plane in October, Vice President Bush's staff received word that the plane was
missing, Mr. Bush's office announced tonight.

The information was contained in a four-page statement that shows a much closer
relationship than previously acknowledged between the Vice President's staff and
the secret private network that was supplying arms to the rebels, known as
contras.

The statement is the first indication that the United States Government knew of
the downing of the plane before it was announced by Nicaragua. The information
was passed on to high-ranking officials of the National Security Council, Mr.
Bush's office said.

Three crew members were killed when their C-123 cargo plane, carrying ammunition
and supplies to the rebels, was hit by a missile on Oct. 5. A fourth, Eugene
Hasenfus, was captured by Nicaraguan Government forces and was convicted of
terrorism and other crimes.

The disclosures by the Vice President's office were contained in a chronology
tracing contacts since November 1983 between Felix Rodriguez, who has been
involved in anti-guerrilla activities in El Salvador, and two Bush staff
members: Donald P. Gregg, the Vice President's national security adviser, and
Col. Samuel J. Watson 3d, Mr. Gregg's deputy.

Through most of the period covered in the chronology, the Government was barred
by law from directly or indirectly supporting military or paramilitary
operations in Nicaragua.

The chronology was released tonight to explain and clarify the relationship
between Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Bush and his aides. It provides the most
significant indication to date that the Administration was aware of the
clandestine network that provided supplies to the Nicaraguan insurgents.

It suggests that the Administration knew more about the supply effort than it
has said publicly.

Spokesmen for the Administration, the State Department, the Central Intelligence
Agency and the Pentagon have emphatically denied that the Hasenfus flight was
connected with the United States Government.

Mr. Bush's office said Mr. Rodriguez called Colonel Watson twice on Oct. 5 and 6
to say he had received information that one of the aircraft supplying the rebels
was missing and possibly downed in Nicaragua. It said Colonel Watson then
informed the White House Situation Room and the staff of the National Security
Council. It did not say whether Mr. Bush was told, nor did it say where Mr.
Rodriguez was calling from.

The Nicaraguan Government announced the downing of the plane on the evening of
Oct. 6.

In addition, the chronology said Mr. Rodriguez met with Mr. Gregg and Colonel
Watson almost two months earlier, on Aug. 8, ''to express his concerns'' about
the secret supply network, including the difficulty in maintaining it and the
poor quality of aircraft being used.

Concerns Relayed to Aides

Those concerns where then relayed by the two Bush aides at a meeting four days
later, which included Edwin G. Corr, the Ambassador to El Salvador; William G.
Walker, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, and
two National Security Council officials, Raymond Burghardt and Lieut. Col.
Robert Earl. Also present was an unidentified C.I.A. official, the chronology
said.

Colonel Earl was called before the Senate Intelligence Committee last week to
testify about the Iran-contra arms case, but he declined, saying he needed more
time to arrange for legal counsel.

The chronology was released by the Vice President's office after Mr. Gregg spoke
about his relationship with Mr. Rodriguez in an interview last week with The New
York Times. He said he did not know until August that Mr. Rodriguez, a former
employee of the Central Intelligence Agency, had been involved in private arms
shipments to the Nicaraguan insurgents.

The statement released by Mr. Bush's office said the Vice President had not been
informed of the August discussions with Mr. Rodriguez about the private supply
network, even though other Administration officials had been told.

Both the chronology and the interview provided an indication of a close
relationship between Mr. Gregg and Mr. Rodriguez, who first worked together as
C.I.A. officials in Vietnam in 1970. Mr. Rodriguez made frequent trips in the
last two years between El Salvador and Washington, where he saw aides to the
Vice President.

Beginning in November 1983, he met Mr. Gregg, either alone or with others, on at
least 10 occasions, including most recently over dinner last month. In addition,
Mr. Rodriguez met several times with Colonel Watson, Mr. Gregg's deputy,
including a meeting last January in El Salvador to discuss counterinsurgency
operations, the Vice President's office said.

According to the chronology, Mr. Rodriguez first met with Mr. Bush in January
1985, informing him that he ''wanted to work in El Salvador against the
insurgency.'' In March, Mr. Rodriguez moved to El Salvador to work with the
Salvadoran Air Force.

On May 1, 1986, the chronology said, Mr. Rodriguez met with the Vice President
for about 10 minutes with Mr. Gregg and Colonel Watson present to be shown
''pictures taken during counterinsurgency operations in El Salvador.'' Also
present at that session was Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, who has been implicated
in a secret deal to funnel funds to the contras from arms sales to Iran.

'Unaware of the Diversion'

Mr. Bush and his staff have denied knowledge of the diversion of funds, and the
Vice President's office said ''there is no indication'' that Mr. Rodriguez was
aware of it.

''At no point in his discussion with anyone in the Vice President's office did
Mr. Rodriguez mention diversion of funds to the contra operation from Iran,''
the statement said. ''There was no indication that Mr. Rodriguez knew of such a
diversion, and he stated categorically to Mr. Gregg that he was unaware of the
diversion.''

The chronology said that Mr. Rodriguez, whom Mr. Bush has called a ''patriot,''
also spoke briefly with Mr. Bush at a large reception in Miami for Cuban
Independence Day on May 20, 1986.

Mr. Gregg said in the interview with The New York Times that Mr. Rodriguez was
present at a meeting on Aug. 12, 1986, in which his concerns about the contra
supply network were relayed to others in the Administration. But the Vice
President's office said tonight that Mr. Gregg had been mistaken.

The chronology said Mr. Bush's advisers had passed along the concerns because
''the Vice President's office had no jurisdiction or responsibility with regard
to contra supply operation.''

''It was believed, however, that Mr. Rodriguez's observations were sufficiently
important to pass along,'' it said.

The relationship between the United States Government and the contra supply
effort has come under increased scrutiny since the downing of Mr. Hasenfus's
plane in October and the disclosure last month of the diversion of Iran arms
funds to the contras.

Mr. Hasenfus, 45 years old, was a cargo handler on the C-123. After his capture,
Mr. Hasenfus said he believed that a co-worker named Max Gomez, later identified
as Mr. Rodriguez, was a friend of Mr. Bush.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 16, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ARMED FORCES SET AVIATION SAFETY RECORD IN 1986

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 662 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 15


Despite an increase in major accidents in the Navy, the nation's military
services set a combined aviation safety record in the fiscal year 1986,
according to the Defense Department.

The Pentagon attributed the record to the introduction of new planes and
helicopters ''which have proven to be safer and more maintainable than their
predecessors despite flying in more realistic and demanding training
environments than ever before.''

The Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps had 162 Class A accidents in the 12
months ended Sept. 30, down from 179 in the fiscal year 1985, the Pentagon said
Thursday. The previous safety record was set in the fiscal year 1984, when the
four services combined had 170 Class A accidents.

A Class A accident is defined as one that results in either a fatality or
property damage to a plane or helicopter exceeding $500,000. The Pentagon did
not provide a breakdown on the number of deaths involved.

Navy Showed Slight Increase

The armed forces chart their flying safety records on the basis of Class A
accidents per 100,000 hours of operation. Overall, with the four services flying
7.27 million hours in the fiscal year 1986, the 162 aircraft crashes produced an
accident rate of 2.23 incidents per 100,000 flight hours. That compares to the
1984 record of 2.42 incidents per 100,000 flight hours.

The one exception in the downward trend involved the Navy, which has
historically led the way, along with the Marine Corps, in aircraft incidents
because of the number of operations conducted at sea.

In the fiscal year 1986 the Navy had 58 Class A accidents, for an accident rate
of 3.39 per 100,000 flight hours. That compares to 47 Class A accidents and a
rate of 2.76 per 100,000 flight hours in 1985, when the Navy set its individual
safety record.

The Navy's 1986 total of 58 major accidents was the highest for that service
since the fiscal year 1982, when 70 Class A accidents and an overall rate of 4.3
incidents per 100,000 flight hours were reported.

Marines Have Highest Rate

The Navy declined to offer any explanation for the increase in accidents.

Although it reported a decline in Class A accidents, the Marine Corps continued
to lead the services in 1986 in its overall accident rate. The Marines reported
18 Class A accidents in the fiscal year ended Sept. 30, posting an overall rate
of 4.18 per 100,000 flying hours. That compares to 25 major accidents in 1985
and a rate of 5.71 per 100,000 flying hours.

The Army, despite a series of helicopter accidents last summer, showed the
greatest improvement in its safety record. Class A accidents in the Army dropped
from 45 in 1985 to 33 this year, producing a rate of 1.98 per 100,000 flight
hours as opposed to 2.94 incidents per 100,000 flight hours in 1985.

A breakdown of the Army's record by specific aircraft shows the greatest number
of accidents involved its aging fleet of Vietnam-era, UH-1 Huey helicopters.
There were 13 Class A accidents involving UH-1's in the fiscal year 1986, more
than double the number for any other type of Army aircraft.

Air Force Improvement Noted

The UH-1's are slowly being replaced by the new UH-60 Blackhawk helicopter.
Three Blackhawks were involved in Class A accidents in 1986.

The Navy, Air Force and Marines said they did not yet have a breakdown of the
accident rates by individual type of aircraft.

The Air Force also posted a significant decline in accidents, reporting 53 Class
A incidents in 1986 and an overall rate of 1.53 per 100,000 flying hours. That
compares to 62 Class A accidents in 1985 and a rate of 1.78 per 100,000 flight
hours.

The Defense Department said it was pursuing additional initiatives to lower the
accident rate even further. Those include a program to install flight data
recorders on all new aircraft, similar to the ''black boxes'' carried aboard
commercial airliners, ''to enable investigators to better determine causes of
accidents,'' the Pentagon said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 17, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THREE TOP LEADERS RESIGN IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 505 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Wednesday, Dec. 17


Vietnam's three top leaders gave up their posts today after leading the
Communists through five decades of war and revolution.

The retirement of the three officials - Truong Chinh, the Communist Party
secretary general; Prime Minister Pham Van Dong, and Le Duc Tho, a leading
Politburo member - was announced at a national party congress.

''The Central Committee has accepted their retirements and they will be advisers
to the new Central Committee,'' said Interior Minister Pham Hung, a member of
the ruling Politburo.

Mr. Chinh is 79 years old, Mr. Dong is 80, and Mr. Tho is 75. The three oficials
went to the rostrum at the Ba Dinh conference hall and waved goodbye as hundreds
of Vietnamese and foreign delegates applauded.

It was the most dramatic leadership change in the party's 56-year history. The
new leadership, to be announced Thursday, is widely expected to include
officials identified with recent economic intitiatives that the party has deemed
crucial.

Top Candidate for Leadership

Widely expected to be named party secretary general is Nguyen Van Linh, 73, a
former party secretary in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.

Deputy Prime Minister Vo Chi Chong, 73, a former Agriculture Minister, and Vo
Nguyen Giap, a prominent military strategist, have been mentioned as possible
successors to Mr. Dong as Prime Minister.

The resignations came on the third day of the four-day congress. The congress
has heard strong attacks on party leadership after months of criticism,
particularly over failings in economic policy.

On Tuesday, congress delegates said that Vietnam wanted better relations with
China, but that Beijing had rejected overtures.

Vietnam ''is ready at any time and anywhere to normalize relations with China,
but so far no positive response has been recorded,'' said Vo Dong Giang, a
minister without portfolio in the Foreign Ministry.

China Is Called 'Hostile'

He said at a news conference that China remained ''hostile'' and that tension is
growing on the border.

Mr. Giang suggested that Vietnam and China might improve relations first, then
work to resolve differences, as the United States and China did in the early
1970's.

Vietnam and China have diplomatic relations but have been at odds since Vietnam
invaded Cambodia in 1978 and ousted the pro-Chinese Khmer Rouge regime. China
responded with an incursion into northern Vietnam and is arming Cambodian
guerrillas fighting the Vietnamese occupation.

Mr. Giang gave no indication that there would be a dramatic move to end the
occupation of Cambodia, a main source of China's displeasure with Hanoi, or
stray from a staunchly pro-Soviet foreign policy.

Yegor K. Ligachev, the Politburo member leading the Soviet delegation to the
congress, said Monday that better relations between China and Vietnam would
improve the political climate of Asia and the world.

The Kremlin is trying to improve its own relations with China, and Mr. Ligachev
said those efforts would not jeopardize Soviet friendship with Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 17, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ARBOR HOUSE TO REDUCE HARD-COVER BOOK OUTPUT

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 336 words


Arbor House, a hard-cover imprint of the Hearst Corporation, will cut its yearly
output of books by 50 percent - from 90 titles to 45. The reduction will occur
over three years.

''We have defined our mission within the Hearst trade group more sharply,'' Eden
Collinsworth, president and publisher of Arbor House, said yesterday, ''and it
is not to compete with the giant houses on all fronts.''

Similarly, last week Macmillan said it had decided that it ''really doesn't want
to be a major trade publisher,'' and consequently will reduce its overall adult
hard-cover output by some 35 percent.

But Arbor House, unlike Macmillan, has few backlist books - books that sell
steadily for years and years. Its recent best sellers include ''Mayflower
Madame'' by Sydney Biddle Barrows with William Novak, ''Glitz'' by Elmore
Leonard, ''No More Vietnams'' by Richard M. Nixon and ''The Wendy Dilemma'' by
Dan Kiley.

Ms. Collinsworth said she did not regard the decision to cut back - in which
three editors and three assistants were let go - as an admission of failure or
retreat. ''In fact, we've increased our sales in the last year by 35 percent,''
she said. But Arbor had to decide whether to publish more books each year or cut
back ''and be able to move more quickly and aggressively to acquire important
books.''

Publishing industry sources have long speculated that the Hearst Corporation may
be planning to merge Arbor House with Hearst's other hard-cover publishing
house, William Morrow & Company. But Miss Collinsworth said, ''If Hearst wanted
us to be an imprint of Morrow, they'd have made us an imprint of Morrow.''

Lawrence Hughes, president of the Hearst Trade Books Group, said in a statement
that the changes - including the move by Arbor House and Avon Books, Hearst's
mass-market paperback imprint, to the William Morrow building next year - will
lead to ''more cohesiveness and cooperation'' among the three houses and will
''mean more, not fewer, Arbor House best sellers in the future.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 17, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FATAL MOVIE EXPLOSION HIT 'LIKE TIDAL WAVE'

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 369 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 16


A camera operator testified today that the special effects explosion that caused
the fatal helicopter crash in the filming of the movie ''Twilight Zone'' hit the
aircraft ''just like a tidal wave.''

The cameraman, Roger Lee Smith, testified that he was inside the helicopter,
filming the actor Vic Morrow and two children below, when the explosions began
to go off in a Vietnam War scene.

''I could see Vic Morrow with the two kids, crossing toward the shore, and I
experienced vibrations and concussions, just like a tidal wave hit the
chopper,'' Mr. Smith testified.

The special effects explosions disabled the aircraft, sending it spinning to the
ground, where it crashed and killed Mr. Morrow, 53 years old, and the two
children, Myca Dinh Le, 7, and Renee Shinn Chen, 6.

On trial for involuntary manslaughter as the result of the deaths are John
Landis, director of the film; George Folsey Jr., the associate producer; Dan
Allingham, the unit production manager, Paul Stewart, the special effects
coordinator, and Dorcey Wingo, the helicopter pilot.

Pilot Reported Unhappy

Mr. Smith was also filming for the ''Twilight Zone'' war scene three hours
before the crash, which occurred in July 1982. He testified that the explosions
in the earlier shot created a heat problem in a helicopter and that Mr. Wingo
expressed displeasure in the flight when the explosion splashed water on the
windshield of the helicopter, forcing him to extend his head out of the aircraft
to see. Another explosion ''singed'' Mr. Wingo's face, Mr. Smith testified.

Mr. Allingham was a passenger in the helicopter on both the flights, Mr. Smith
testified. Mr. Smith said that Mr. Allingham had assured him prior to the fatal
crash that the helicopter would be repositioned away from the explosions.

''He said he talked to Landis,'' Mr. Smith testified. ''He told me there was
nothing to be concerned about because we would fly over and lift up, turn around
and become the platform for the master shot after the blowing up of the
village.''

Mr. Smith testified that the helicopter dropped to an altitude of about 25 feet
in the fatal scene, as against about 35 feet in the filming sequence three hours
before the crash.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM'S 3 LEADERS GIVE UP THEIR POSTS, TO BE FILLED TODAY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 17


Vietnam announced the resignation of its three top leaders today.

The departure of the three - Prime Minister Pham Van Dong; Truong Chinh, the
Communist Party's General Secretary, and Le Duc Tho, the Politburo member who
led Hanoi's team in negotiating the United States withdrawal from Vietnam -
marks the most dramatic political change in 56 years of party history and more
than three decades of independence.

Replacements are expected to be named Thursday at the closing session of the
Sixth Communist Party Congress, now in its third day in Hanoi.

In a speech on Monday to the opening session, Mr. Chinh suggested that a
''purification'' or purge of the party might follow this week's meeting.

The resignations in effect bring to an end a half-century of unbroken control of
the Vietnamese Communist Party -and later Hanoi's Communist Government - by the
remarkable band of revolutionaries who formed around Ho Chi Minh, the party's
founder, in the 1920's and 1930's. Ho died in 1969.

It is too early to determine whether policy changes will follow. Vietnam
acknowledges that it faces serious economic problems and a crisis of confidence
in its political leadership. Hanoi is also involved in a difficult and unpopular
war in Cambodia, according to defectors from the Vietnamese Army and disgruntled
citizens in both the north and the south.

According to the official Voice of Vietnam, the three leaders are retiring
because of ''old age and health conditions.'' They will, however, become
''advisers'' to the Central Committee, according to the broadcast, which added
that they would be able ''to contribute further to the collective wisdom of the
party.''

Vietnam has barred most Western reporters from the country during the party
congress. According to the Vietnamese Embassy here, 14 reporting visas were
granted, most of them to television crews from Japan, Australia and Britain.
American newspapers are represented by The Associated Press.

Possible Contenders

The three names most often mentioned as contenders for Mr. Chinh's job as party
leader are Nguyen Van Linh, 73 years old, a former party secretary in Ho Chi
Minh City, formerly Saigon; Vo Chi Cong, 73, a Deputy Prime Minister, and Gen.
Vo Nguyen Giap, the military stragetist behind the wars against France and the
United States. General Giap, who diplomats say questioned Vietnam's invasion of
Cambodia in 1978, has been in eclipse for several years.

The three leaders' decision not to run for re-election to the party's Central
Committee was announced today by Interior Minister Pham Hung, another member of
the founding generation.

The broadcast said the congress had honored the three men ''for great services
rendered to the party and people of Vietnam.'' Witnesses said the three then
waved goodbye to their fellow party members.

Mr. Dong (pronounced DOME), who is 80 and very frail, had been expected to
retire. But the departures of Mr. Chinh, 79, and Mr. Tho, 76, surprised many
diplomats and scholars.

Mr. Chinh, who became leader of the party - and in effect of the country -after
the death of Le Duan in July, had recently been described as looking fit. Since
early fall, he appeared to be leading the ''self-criticism'' campaign that
acknowledged the country's problems to audiences at home and abroad.

Mr. Tho, a cosmopolitan but often apparently humorless man, had often been
suggested as a candidate for one of the country's highest posts.

Factions in Leadership

According to Thai Quang Trung, a Vietnamese-born, Paris-educated exile historian
of the party, the removal of Mr. Chinh and Mr. Tho at the same time may be an
attempt to deal evenhandedly with two persistent factions of the party
leadership, roughly described a pro-Soviet and pro-Chinese.

In a monograph written for Singapore's Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Mr.
Trung described Mr. Chinh as spokesman for a northern sector of the party
influenced by Mao Zedong. Mr. Tho, a southerner whom Mr. Trung believed to be
the leader the pro-Moscow wing, had been a rival of Mr. Chinh for decades.

Truong Chinh - a pseudonym meaning ''long march'' that he adopted as a young man
when most of his associates were under the influence of the Chinese Communist
movement - had been an advocate of radical agricultural change in the 1950's.
When his forced collectivization plans cost many Vietnamese lives and
considerable eonomic damage, he was pushed to the background of the party
hierarchy.

Urged 'Prolonged War'

He had also advocated a ''prolonged war'' in what was then South Vietnam, rather
than the quicker and more decisive military action urged by Mr. Tho.

As the war against the pro-Western South ended with a sudden North Vietnamese
military sweep in 1975 and Hanoi was drawn into the orbit of Moscow, Mr. Chinh's
future seemed unpromising.

But Vietnam, unlike many other Communist nations, did not experience cataclysmic
leadership splits. So Mr. Chinh was eventually rehabilitated. Mr. Duan, whom he
succeeded as leader, was considered by many to be a pro-Moscow man.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM WAR DESERTER HELD IN AUSTRALIA

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia, Dec. 17


Australian military policemen have arrested a United States marine who deserted
17 years ago during the Vietnam War and went into hiding in Australia, an
American Embassy spokesman said today.

The spokesman said Pfc. Douglas Beane, 39 years old, disappeared in Vietnam in
1969.

The Australian authorities today were considering an American request that they
hand over Mr. Beane to the United States for court-martial, but Immigration
Minister Chris Hurford indicated he did not favor the request.

Mr. Beane was arrested Monday by Australian naval policemen at his home in
northern New South Wales at the request of American officials whose attention
was drawn to him when he applied for a passport to visit his sick father in the
United States.

'Here Legally,' Minister Says

''He was here illegally without any doubt in the earlier years but he is now
here legally,'' Mr. Hurford said. ''He has achieved permanent residence by
virtue of his marriage to an Australian and of course he has two Australian
children as well.''

Mr. Hurford said Mr. Beane had ''come clean'' while being interviewed in custody
at a navy base in Sydney.

The Australian Defense Minister, Kim Beazley, who has the final decision on Mr.
Beane's fate, has not issued any statements on the case.

Mr. Beane, according to an American Embassy spokesman, was detected after
applying for a passport at the embassy in Canberra three weeks ago.

In Washington, the Marine Corps said Mr. Beane's hometown was Rochester, Vt.,
and that his classification as a deserter was dated Feb. 28, 1970, but that he
went absent without leave on June 9, 1969.

Mr. Beane served primarily as a cook and guard in Vietnam, but his decorations
include the Combat Action ribbon, according to the Marine Corps.

Unit No Longer Exists

The corps said that if Mr. Beane was returned to the United States, he would be
assigned to the Marine Corps base at Camp Pendleton, Calif., for disposition of
his case. Normally, a deserter is returned to his unit, but Mr. Beane's unit no
longer exists.

The United States Embassy spokesman, who spoke on condition he not be
identified, said Mr. Beane was facing court-martial in Vietnam when he went
AWOL. At the time he was undergoing psychiatric treatment at a military
hospital, from which he escaped, the official said.

It was not immediately known what charges Mr. Beane was facing when he
disappeared or how he reached Australia.

''But no doubt there were commercial flights out of Vietnam,'' the spokesman
said in a telephone interview.

Barry Custance, a spokesman for the Royal Australian Navy, said, ''The main
thing is to advise the gentleman of his rights and obtain information from him
as to why he believes he should either stay in Australia or be handed over to
the American authorities.''

Neither official offered further details.

Lived Under False Name

The Sydney Morning Herald said that Mr. Beane had been living in Australia for
16 years, that he had married and that he had fathered two children, now aged 9
and 11.

The newspaper said he was arrested under a warrant issued at the request of the
United States military under the Visiting Forces Act.

According to his wife, Karen, Mr. Beane lived under a false name and worked as a
cook and a farm laborer in Queensland State and later in New South Wales.

''He was so worried about his father, I don't think he considered the
consequences,'' Mrs. Beane, 37, was quoted as having said. ''I think he just
thought the warrant couldn't be applied after all these years.''

The newspaper reported that Mr. Beane had said he went AWOL after one year of
fighting in Vietnam because he had ''had enough.''

His wife meanwhile was quoted by The Daily Mirror as having pleaded, ''Don't
destroy my family.''

''We had been anticipating this for a long, long time,'' she said. ''Doug has
served his time; 16 years is long enough for anybody to be on the run.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Douglas Beane (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Chinese to Visit Laos; First Time Since 1979

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 299 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Dec. 17


China today announced plans for its first high-level official visit to Laos
since relations between the two Communist neighbors were frozen in 1979.

The Foreign Ministry spokesman, Ma Yuzhen, said Deputy Foreign Minister Liu
Shuqing would visit Laos from Saturday to Thursday at the invitation of the
Laotian Foreign Ministry.

Diplomats said it would be the first such visit since China and Laos froze
relations at the charge d'affaires level after the 1979 Vietnamese invasion of
Cambodia.

Laos is a close ally of the Soviet Union and Vietnam, which has about 50,000
troops in Laos.

In August, the Foreign Ministers of Laos, Vietnam and Vietnamese-occupied
Cambodia issued a statement calling for talks with China. The overture came less
than a month after the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, urged closer ties
between the Communist nations of Asia.

Beijing responded that it welcomed proposals for improved relations with
Vientiane but said there was ''no point'' in talking with Vietnam until it
withdrew its estimated 140,000 troops from Cambodia.

''During his visit to Laos, Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Shuqing will exchange
views with the Lao side primarily on the improvement of relations between the
two countries,'' Mr. Ma said at a weekly news briefing.

But he rejected recent Soviet and Vietnamese calls for closer ties between
Beijing and Hanoi.

''We wish to improve relations between China and Laos, and we also wish to
improve Cninese-Vietnamese relations,'' Mr. Ma said. ''But Vietnam must withdraw
all its troops from Cambodia and stop its hostilities against China.''

Vietnam and China fought a monthlong border war in 1979 after Hanoi's forces
ousted the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia. The two nations have
reported many border clashes since.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RAIN WORRIES PUERTO RICAN HILLSIDERS

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1207 words

DATELINE: PONCE, P.R., Dec. 14


At night when rain patters on the roof, Felix Barbosa wakens and seems to count
the drops. ''How bad is this rain and how much water will it bring to the
hill?'' he asks himself.

Eight times in 14 months the rain has drilled hard enough for Mr. Barbosa and
his wife to gather their five children and take them to a sister's house in
Ponce. Other parents living in his village, Mameyes, have done the same.

It was 14 months ago that tons of rock and mud thundered down the other side of
the Mameyes hill, burying 100 homes and many of their occupants in a minute.

Residents like Mr. Barbosa, who counts 77 cousins among the 300 families living
on the hillside, are angry that in the 14 months since the disaster, in which
150 residents are thought to have perished, very little seems to have been done
to assure that they will not meet the same fate.

They Have Asked for Help

They have asked for engineering assistance to improve drainage and stabilize
erosion. But on a mountainous island where many of the poor live in similar
circumstances, officials say there is not enough money.

The residents have heard conflicting reports on the degree of risk they face,
from assurance they have nothing to fear to predictions that it is only a matter
of time.

''They fear what happened last year can happen to them,'' said Mirta Quinones,
director of community relations in Ponce. ''The city is trying to get the state
to relocate them in public housing.''

But, she asserted, while the state has conducted several studies, there is
little evidence of action. Only five families have been moved from Mr. Barbosa's
side of Mameyes, she said, though many others feel at risk. ''All the state
tells us is they're still evaluating the situation,'' she said.

Geologic Survey Is Made

Inspectors from the United States Geologic Survey concluded that while slides
were possible, the bedrock on that side of the hill was not as unstable as the
other.

That report has not satisfied the residents, who believe they see a rise in soil
erosion on their side.

In this rainy season, death and destruction have been everyday topics for the
village set in the green foothills that rise from the streets of Ponce on the
south coast of Puerto Rico.

The homes in the poor community are stacked on pilings or more substantial
foundations that hug makeshift, eroded terraces like goats on a hillside. Now
the people on Mr. Barbosa's side, which on the surface is a copy of the lost
area, anxiously watch runoff gushing down the slope, eating the earth under the
shaky foundations.

Mr. Barbosa said; ''Everytime I see rain coming now I worry.''

Housing Chronically Short

The 1980 Census reported that one out of five housing units in Puerto Rico was
inadequate in running water, plumbing and electricity. But this definition did
not consider how many houses were in flood plains or on mountain slopes, said
Lucilla Marvel, a planner with the Commonwealth Department of Housing and a
liaison to Mameyes. She said Mameyes was a squatter community that grew up in
response to a chronic shortage of low income housing. Families build houses on
any footing they can find, and dig septic tanks underneath that contribute to
the erosion.

Puerto Rico ranks second in the country in total public housing units but it
still is short of low income housing, she said. ''Mameyes represents one way of
solving the housing demands,'' she said.

''What has not been determined,'' she said in an interview, ''is the degree of
risk for another landslide at Mameyes.''

Vivien Mattei, an assistant to Mayor Jose Dapena of Ponce, said: ''People live
in fear that what happened last year can happen again. The ground is very
unstable. When it rains it is like a sponge and it expands. When it dries you
can almost feel the earth move.''

It Is Easy to Get Lost

Like Old Mameyes before its death, Mr. Barbosa's section, called San Tomas by
the families who live there, is thickly covered by homes set a few feet apart,
stepped along the broad hillside. Narrow concrete walkways weave crooked paths,
creating a maze in which a visitor is easily lost. Narrow open-front stores
selling beer, meat pastries and other goods are tucked between the houses. The
interiors of the houses are spare but spotless, and young children race in and
out of the open doors and nimbly hurtle through the walkways and steps.

Palm trees arch overhead, mixing with other subtropical trees to give the barrio
a facade of casual life. Below the hill, in a splendid panorama, cluster the
white and gray buildings of Ponce. Off to the left the green mountains of the
Cordillera Central rise majestically, and to the right, beyond the city, are the
notched coastline and clear blue of the Caribbean.

But wide cracks have opened in concrete block retaining walls over places where
children play. The roots of the trees are exposed. Water seeps constantly
underneath, even on hot dry days, unseen except where it has eaten holes in the
walkways or gurgles up in a ditch and nibbles at an exposed pier.

City Wants State to Step In

''We are all very concerned about what seems to be happening in San Tomas and we
would like the state to take some action,'' said Pedro Gonzalez Ortiz, the
director of civil defense for Ponce. He said the city had no resources for those
still living in Mameyes, though a telethon raised nearly $8 million to provide
400 prefabricated homes elsewhere for those dispossessed by the slide.

The scene of the disaster, once an ignored slum, has become a site for tourists.

From a distance the rounded hillside seems to have been ravaged by strip-miners.
Under a noontime sun, its terraced contours reflect unrelenting light. It takes
a moment or two to adjust to the brightness and the dark thought of what lies
under the chalky yellow slopes.

The slide came on an October night after a three-day rain gorged crevices of
underground rock. With thunder and lightning crashing, a limestone shelf
apparently cracked above Mameyes and slid off the bedrock. Tons of rock and mud
fell, sweeping the rude homes from the collapsing terraces, tier by tier, to the
bottom of hill.

Those who survived pulled themselves free within hours. The sun came out and
baked the mud like mortar, turning an area of rubble about the size of a
football field into a tomb. One hundred homes were destroyed, and 83 more were
pulled down. #42 Bodies Found in Search Forty-two bodies were found in the next
few days. Fifty-two residents were listed by the authorities as still missing.
But the local people say perhaps 100 more victims, mostly children, lie buried
30 to 40 feet under the cap of earth and rock engineers put on top.

Boys play in the rubble, hurling stones at the rafters of a house half-buried.

Hector Munoz, a 40-year old Vietnam combat veteran, squinted up at the rows of
houses above his. ''It's a house of cards,'' he said without expression. ''If
one goes, they all come down.'' Mr. Munoz's wife, Rosa, walked away. In the
minute of death on the other side of the hill, she lost her mother, a sister,
two brothers, a nephew, three cousins, a sister-in-law and two uncles. Their
bodies were never found. Next spring a memorial plaza will be erected.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of cemetery for landslide victims (NYT/Angel Franco); photo of
Felix Barbosa (NYT/Angel Franco); map of Puerto Rico highlighting Ponce

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PLANE MANEUVERS IN MALAY WEATHER

BYLINE: By SANDRA BLAKESLEE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 755 words

DATELINE: MOJAVE, Calif., Dec. 17


Constantly changing course to avoid thunderheads, lightning and turbulent air,
the aircraft Voyager passed over the Malay Peninsula and Bay of Bengal today in
its attempt to be the first to fly around the earth on one load of fuel without
landing.

Guided by weather forecasters using advanced meteorological equipment, the
pilots, Richard Rutan and Jeana Yeager, fought fatigue as they threaded their
way through bad weather on the fourth day of what is expected to be a 12-day
journey.

The two took off in their experimental H-shaped aircraft from nearby Edwards Air
Force Base early Sunday morning. If all goes well, they expect to land there
next week.

The Voyager's designer, Mr. Rutan's brother Burt, said that the aircraft was
having to use more fuel than planned to dodge bad weather. The Voyager made some
90-degree turns and one 180-degree turn to escape turbulence, Burt Rutan said at
a news conference held at the Voyager control center in a hangar at Mojave
Airport.

It Bounces Like a Rowboat

''The Voyager is not like a commercial aircraft,'' said Mr. Rutan. ''Even the
slightest bit of turbulence makes the aircraft bounce as if you were in rough
seas in a rowboat.''

Several times, he said, Richard Rutan had to use the front engine, installed to
provide extra power for takeoffs and landings. Organizers of the flight had
hoped the plane would be able to cruise using only its rear engine.

The plane has 17 fuel tanks, but two of the largest are already empty, Burt
Rutan said. He said there was a chance the plane would run out of fuel. ''It's
nip and tuck,'' he said.

There were signs, too, that a fuel pressure gauge was not working properly. The
Voyager pilots conducted a series of tests to determine whether the gauge was
inaccurate. However, controllers in Mojave said they were confident that the
airplane had enough fuel.

Before dawn the Voyager skirted a typhoon over Guam, riding the spiral of the
storm and picking up a 30-mile-an-hour tailwind across the South China Sea.

But then, with Indochina to the north and storms to the south, Mr. Rutan
discovered there was also bad weather ahead. Unwilling to risk possible
turbulance over Indochina, including Vietnam, he turned completely around,
climbed to a higher altitude and then resumed his westward course.

Mr. Rutan called mission control and, according to a meteorologist, Larry Burch,
said: ''I have thunderstorms ahead. I see lightning bolts. What shall I do?''
Mr. Burch, consulting his maps, told him to head north. The Voyager crossed the
Bay of Bengal with 80,000-foot thunderheads to its south.

The Voyager was originally to have flown in the Southern Hemisphere, but weather
has kept it north of the Equator, Mr. Burch said. He said the plan was for it to
follow a route across the Indian Ocean, Central Africa, the Atlantic Ocean, the
Caribbean and up through Texas.

Meteorological Challenge Seen

Getting the Voyager around the world while avoiding turbulent air is ''the
biggest meteorological challenge a weather man could have,'' Mr. Burch said.
''Any time you fly over the tropics, you need to worry about flash
thunderstorms.''

Voyager weather experts stay in contact with the Air Force weather center in
Omaha, where information on winds is collected from all over the world. Weather
satellites operated by Japan and Western European countries are providing
pictures of weather systems along the route. As the craft crosses the Atlantic,
it will use information from American satellites.

The weather pictures are animated so that wind patterns and turbulence can be
mapped.

A meteorologist, Leonard Snellman, said that India had not yet launched its
weather satellite, so there was an information gap. Voyager will thus fly for
several hundred miles without the help of satellite information. But it will not
be flying blind, he said, because information, including data from weather
balloons of the World Meteorological Organization will be available.

Dr. George Jutila, the flight surgeon, said he spoke to the pilots today. They
are ''doing very well under the circumstances,'' he said. He likened them to
''two people living in a telephone booth on its side for three days.''

The meteorologists said their next challenge would be to guide the Voyager over
Africa. ''We can no longer make a right turn to avoid a typhoon,'' said Burt
Rutan. ''We may have to fly through some bad weather.''

A course will be chosen that directs the Voyager over countries friendly to the
United States, he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE NAME NEW PARTY CHIEF

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 18


A 73-year-old political administrator who built his career as Hanoi's
representative in the south before and after the takeover of Saigon was named
head of the Communist Party of Vietnam today.

The election of Nguyen Van Linh to the top party post was announced in Hanoi
during the closing session of the Sixth Communist Party Congress. It makes him
the country's most powerful figure and the first ruler not to be a member of Ho
Chi Minh's inner circle.

Mr. Linh replaces Truong Chinh, whose resignation as General Secretary of the
party was announced Wednesday as part of the most sweeping reorganization of the
party leadership in half a century. Five of 13 Politburo members have lost their
seats in the last two days.

Mr. Linh, a figure little known outside Vietnamese Communist Party circles, is
frequently associated with a group of economic pragmatists, many of them with
experience in the south, who have advocated some liberalization of the economy.

Significance Not Yet Clear

But the congress did not produce bold new economic policies, and most experts
say it is therefore too early to say whether Vietnam has been turned over to a
generation of reformers.

In other changes announced today, Vietnam's Defense Minister, Senior Gen. Van
Tien Dung, was dropped from the Politburo. He will lose his ministerial
position.

No reason was given for General Dung's departure from a job he held since 1980,
the year after Vietnam toppled the Government of its neighbor, Cambodia. Ever
since, Cambodia has been the site of an inconclusive war with which General Dung
and Le Duc Tho, who was dropped from the Politburo yesterday, have been
associated.

The name of Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, the hero of Dien Bien Phu and the war against
South Vietnam, was missing from today's Politburo appointments. He was returned
to the Central Committee rather than being named, as expected, to a higher party
post after having spent several years on the fringes of power.

A Rise in Status

However, Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach rose from the position of Politburo
alternate to its eighth-ranking member.

Vietnamese officials would not comment on whether Mr. Thach, who is well known
abroad, might leave the ministry for other government tasks. But one official
pointed out that Deputy Foreign Minister Hoang Bich Son had joined the party's
Central Committee, a steppingstone to higher office.

Another official who has promoted economic changes, the state planning director,
Vo Van Kiet, moved up from tenth place in the hierarchy to fifth.

One newcomer to the Politburo was Mai Chi Tho, the brother of Le Duc Tho. Mai
Chi Tho had been mayor and party secretary in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon,
and is considered one of Vietnam's leading experts on state security.

Nguyen Thanh Binh, secretary of the Hanoi party committee, also joined the
Politburo, as did Gen. Doan Khue, who had been First Deputy Minister of Defense.


Prime Ministership Still Vacant

Although no one was named today to fill the Prime Minister's position vacated
Wednesday by Pham Van Dong, the veteran revolutionary, the rankings in the new
Politburo list indicate that the job may go to Vo Chi Cong, now a Deputy Prime
Minister.

Mr. Cong moved up from seventh place on the Politburo list to third. He is
separated from the top position by Pham Hung, the last of Ho Chi Minh's inner
circle, who is reported to have declined the prime ministership.

Government ministries, as distinct from party positions, are to be allocated
when the National Assembly meets, probably in the last week of the year,
officials say.

Mr. Cong, who was formerly Agriculture Minister, has been an advocate of more
incentives for farmers as a means of raising food production. Increased food
supply has been made one of the top policy priorities at the congress, along
with the production of more consumer goods and the development of more export
industries to earn hard currency.

A Need for Development

Vietnam is suffering severe economic problems and needs capital and technology
for development. Western nations and Japan have withheld aid since Hanoi invaded
Cambodia.

The appointment of Mr. Linh (pronounced LING) to the country's top post was
widely expected, and seemed to be confirmed when he gave the opening speech of
the congress on Monday.

Mr. Linh, who was born in Hanoi, made his reputation in the 1960's and 1970's as
North Vietnam's top official with Vietcong forces in South Vietnam during the
war against American forces and the Saigon Government.

After the war Mr. Linh returned to Hanoi, where he was appointed to the party's
Central Committee and Politburo in 1976. Within a few years he was back in the
south as party chief in Ho Chi Minh City.

A year later, Mr. Linh stepped down from the Politburo and the party's
administrative body, the Secretariat. Some scholars believe he may have been
moved aside because he had failed to reorganize the south fast enough.

While in the south, Mr. Linh became identified with economic measures that were
designed to decentralize decision-making and to use material incentives to
stimulate production.

As more members of the leadership were coming to hold similar views, Mr. Linh
returned to the Politburo in 1985, perhaps vindicated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS: CHOOSING THE PROSECUTOR;
Naming of Walsh as Prosecutor Seen by Monday

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 244 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 18


The appointment of Lawrence E. Walsh as the special prosecutor in the Iran arms
investigation is expected to be announced Friday or Monday, people knowledgeable
about the search said today.

Officials said Mr. Walsh, a former Federal judge who once served as president of
the American Bar Association, had been called to Washington by the three-judge
selection panel and arrived today. Reached by telephone at his hotel, Mr. Walsh
declined to comment.

Mr. Walsh, 74 years old, has held more than a dozen government jobs, including
Deputy Attorney General, the No. 2 post in the Justice Department. He had served
as Assistant District Attorney in Manhattan and later was appointed to the
Federal bench there.

The search for a special prosecutor formally began two weeks ago, when the
Justice Department announced it would request an independent examination of the
Iran arms deal.

According to Government officials, Mr. Walsh will be expected to determine if
White House officials and others violated the law when they helped sell weapons
to Iran and then diverted some of the profits to Nicaraguan rebels.

Mr. Walsh, who now lives in Oklahoma City, was associated for more than 20 years
with the New York law firm of Davis Polk & Wardwell. In the late 1960's, he
served as a negotiator at the Paris peace talks aimed at ending the Vietnam War.

Reagan Administration officials have said the special prosecutor's investigation
could last more than a year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUDGET PROPOSES SHARP CUTS IN VETERANS' HEALTH BENEFITS

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 18


President Reagan's draft budget for the next fiscal year proposes sharp cuts in
Federal spending for veterans' health care benefits.

Confidential budget documents show that the Office of Management and Budget is
seeking to virtually eliminate medical benefits for veterans with income
exceeding $15,000 a year and for married veterans with income above $18,000.

To obtain Government medical care, such veterans are already subject to certain
criteria specified by a law that took effect last spring. Before that, Veterans
Administration institutions could provide free health care to veterans 65 years
old or older without regard to their ability to pay for such care.

Under the new plan, veterans with income above the proposed limits would have to
go elsewhere, the Veterans Administration predicted.

No Change for Disabled

But the agency would continue providing care to certain categories of veterans
without scrutinizing their financial resources or their ability to pay for
health care. These categories include veterans with disabilities resulting from
military service as well as former prisoners of war and Vietnam veterans who
were exposed to the herbicide Agent Orange.

President Reagan plans to send Congress his budget Jan. 5. The budget shows the
President's spending request for the fiscal year 1988, which begins next Oct. 1,
as well as his plans for the rest of the current fiscal year.

Mr. Reagan will ask Congress to cancel $160 million in appropriations already
made by Congress for veterans' medical care in the current fiscal year,
according to the budget documents. This would reduce the budget for these
programs to $9.25 billion.

The draft budget seeks to reduce the number of Government employees providing
medical care to veterans. Congress provided money this year for 194,140
employees. The Office of Management and Budget would cut the number by 3,000
this year and by more than 5,000 next year, to a level of 185,844 employees.

The Veterans Administration operates one of the largest health care systems in
the world, with 172 hospitals, 228 outpatient clinics and 119 nursing homes.
This year it expects 18 million outpatient visits to its facilities and projects
that it will treat 1.3 million inpatients at its hospitals and other
institutions.

The Office of Management and Budget said in the budget documents that the
proposed cuts were necessary to help cut the Federal deficit in 1988 to $108
billion, the level set by the law requiring a balanced budget by 1991.

Thomas K. Turnage, Administrator of Veterans Affairs, and his aides sent an
appeal of the proposed cuts to James C. Miller 3d, director of the Office of
Management and Budget, warning that they would have ''extreme consequences.''

They said the cuts would violate the Government's obligation to millions of
veterans who ''suffered no injuries or diseases as a consequence of their
service.'' In making such a proposal, they said, the budget office is
''violating a promise made and kept across the history of the nation.''

'Outrageously Bad and Unfair'

Senator Alan Cranston, Democrat of California, who will head the Committee on
Veterans Affairs in the new Congress, said: ''The Office of Management and
Budget seems determined to submit a 1988 budget that is just as outrageously bad
and unfair to veterans as the Administration's budget for fiscal 1987. I will
work to insure that the proposed cuts in veterans' programs get the same
resounding rejection from Congress as they got this year.''

Veterans' programs have enjoyed strong support from a bipartisan coalition of
members of Congress, including liberals and conservatives. But this year
Congress made a major change, establishing for the first time a means test for
free medical care under programs of the Veterans Administration.

The new law, signed by President Reagan on April 7, established three categories
of veterans. The Veterans Administration is required to provide needed hospital
care and medical services to any veteran who applies if his income is less than
$15,000 a year ($18,000 if the veteran is married).

Veterans with incomes from $15,000 to $20,000 are eligible to receive free care
if space and facilities are available. For married veterans, the income range is
$18,000 to $25,000.

Veterans with incomes above these levels can receive health care at Veterans
Administration facilities if space is available and if the veterans agree to
make certain payments. The charge this year was $492 for the first 90 days of a
hospital stay.

The Veterans Administration said the new budget proposals would require the
agency to ''concentrate its health care delivery solely toward'' the poorest
category of patients.

No Funds for New Nursing Homes

Although the number of elderly veterans is increasing rapidly, the President's
budget seeks ''no funds for new nursing homes.'' The Reagan Administration says
veterans can receive long-term care through state and local programs. The
Federal Government sometimes helps pay for such care.

The President's draft budget also proposes to increase the fee charged for home
mortgages guaranteed by the Veterans Administration. The fee, now 1 percent of
the loan amount, would be increased to 2.5 percent under the proposal. Congress
this year rejected a proposal that would have raised the fee gradually to 3.8
percent by 1990.

The budget also asks Congress for permission to sell $1.1 billion in loans held
by the Veterans Administration. Commercial banks and investment bankers have
expressed interest in buying such loans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
Police Monument Begins

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 36, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 155 words


A proposal to build a national monument on the Mall to law-enforcement officers
killed in the line of duty is getting into motion two years after Congress
approved it. Jan C. Scruggs, the moving spirit behind the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial, has agreed to become project director of the National Law Enforcement
Officers Memorial Fund and help organize a $5 million campaign to finance the
effort.

This morning at the National Press Club, Mr. Scruggs will announce plans to
start a campaign of direct mail solicitation and seek out corporate sponsors.
The memorial is to be built on public land in Washington on a site selected by
the Secretary of the Interior, with the fund sponsoring an architectural
competition for a design. Participating in the fund are major police
organizations, including the Fraternal Order of Police, the International
Association of Police Chiefs and the International Brotherhood of Police Officer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: THE VIETNAM WAR IN STONE'S 'PLATOON'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1125 words


NOTHING that Oliver Stone has done before - including ''Midnight Express,'' for
which he wrote the screenplay, and ''Salvador,'' which he wrote and directed -
is preparation for the singular achievement of his latest film, ''Platoon,''
which is possibly the best work of any kind about the Vietnam War since Michael
Herr's vigorous and hallucinatory book ''Dispatches.''

For that matter, ''Platoon,'' opening today at Loews New York Twin and Astor
Plaza, is not like any other Vietnam film that's yet been made -certainly not
like those revisionist comic strips ''Rambo'' and ''Missing in Action.'' Nor
does it have much in common with either Francis Coppola's epic ''Apocalypse
Now,'' which ultimately turns into a romantic meditation on a mythical war, or
Michael Cimino's ''Deer Hunter,'' which is more about the mind of the America
that fought the war than the Vietnam War itself.

Much like Mr. Herr's ''Dispatches,'' this vivid, terse, exceptionally moving new
film deals with the immediate experience of the fighting - that is, with the
life of the infantryman, endured at ground level, in heat and muck, with fatigue
and ants and with fear as a constant, even during the druggy hours back in the
comparative safety of the base.

Life becomes very simple in such circumstances: ''we'' are ''grunts'' and
''they'' are ''gooks.'' That's reason enough to kill or be killed. However,
since the announced enemy remains invisible most of the time or, when visible,
without particular character, an entire hierarchy of other, more comprehensible
enemies emerges from the ranks of one's comrades. Sanity is not a state of mind
but a pair of dry socks. Objectives don't have names. They're numbered
coordinates, drawn on a very small map from which the rest of the world has
vanished.

Mr. Stone, himself a Vietnam vet, observes the war through the short focus of a
single infantry platoon, fighting somewhere near the Cambodian border in 1967.
It's meant as praise to say the film appears to express itself with the same
sort of economy that used to be employed in old, studio-made action movies
-B-pictures in which characters are largely defined through what they do rather
than what they say.

That's only the impression, since the grunts in ''Platoon'' do talk quite a lot,
though for the most part, they don't get too literary, nor do they explain too
much. They are so exceedingly ordinary that they sometimes jump off the screen
as if they were the originals for all the cliched types that have accumulated in
all earlier war movies.

There's the fellow who says with cheerful reason that, if you're going to get
killed in Vietnam, it's better to get killed in the first couple of weeks.
Otherwise, you just waste time worrying about it. There's also the young,
out-of-his-depth officer who does the best he can to talk his men's language
but, when he leaves their recreation hut, must say, as if exiting from the frat
house, ''I gotta run. I'll catch you guys later.''

At the center of the film is Chris Taylor, a new arrival who dropped out of
college to enlist, a fact that strikes the rest of the platoon as profoundly
comically irrational. Chris, beautifully played by Charlie Sheen, is about as
close as ''Platoon'' ever gets to a literary mouthpiece - he writes letters home
to his grandmother, which we hear on the soundtrack, and in which he always -
politely -sends regards to his mother and father.

Chris is idealized but without sentimentality. Part of him remains unknown and
private, at least until the final minutes of the film, when Mr. Stone
unfortunately feels called upon to have Chris say what has been far more
effectively left unsaid.

The platoon's most important figures are two NCO's, each an exhausted,
self-aware veteran of earlier Vietnam tours: the facially scarred Sergeant
Barnes (Tom Berenger), who has somehow become committed to the war, which is all
he has left, and Sergeant Elias (Willem Dafoe), whom the war has made as eerily
gentle as Barnes is brutal. The two men, longtime friends, loathe each other.

Throughout the action of the film, the sergeants are fighting their own war for
the loyalty of the men. It's a measure of how well both roles are written and
played that one comes to understand even the astonishing cruelty of Barnes and
the almost saintly goodness of Elias. Each has gone over the edge.

Another measure of the film is the successful way Mr. Stone has managed to
create narrative order in a film that, at heart, is a dramatization of mental,
physical and moral chaos. ''Platoon'' gives the impression at first of being
only a little less aimless than the men, whose only interest is staying alive
or, as Chris Taylor puts it, of remaining ''anonymous,'' meaning safe.

Yet the tension builds and never lets up (until the anti-climactic final
moments). Somewhere in the second half of the film, there's a sequence of
astonishing, harrowing impact that sort of ambles into a contemplation of how a
My Lai massacre could have happened. It's not easy to sit through, not only
because it's grisly but also because, all things considered, it's so inevitable.

Mr. Stone's control over his own screenplay is such that ''Platoon'' seems to
slide into and out of crucial scenes without ever losing its distant cool. He
doesn't telegraph emotions, nor does he stomp on them. The movie is a succession
of found moments. It's less like a work that's been written than one that has
been discovered, though, as we all probably know, screenplays aren't delivered
by storks. This one is a major piece of work, as full of passion as it is of
redeeming, scary irony.

The members of the supporting cast are no less fine than the principal players,
and no less effective, often, for being almost anonymous. Two particular
standouts are Kevin Dillon, Matt's younger brother, who has the flashy role of a
certifiable, homicidal maniac with a baby face, and Keith David, who plays Mr.
Sheen's best friend, a black soldier who may be the only sane man in the
platoon.

''Platoon'' is a Vietnam film that honors its uneasy, complex, still haunted
subject.

BATTLEGROUND - PLATOON, written and directed by Oliver

Stone; director of photography, Robert Richardson; film editor, Claire Simpson;
music by Georges Delerue; produced by Arnold Kopelson; released by Orion
Pictures Corporation. At Loews Astor Plaza, Broadway and 44th Street; New York
Twin, Second Avenue at 66th Street. Running time: 113 minutes. This film is
rated R. Sergeant Barnes...Tom Berenger; Sergeant Elias...Willem Dafoe;
Chris...Charlie Sheen; Big Harold...Forest Whitaker; Rhah...Francesco Quinn;
Sergeant O'Neill...John C. McGinley; Sal...Richard Edson; Bunny...Kevin Dillon;
Junior...Reggie Johnson; King...Keith David.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS: A LOOK AT THE PRSECUTOR;
MAN IN THE NEWS: A Jurist in Varied Roles: Lawrence Edward Walsh

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 19


Lawrence E. Walsh has spent 50 years weaving the threads of public service and
private representation into a career that has included frequent troubleshooting
missions, occasional controversy, moments in the spotlight, experience as a
prosecutor, judge and advocate and service at the highest levels of the
profession.

Today he said that the job of independent counsel was ''probably the most
important that I've been asked to do.'' Then he added: ''And so I wanted to do
it.''

Thirteen years ago Mr. Walsh was on the list of potential special prosecutors to
head the Watergate investigation. For decades, his name has been on nearly any
list of lawyers required for various blue-ribbon assignments. Over the years,
one of his former law partners said today that ''private clients have turned to
him when they were in trouble and public officials have turned to him when
government was in trouble.''

A trim and vigorous six-footer who will turn 75 on Jan. 8, Mr. Walsh was once
described as looking as if he had stepped out of the pages of a Louis
Auchincloss novel about a Wall Street lawyer.

Wall St. Practice

Indeed, Wall Street law practice was his professional center of gravity for most
of his career. For 20 years, he was a partner in the firm of Davis Polk &
Wardwell, specializing in litigation on behalf of corporate clients.

In 1981, before he turned 70, the usual retirement age for partners in the firm,
he left Davis Polk and moved to Oklahoma City, his wife's hometown. He
established an active law practice there that frequently brought him back to New
York in collaboration with his old law firm.

But in those years on Wall Street, private law practice was scarcely
all-consuming. First, Governor Nelson A. Rockefeller called on him for a
yearlong assignment as head of a special commission to recommend reforms in the
way New York State regulated the liquor industry. Then Mayor-elect John V.
Lindsay put him in charge of an anti-crime panel.

As a trustee of Columbia University and president of the university's Alumni
Federation, he made recommendations to the university in the wake of the 1968
student riots. He urged Columbia and its alumni to ''forthrightly attack the
problem of making Harlem a self-sufficient, healthy community.''

Deputy at Paris Peace Talks

In 1969, President-elect Nixon named Mr. Walsh as the deputy to Henry Cabot
Lodge, the chief United States negotiator at the Paris peace talks seeking an
end to the war in Vietnam. The talks foundered, and both men resigned later that
year.

Mr. Walsh was the chairman of the American Bar Association's standing committee
on the Federal judiciary when that panel approved two of President Nixon's
Supreme Court nominees, Clement F. Haynsworth Jr. and G. Harrold Carswell. The
Senate rejected both nominees, and both the bar association and Mr. Walsh came
under intense criticism.

''I still carry scars from that,'' he said in an interview some years ago.
''It's not a job to do if you're afraid of scars.''

Asked at a news conference today whether he wished he had handled the matter
differently, Mr. Walsh said today that he would still recommend the confirmation
of Judge Haynsworth, who had a respected career as a Federal appellate judge. Of
Mr. Carswell, he said: ''I'm not going to express any view on him now. It's no
longer important.''

Months later, Mr. Walsh's committee refused to endorse two other Nixon
Administration choices for the Supreme Court, Herschel H. Friday and Mildred
Lillie. Mr. Nixon and his Attorney General, John N. Mitchell, were so angry that
they cut the committee out of the nomination process and shunned Mr. Walsh, who
had enjoyed easy access at high levels of the Administration.

Worked Against Meskill

In 1975, Mr. Walsh, then president-elect of the American Bar Association, led a
long and unsuccessful effort to defeat the nomination of Gov. Thomas J. Meskill
of Connecticut to the United States Court of Appeals in New York. President
Nixon had nominated Mr. Meskill before resigning the Presidency.

Although Mr. Walsh is often addressed as judge, his judicial tenure was a short
chapter in his career. President Eisenhower named him to the Federal District
Court in Manhattan in 1954. In his most important judicial assignment, he
presided over the litigation resulting from the 1956 collision of the Andrea
Doria and the Stockholm.

He left the bench three years later to become Deputy Attorney General, the No. 2
job in the Justice Department. The Attorney General, William P. Rogers, was an
old friend and colleague from the days when the two young lawyers worked for
Thomas E. Dewey, the Manhattan District Attorney, in the late 1930's.

When Mr. Dewey became Governor of New York, Mr. Walsh went to work for him as an
assistant counsel and was named chief counsel in 1950. The next year, he became
chief counsel of the state's Public Service Commission. In 1953, he was named
executive director and general counsel to the Waterfront Commission, which had
the mission of cleaning up corruption on the New York docks.

Born in Nova Scotia

Lawrence Edward Walsh was born Jan. 8, 1912, in Port Maitland, Nova Scotia, a
fishing town where his father, Cornelius Edward Walsh, was a physician. His
mother was the former Lila May Sanders. The family moved to New York when he was
2 years old. He grew up in Queens and became a naturalized citizen at the age of
10.

He graduated from Columbia College in 1932 and from the law school in 1935. For
seven summers, he earned money by working as a merchant seaman. He had
originally intended to be an engineer until he discovered he was ''incompetent''
at mathematics.

Mr. Walsh's first wife, Maxine, died. In 1965 he married Mary Alma Porter of
Oklahoma City. He has four daughters and a son.

Mr. Walsh's reputation for being unflappable was put to the test as he
approached a crowded news conference today. A radio reporter and a photographer
standing near him practically came to blows over who could get the closest. He
glanced at the contenders, and then he walked calmly into the room.

He turned away concern that he was too old for the job. ''I haven't been
concerned with my own age,'' he said. ''So I'm satisfied.''

And he prompted much laughter among reporters when he good-naturedly defended
himself against allegations that his ties to the Republican Party might affect
the investigation's objectivity.

''If you have to have a career in one party or another,'' he said, ''I can't
think of a better party.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Mr. Walsh and the Price of Trust

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 439 words


By choosing Lawrence Walsh, an elder statesman among American lawyers, as
independent counsel to investigate the Iran-contra crisis, a Federal court in
Washington helps calm the controversy while assuring more satisfactory answers
to its mysteries.

Mr. Walsh, a former New York lawyer, judge, Deputy Attorney General and Vietnam
peace negotiator, combines worldly experience with high ethical standards. His
appointment, along with this week's appointment of highly competent Senate and
House select committees, betoken a return to trustworthy government and a fair
accounting of where the nation's leadership went astray. These reassurances come
at a price.  The executive branch is in partial receivership, properly stripped
of its power to investigate itself. Though some officials plead the Fifth
Amendment, the Administration as a whole is pleading ignorance. That leaves
Congress and Mr. Walsh to sort out policy misjudgments, flawed execution,
deception and perhaps downright criminality.

The court chose wisely. It also responded prudently to Congressional entreaties
to broaden the counsel's jurisdiction. Attorney General Edwin Meese, ignoring
pleas from critics in Congress, sought a mandate limiting him to investigating
the sale of arms to Iran and the transfer of proceeds to the Nicaraguan rebels.
The actual charter is broad enough to include potentially illegal contra aid
independent of the Iran deals.

As Archibald Cox, the former Watergate prosecutor, observed recently, criminal
investigations are important but subordinate to Congress's need to uncover what
happened. Mr. Walsh can be expected to work effectively with the committees when
overlap threatens. His prosecutorial days are a distant chapter in a long legal
career, but at 74 he retains great energy and a capacity for outrage at
wrongdoing.

Like him, the members of the Senate and House committees are largely moderate
professionals, unlikely to be vindictive or partisan. All face an early test in
deciding whether to force Vice Adm. John Poindexter and Lieut. Col. Oliver North
to testify in Congress. Mr. Walsh would be forbidden to use such testimony
against them. The committees don't need Mr. Walsh's approval to immunize the
witnesses but they would be wise to consult with him.

These various investigators will not rush to convict, acquit or immunize. They
seem well suited to conduct the impartial probe contemplated by the Ethics in
Government Act when the Justice Department has a political conflict of interest.
The crisis afflicts public trust in government. Slowly, carefully, these formal
fact-finding bodies can rebuild it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Keep an Eye on Hanoi

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 451 words


So far only the faces are different in Vietnam, but policy changes could be
next. If these bring relaxation of control at home and in Cambodia, they could
be of enormous importance to the people of Indochina and open some interesting
opportunities in the Soviet-Chinese-American triangle.

Economic reformers dominate the new leadership lineup announced at this week's
Communist Party Congress. Vietnam has been mired in deep poverty, the price of
doctrinaire Communism and aggression in Cambodia. The Vietnamese people need
relief.

As for foreign relations, the new team might be ready to rethink policy toward
Cambodia. Vietnam's military occupation of that country has been long and
frightful, and fuels a deadly civil war. Hanoi's insistence on retaining control
of Cambodia is the main reason the world has isolated Vietnam.

If the new leaders would shift the focus to development, they could reassess
their present dependence on the Soviet Union. The Russians provide them, as an
anti-Chinese ally, about $1 billion yearly. For Vietnam to leave Cambodia would
allow repositioning between Moscow and Peking and help to open the door with
Washington as well.

The party congress, the first since the death last summer of the veteran
Communist leader Le Duan, designated Nguyen Van Linh as party chief, and
replaced 5 of the 13 politburo members. Mr. Linh, the new party leader, was
Hanoi's top official in South Vietnam before and after unification. His
familiarity with the South's more open economic style made him an advocate of
economic decentralization and raising production through material incentives
rather than ideological exhortations. These views were resisted in the past and
only the announcement of a new economic program will show how far Hanoi is
prepared to go now. Nevertheless, the promotion of other leading economic
reformers is a positive sign.

A hint of a possible change on Cambodia comes from the retirement of both Le Duc
Tho and Gen. Van Tien Dung, two leaders closely linked to present policies.
Economic revival virtually depends on reversing those policies, which have
drained resources and provoked a cutoff of Western and Japanese assistance.

Vietnam's revolutionary cadres endured years of sacrifice, sustained by dreams
of development and nationalist glory. Instead, they have reaped underdevelopment
and dependence on support from Hanoi's only ally, the Soviet Union. If Vietnam's
new leaders seek a constructive way out of the mess and provide more information
about Americans missing in action and related issues, Washington should be ready
to pay heed and encourage a welcome trend. Policy made in Vietnam can still
reverberate in the largest capitals.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TWO TIMES SQUARE STALWARTSMAKE WAY FOR NEW BUILDINGS;
U.S.O. CENTER FACING EVICTION AFTER DECADES AS BEACON TO SOLDIERS

BYLINE: By NICK RAVO

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 667 words


The Times Square U.S.O. center - long part of a network known as a soldier's
home away from home - may soon become homeless.

The center, in the basement of the Loews State Theater building at West 45th
Street and Broadway, is being evicted to make room for a Times Square
redevelopment project.

''It's not just another light gone out on Broadway,'' said the center's
executive director, Robert L. Riddell. ''It's a beacon.''

The Loews building was sold 10 months ago to the VMS Development Corporation and
the Times Square developer Bruce Eichner. The new owners plan to demolish it and
build a structure that would include a 160-car parking garage, four movie
theaters, a retail arcade, 600 hotel rooms and 240 apartments. #90 Days' Notice
Officials of the United Service Organizations received an eviction notice last
month ordering them to leave the building by Feb. 5. They say relocation by that
date is almost impossible. They want an extension.

''We knew it was sold; we knew eventually we had to move,'' Mr. Riddell said.
''The thing that threw us is that they only gave us 90 days' notice.''

''It's unfortunate,'' said the president of VMS Development, Stephen Barini.
''We are going to demand that they be out, but we are presently trying to locate
a new spot for them.''

U.S.O. officials said the developers were sympathetic, but that is not enough.
''They have been very helpful, very cooperative, but we don't have a place,''
said the chairman and chief operating officer of the U.S.O. in the tri-state
area, Paul R. Screvane.

Mr. Riddell said the U.S.O. is seeking about 4,000 square feet of office space,
preferably in the Times Square area and preferably on a ground floor. ''We're
looking for a proper place where transients could visually see us, get to us and
get out,'' he said. ''What good are we on the 38th floor of some midtown office
building? The location, the setting, it's so important.''

Rent for the 4,600 square feet of office space used by the U.S.O is about
$40,000 a year, Mr. Riddell said. Amenities such as food and furniture are
donated. Rent, utilities and salaries are paid by the U.S.O., a nonprofit
organization that receives no Government funding.

The tri-state area U.S.O currently maintains another center at Kennedy
Internaional Airport, and its corporate offices are at 140 West Street, near the
World Trade Center.

The center, formally known as the General Douglas MacArthur Memorial Center, has
been at its current location since 1968 and in the Times Square area since 1941.
It serves tens of thousands of soldiers, sailors and airmen and their family
members each year, Mr. Screvane said.

''We're still looking at other locations,'' Mr. Screvane said. ''But the kids
want to stay in Times Square. We did the polls, and this is where they want to
be. This is where the action is.''

Altered Role

The role of the U.S.O. has changed over the years. During World War II, the
Korean War and the Vietnam War, the organization became famous for providing
entertainment -dances, concerts and shows - for members of the military away
from home.

''It was the one anchor for us who were on the move,'' said Mr. Riddell, who
served in the Navy in World War II.

Today, however, in peacetime and without a draft, the Times Square U.S.O. center
- essentially a snack bar, a ticket counter and a dozen couches - resembles an
information booth at a bus station and almost all of the service members arrive
dressed as civilians.

Services are generally limited to handing out theater, movie or sporting
tickets, or finding a service member and his family a place to stay, or warning
about life in the area's seamier sections.

''They depend on us not just for movies and sporting events, but the meat and
potatoes, too,'' Mr. Riddell said, referring to the drug, alcohol and family
crisis programs provided by the U.S.O. ''Many of these people, they have never
been in New York before and getting acquainted with the city is a trauma in
itself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Russell Cole checking his finances outside the U.S.O center in
the basement of the Loews State Theater building (NYT/Fred Conrad)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OFFICIALS CITE 26 FOOD OUTLETS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 68, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 350 words


The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 26 food
establishments cited for violating the health code.

In addition, it listed 11 restaurants that were allowed to reopen after
correcting earlier violations and one that was closed for having failed to do
so. The establishments are these: Violations MANHATTAN Dallas BBQ, 27 W. 72d St.
Fon Lee, 307 W. 38th St. 41 Coffee Shop, 143 W. 40th St. Hung Bo Joy Hang
Seafood Restaurant, 105 East Broadway (Pike St.).

Kan Lai Chinese, 708 Amsterdam Ave. (94th

St.).

Loong Lau Restaurant, 206 Canal St. (Mulberry

St.). Marino's Restaurant, 109 Washington St. (Carlisle St.). Metropolitan
Coffee Shop, 444 Park Ave. S. (30th St.). New Vietnam Restaurant, 11-13 Doyers
St. (Pell St.). Ottomanelli's, 1518 1st Ave. (79th St.). Popeye's Famous, 722
7th Ave. (48th St.). Sakura Restaurant, 2298 Broadway (83d St.).

San Francisco Plum Restaurant, 544 Ave. of the

Americas (15th St.). BRONX Carmela's, 601 E. 187th St. BROOKLYN Gastronom
Moscow, 3152 Brighton 6th St. (Brightwater Ct.). Seville Restaurant, 4307 18th
Ave. (E. 2d St.). Williamsburg Coffee, 192 Havemeyer St. (Grand St. Ext.).
QUEENS Asuwon Chinese Restaurant, 80-13 Roosevelt Ave. Aunt Rosie's, 43-57 11th
St. Ehak Restaurant, 36-22 Union St. Faierman's Deli, 256-01 Union Tpk. Fast &
Best Deli Restaurant, 31-52 Steinway St. Mr. G's Pizza, 79-15 Atlantic Ave.
Peking Chinese Kitchen, 141-06 Northern Blvd. Village Diner, 218-12 Jamaica Ave.
STATEN ISLAND Mister's, 4358 Victory Blvd. (Glen St.).

Reopened MANHATTAN Baskin-Robbins, 454 Lenox Ave. (133d St.). Golden Pizza, 7
Carmine St. BRONX McDonald's, 300 E. 204th St. El Oasis Chino Restaurant, 3489
Jerome Ave. (E. Gun Hill Rd.). Pizza Time, 693 Nereid Ave. (White Plains Rd.).
Santa Ana Restaurant, 942 E. 163d St. Tony's Pizza, 3733 Riverdale Ave. (238th
St.). BROOKLYN Tiffany Restaurant, 42 4th Ave. (Dean St.). Wendy's, 1 DeKalb
Ave. (Fulton St.).

Boston Fried Chicken, 365 Myrtle Ave. (Adelphi

St.). QUEENS Georgia, 792 Onderdonk Ave.

Closed QUEENS Ringside Pub, 102-31 Jamaica Ave.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'PLATOON' GRAPPLES WITH VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Michael Norman: Michael Norman, a former reporter for The New York
Times, served in Vietnam with the 2d Battalion, 9th Marines in 1968. He is at
work on a book about 11 of his comrades who survived the war and one who is
missing in action.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2118 words


The guns are silent and cold, but the memory of their report still echoes across
the land. Vietnam lingers, especially for the eager volunteers and luckless
conscripts who crossed the Pacific to fight it. They are in their maturity now.
They sit in the Congress, they stand along the assembly line, they sell pencils
in the street. Some have tried to bury their past and forget the war. Many more
have searched for a way to remember. They have a new mission now, one that began
when the fighting stopped. This is the mission to make sense of the senseless,
to find some provision in a storehouse laid empty by waste.

When the veteran is an artist - a writer, a sculptor, a cinematographer - his
war almost invariably becomes his subject. ''The soldier who has seen blood
spilt'' is a marked man, said the historian Dixon Wecter in 1944. ''It remains a
dye in the fabric, a warp in the wood.'' Oliver Stone, film writer and director,
is one of these men. On Sept. 15, 1967, he reported for duty in Vietnam, an
infantryman, or ''grunt'' as they were called, a member of the 2d platoon of
Bravo Company, 3d battalion, 25th infantry. He served in two other units before
his tour was done and was twice wounded and decorated. In 1976, he wrote a
screenplay about his comrades and the war they fought. Now, 10 years later, he
has turned his script into a movie, ''Platoon,'' a graphic and often brutal film
that is likely to unsettle even those who lived through the war's restless
nights and incendiary days.

Mr. Stone says his aim was to ''make a document of a time and place,'' to
re-create the reality of Vietnam so that those who stayed home or came of age
after it ended would now know ''what it was like to be there.'' An artist, of
course, has no obligation to state his purpose or explain his work. The
substance of what he creates is its own message. His style is his metaphor for
meaning. But Vietnam was more than a shooting war across the sea. It was as well
a political and cultural struggle at home. The fighting along this ''second
front,'' as it might be called, is now sporadic, but the skirmish lines are
still hot, and anyone who takes a place there - novelist, playwright, film maker
- should be prepared to defend himself.

''Platoon,'' at the Astor Plaza and New York Twin, has a simple and familiar
story line. The protagonist, Chris Taylor, is a 21-year-old child of privilege
who volunteered for the draft and Vietnam because he was convinced that young
men who had grown up with less than him could teach him something about life.
The war was to be his metamorphosis, his passage to manhood.

Taylor joins his unit in the jungle and a short time later is slightly wounded
when his platoon, out at night to ambush the enemy, is surprised by its prey. In
the weeks that follow, it becomes clear that the platoon is divided into two
cliques formed around two sergeants who are rivals - Barnes and Elias - the
former a figure of evil, the latter of good. Taylor falls in with Elias. At one
point, after taking some casualties on a patrol, the platoon enters a village
and begins to seek its revenge. Taylor, stunned and outraged by the death of his
comrades, begins to take part in the brutality, then becomes horrified by it.

At the end of the movie, and of Taylor's tour, the platoon fights an apocalyptic
battle with a large enemy force. Taylor is again wounded, but survives this
bloody holocaust. As he is airlifted from the scene, his voice, speaking from
the present, says, ''Those of us who did make it have an obligation to build
again, to teach others what we know and to try with what's left of our lives to
find a goodness and a meaning to this life.''

As a story, a narrative, ''Platoon'' borrows from the long tradition of war
literature. Here is the classic warrior myth, the innocent who goes off to
battle and comes back with what he believes is the wisdom of the ages. Here is
war corrupting those who take part in it. Here is the survivor as hero. And,
finally, here is the awful result of technology turned to destruction. The same
story has been told in different eras by Stephen Crane and Erich Maria Remarque
and Norman Mailer.

As a film, however, ''Platoon'' is an attempt to break new ground. Like other
war movies, it has its share of cliches. (In one scene, a dying soldier drops to
his knees and raises his hands to heaven. ''Poetic license,'' says Mr. Stone.)
But it is a rare film in that it tries to re-create the grim chaos of combat.
And it is likely the first film about Vietnam to give a sense of the persistent
fear, discomfort and hard labor of fighting there. It is possible to argue with
the way Mr. Stone drew his characters, the way he choreographed his battles and
his various explicit and implicit messages, but few veterans will find any fraud
in his milieu and many will remember the way combat left them feeling numbed and
stupefied.

Mr. Stone, of course, did not aim his movie at his own kind, his comrades. He is
sure its appeal will be broad, and his opinion might be well founded. The
currency of war is violence and death, issues, wrote the self-described
psychohistorian Robert Jay Lifton, that are ''all too real'' for everyone.
Confounded by these issues, those who have not witnessed death ask questions of
those who have. Rare is the combat veteran who has not been pushed to answer:
''Did you kill anyone?'' and ''What was it like?'' Some of the questioners were
no doubt preoccupied with death. But most were simply looking for help. As Dr.
Lifton wrote, they were involved in the common ''struggle to come to terms with
the realization that one's own life could and would be at some moment snuffed
out.''

To convey ''what it was like,'' said Mr. Stone, ''We took a lot of pains with
details.'' The film, with a modest budget of $6.5 million, was shot in the
Philippines between March and May, monsoon and summer. The Philippine Government
supplied the military hardware and equipment and a former Marine Corps captain,
Dale Dye, the film's technical adviser, provided much of the verisimilitude. He
''trained'' the ensemble of young actors, putting them through a 14-day boot
camp to prepare them for their roles. ''Actors have a great imagination,'' said
Mr. Stone. ''They were able to take those two weeks and turn them into months.''
Makeup artists gave Mr. Stone the details of gore for his wounded and the gray
pallor of death for his corpses. All that was left was to haul in ''tons of
dirt'' to keep everyone filthy and covered with mud. When everything was set,
the cameras began to roll, and 54 days later Oliver Stone began to film a script
he said no one wanted to buy a decade ago.

This is the second major movie Mr. Stone, 40 years old, wrote and directed. The
first was ''Salvador.'' He also wrote the screenplays for ''Midnight Express''
and ''Scarface.'' His material has been topical, his style graphic. Someone, he
says, proudly, once described him as a cinematic provocateur.

''Platoon,'' in many ways, is a chapter in his autobiography. The character of
Chris Taylor has the psyche of Oliver Stone, and when the director is asked a
question, he will sometimes refer the interviewer to his screenplay for the
answer. Why, Mr. Stone, did you volunteer for the draft?

''CHRIS VOICE OVER: I guess I have always been sheltered and special. I just
want to be anonymous. Live up to what grandpa did in the First War and Dad in
the Second. I know this is going to be the war of my generation.''

Mr. Stone was born in France and raised in New York City. In 1965, he dropped
out of Yale during his freshman year and, filled with the words of Joseph
Conrad, set out for the Orient and adventure. He paid his way to Saigon and took
a job in the city's Chinese district teaching school at the Free Pacific
Institute. ''I was 18,'' he said. ''My father treated me like a child and I
wanted to prove I was a man.''

Six months later he took a job in the engine room of a merchant ship run, he
said, ''by characters right out of the 19th century - the fat captain, the
soldier who worked for the C.I.A., the strong bull of an engineer.'' He switched
ships, sailed through a hurricane to home and in 1966 took up temporary
residence in Guadalajara, Mexico, where he began a 1,400-page autobiographical
novel called ''Child's Night Dream.'' A few months later, he returned to Yale,
but not to class. He kept writing his novel and flunking his courses. In 1967,
he tried to get his work published and was rejected.

''I was upset,'' he said, ''heartbroken. I wanted to go back to Southeast Asia.
But I wanted to get to another level. I hadn't hit the bottom - you know, in the
screenplay on Page 15.''

''CHRIS VOICE OVER: I've found it finally, way down here in the mud - maybe from
down here I can start up again and be something I can be proud of, without
having to fake it, maybe. . . I can see something I don't yet see, learn
something I don't yet know.''

So, like his French grandfather in World War I and his American father in World
War II, he went off to fight. And now, 18 years later, he has made a movie that
tries to convey the passion of that search and the cost of the adventure. And
yet, like many other efforts since the war, it does little to solve Vietnam's
sobering conundrum or to provide the kind of meaning that Chris Taylor, the
protagonist, or Oliver Stone, the film maker, is searching for.

Part of the problem might be Mr. Stone's attempt to ''document'' the experience.
War, real war, is an obscenity. It is foul. It is repulsive. It is loathsome.
War has no form and war has no style. It is the absence of art, not the
substance of it. A film maker can suggest or evoke this ugliness and chaos, but
he cannot capture the effect of a year of unrelenting terror and tedium on 113
minutes of film.

For all its graphic realism, Mr. Stone's film is still an adventure story, his
protagonist still a kind of existential hero. ''I wanted to show the boy
changing from an innocent kid into somebody who comes to include both good and
evil in him,'' he said. ''This is a memoir of youth.''

Although the film is rooted in his experience - that is, it portrays events that
either he or his unit took part in and characters he knew as comrades -
''Platoon'' might be taken by many as typical of what every soldier experienced
in Vietnam. And if that happens, it will resurrect old and troubling notions
about how American men behaved on a battlefield so far from home.

The most brutal sequence in the movie, the one that most prompted those who
walked out of the previews to leave, takes place in a village. Angry and out of
control, some members of the platoon begin to murder and rape civilians.

''I wasn't trying to call up My Lai,'' Mr. Stone said. ''This is not an academic
film. It is based on my experience. We did shoot livestock. We burned hooches.
One of my comrades did kill a woman. I did save two girls from being raped and
killed. It was madness.''

It also was not typical. Yes, some men, perhaps many men, are just as brutalized
by war as the innocents who wander into their sights. ''From the Homeric account
of the sacking of Troy to the conquest of Dien Bien Phu, Western literature is
filled with descriptions of soldiers as berserkers and mad destroyers,'' wrote
J. Glen Gray, the philosopher and World War II veteran. However, he adds,
''destruction is ultimately an individual matter, a function of the person and
not the group.'' And this particular truth about war underscores what seems to
be missing from Mr. Stone's film, perhaps what he never came to know - the
passion of comradeship.

There is little kinship for the men of ''Platoon.'' They may serve together, but
there is no sense of self-sacrifice among them, no loyalty and no love. It is
thus not surprising that many of Mr. Stone's characters come across as
coldblooded killers. ''Comradeship among killers is terribly difficult,'' wrote
Mr. Gray. And it is on this point, found so often in the art and memoirs of war,
that a great many men will break with Mr. Stone and find his film lacking.

And yet, I am glad he prevailed and brought his story to the screen. It is a
welcome counterpoint to the comic and grotesque characterizations offered by the
authors of ''Rambo'' and other cardboard heroes. And Mr. Stone's reality is much
closer to the moral truth of Vietnam than the chest-thumping of modern
revisionists. What is more, it is time for the veterans of Oliver Stone's war,
my war, to pass through what T. S. Eliot called the ''unknown remembered gate. .
. the source of the hidden river. . . the voice of the longest waterfall,'' in
short, the past. We may, at last, be ready to find our peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tom Berenger and Li Thi Van

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WEEK: WITH ADDED TWISTS, A BIZARRE TALE CONTINUES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 491 words


Sunday: Nicaragua said Sam Nesley Hall, a self-styled counterterrorist and
brother of Representative Tony P. Hall, Democrat of Ohio, had been arrested at
an air base near Managua and accused of spying.

Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, who was dismissed from the National Security
Council staff for his role in the sale of arms to Iran and the diversion of
funds to the Nicaraguan rebels, was reported to have helped a campaign to defeat
Congressional candidates opposed to aid for the contras by collaborating with a
conservative lobbyist, Carl R. Channell. No evidence emerged that funds from the
arms sales went to the political campaign.

Monday: William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, was
hospitalized. A tumor was removed from his brain Thursday. Tuesday: Donald T.
Regan, the White House chief of staff, was said to have told the Senate
Intelligence Committee that President Reagan at first rejected selling arms to
Iran, but the sales became United States policy after Israel went ahead with
arms shipments. His version conflicted with that of Robert C. McFarlane, the
former national security adviser, who said the President had given advance
approval for the Israeli shipments. A special Senate committee was named to look
into the scandal.

Wednesday: The Federal Bureau of Investigation is looking into why Attorney
General Edwin Meese 3d ordered a delay in an investgation of arms shipments to
Nicaragua. The order suggests that he may have known earlier than he has
acknowledged about the diversion of funds.

Secretary of State Shultz told United States ambassasors not to communicate
directly with the White House national security adviser unless they had his
permission or that of the President.

The House named its Iran scandal committee, nine Democrats and six Republicans,
with Representative Lee H. Hamilton, an Indiana Democrat, as chairman.

Eugene Hasenfus, the American cargo handler sentenced to 30 years in a
Nicaraguan prison as an arms supplier and spy, was freed by the Sandinista
Government.

Thursday: The Justice Department said the delay of the F.B.I. inquiry into
contra arms shipments had been requested by Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, who
resigned as national security adviser when the Iran scandal broke.

The department said the admiral had asked Mr. Meese for the delay, saying the
investigation could endanger talks on freeing American hostages in Lebanon.

Friday: Lawrence E. Walsh, a former prosecutor, Federal judge and Vietnam peace
negotiator, was named independent counsel, or special prosecutor, to conduct a
criminal investigation into the Iran affair. His broad mandate will allow him to
look into arms shipments to Nicaraguan rebels since 1984. ''I recognize the
importance of what I'm being asked to do,'' he said.

Vice President Bush suggested that Admiral Poindexter and Colonel North waive
their Fifth Amendment rights and ''tell us the truth'' about the Iran affair.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTHEAST ASIA'S LEFT TAKES A LOOK INWARD

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 771 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK


TO the three Communist nations of Indochina, it has been a season for candid
introspection and leadership change.

Such ''renewals'' are a trademark of ruling Communist parties from Moscow to
Havana, a reflection of the difficulty of motivating societies with a
centralized economy and an ideology that for the most part admits no heresy. For
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos, the problem is greatly exacerbated by severe
economic hardships.

At party congresses in Hanoi last week and in Laos last month, there was an
extraordinary outpouring of self-criticism, expressed in usual catchwords such
as ''shortcomings,'' ''serious mistakes,'' ''selfishness,'' ''laziness'' and
''corruption.'' Cambodia, too, has acknowledged its troubles, reshuffling its
leadership in the last several weeks.

In Laos, which, like Cambodia, has been drawn into Hanoi's orbit through
economic cooperation and the presence of Vietnamese troops and advisers, the
Communist Party leader, Kaysone Phomvihan, listed 12 areas - from health to law
enforcement - in need of immediate attention.

But the toughest appraisal came from Truong Chinh, the General Secretary of
Vietnam's Communist Party, who last week apparently lost a fight to keep his
title. At the party congress, he attacked ''corrupt phenomena in state
machinery'' and lashed out at the failure to improve Vietnam's economy or
inspire its people in the nearly 12 years since the end of the ''American war.''


Source of 'Shortcomings'

''The mistakes and shortcomings committed in the economic field and
socioeconomic leadership,'' he said, ''originate from shortcomings made in the
party's ideological and organizational activities and cadre work.''

All three countries worry that they have inadequate national security. Cambodia
and Vietnam, joined in a war against Chinese-backed guerrillas, dismissed their
defense ministers. And Laos, while seeking improved ties with neighboring
Thailand and, to a lesser degree, China, has called for expanded military
conscription and more efficient armed forces.

Amid the criticisms and warnings, there are pleas for ''renovation'' - better
management, more honest accounting, harder work. The leaders argue that nothing
is wrong with the socialist system and blame inept bureaucrats for giving it a
bad name.

The turmoil in Indochina is causing concern elsewhere - including Moscow, which
remains committed to keeping its allies afloat. In Hanoi last week, Yegor K.
Ligachev, a deputy to Mikhail S. Gorbachev, promised to double nonmilitary
economic assistance to Vietnam, from about $1 billion to nearly $2 billion a
year, over the next five years - despite Soviet complaints that its aid was
being squandered.

''Moscow attaches great importance to Vietnam,'' said Thai Quang Trung, a
Vietnamese scholar who lives in Paris. ''Vietnam's integration with the Soviet
bloc has reached the point of no return.'' Hanoi cannot be allowed to fail, he
continued, or to continue to set a sad example for the region. Moreover,
diplomats contend, Moscow is determined to keep Hanoi from drifting toward the
heretical economic pragmatism of China. Vietnam is an invaluable military
outpost for Soviet forces in the East and is critical to Moscow's new diplomatic
push into Southeast Asia and the Pacific.

'Basket Cases'

Indochina's problems are made starker when contrasted to its non-Communist
neighbors. The gap between Indochina and the members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations - Thailand, the Philippines, Malaysia, Singapore,
Indonesia and Brunei - continues to widen, even at a time of their economic
slowdown. An economist for a regional United Nations organization in Thailand
recently called Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia ''the world's new basket cases.''

What remedies have the Indochinese leaders proposed? Observers who have studied
the Laotian and Vietnamese plans - Cambodia, caught in civil war, is a separate
case -say the countries are committed to revitalizing their economies. But
experts say this will be attempted in an atmosphere of moderation, curbing both
the radicals who want a quicker march to socialism through collectivization and
the pragmatists who favor free-market forces.

''Stalinist'' economic planning, with its emphasis on heavy industry, will be
abandoned, Vietnamese leaders say. Efforts will be made to increase exports
outside the socialist bloc and to seek joint ventures. Officials know the
restless young are not moved by appeals to sacrifice. ''People endure any
hardship in time of war,'' a Vietnamese diplomat said last week. ''But in
peacetime, their demands become very great.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS;
A Fugitive Found

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 139 words


Seventeen years after he ran away from it, the Vietnam War caught up with Pfc.
Douglas Beane. A spokesman for the United States Embassy in Sydney, Australia,
said last week that Mr. Beane, a United States marine who deserted during the
war, had been arrested at the request of American authorities. Alerted to Mr.
Beane's presence when he applied for a passport last month, Washington asked
that he be returned to the United States to face a court-martial. But
Immigration Minister Chris Hurford said he did not favor the request. He noted
that while Mr. Beane had entered Australia illegally, he had since achieved
permanent-resident status ''by virtue of his marriage to an Australian.'' Mr.
Beane and his wife, Karen, have two children. Defense Minister Kim Beazley, who
has final say in the extradition matter, had no comment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Douglas Beane

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Once More, a President Who Would Be King

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 770 words


To the Editor:

Tom Wicker's argument (''Beware That Mandate,'' Dec. 5) that four modern
Presidents (Roosevelt, Johnson, Nixon and perhaps Reagan) have been stalemated
after landslide election triumphs can be carried much further.

Landslides are not the only cause of that dangerous combination of ignorance and
arrogance that has bedeviled modern Presidents and us. Commonly perceived crises
or unusually high Presidential popularity may also produce a suspension of our
traditional constitutional system of separated institutions sharing, and
struggling over, power.

Our recurring national crises are not just the result of venal and mean-spirited
Presidents and their aides or of a gullible public, although we have experienced
both. I would argue that the country suffers from a kind of constitutional
schizophrenia, between the traditional constitutional system and a 20th-century
version of elective kingship or constitutional dictatorship.

Franklin Roosevelt was our first elective king, empowered by economic crisis and
personal popularity, an effective leader until his Supreme Court-packing plan
backfired.

Not much kingly in domestic affairs about Harry Truman, Dwight Eisenhower or
John Kennedy, but all did about as they wanted abroad.

Lyndon Johnson, lifted to kingship by national grief at the Kennedy
assassination and a landslide election victory, got all he asked for from
Congress in domestic and foreign policy. He was given a nearly blank check to
pursue national security in Vietnam, a maelstrom that convulsed the country and
swallowed him.

Domestically, Richard Nixon asked for little more than the opportunity to block
Congressional initiatives. One would not have known there was a Congress in the
policies of ''Vietnamizing'' the war in Southeast Asia, recognizing China and
establishing detente with the Russians. It was Nixon who gave us the term
''silent majority'' as his source of authority, which seemed in his mind to
supplant mere elections and constitutions.

Neither Gerald Ford nor Jimmy Carter fitted the royal mode, but electoral
landslides and extraordinary popularity have led to the elevation of Ronald
Reagan to near-royal status, at least in remaining personally unchallenged until
now.

What are the common elements? From Roosevelt to Reagan, the public, Congress and
the media all seem enamored of leadership, of Presidents who will do something.
The media and public both appear anxious to accord celebrity status to
Presidents, lavishing such attention, even adulation, on them as to turn the
head of any human and belie the idea that ours is a system of three co-equal
branches of government.

But the constitutional system of fractured power was designed to inhibit action,
not encourage it. In its normal operation that system produces intergovernmental
struggle, bargaining, compromise and often stalemate. Not the stuff of
leadership.

Comes a crisis, however, a landslide or an inordinately popular President, and
seemingly by common consent, the constitutional system is suspended, replaced by
elective kingship, at least in foreign policy, with Congress reduced to a mere
cipher, perhaps not even a critic.

These are heady circumstances for any President and his administration.
Political opposition is silenced, lest it impede the leadership imperative. The
impossible can now be dreamed: one policy can be announced and the opposite
pursued; 40 years of nuclear buildup can be swept away in a weekend summit, and
laws can be ignored.

Sooner or later perfidy, lawlessness or policy disaster is discovered. Because
truth, the rule of law and workable policies cannot be suspended for long in an
open society, the opposition, Congress, the media and the public demand an
accounting and perhaps punishment, and leadership, no longer trusted, is at an
end. The elective kingship is suspended, and the constitutional system put back
in place.

All of our recent failed Presidents have stumbled by attempting not to share
power with those constitutionally entitled to share. All have been encouraged by
a pliant Congress, uncritical media and a gullible public.

The difficulty is that the traditional Constitution can check the abuse of
power, but it stalemates leadership. The elective kingship can give us
leadership, but with it comes abuse of power or policies failed because narrowly
conceived. We need both effective leadership and the rule of law, but neither of
our constitutional systems has proved able to provide us with both.

PAUL E. SCHEELE
Professor of Political Science
State University of New York
  Oneonta, N.Y., Dec. 8, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHOSE FOREIGN POLICY IS IT ANYWAY?

BYLINE: By Sanford J. Ungar; Sanford J. Ungar, dean of the School of
Communication at the American University in Washington, is the editor of
''Estrangement: America and the World.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1486 words


A SEASON OF INQUIRY The Senate Intelligence Investigation. By Loch K. Johnson.
Illustrated. 317 pp. Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky. $31.

PRESIDENTS' SECRET WARS CIA and Pentagon Covert Operations Since World War II.
By John Prados. 480 pp. New York: William Morrow & Company. $22.95.

THERE is nothing that can damage a reputation - or a Presidency - like a secret
war. And now Ronald Reagan has his.

It hardly seemed as if there could be anything secret left about American aid to
the rebels fighting to overthrow the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua. Indeed,
it was in Central America that the words ''secret'' and ''covert'' finally lost
all meaning as descriptive terms for elements of American foreign and military
policy. But the revelations of recent weeks -that the United States was secretly
sending weapons to Iran, and that excess profits from the transactions were
being funneled through Swiss bank accounts to the contras - indicate just how
little the public, the press and Congress really knew about the private foreign
policy being run out of the White House basement.

Attempts will now be made to remedy that situation. Congress, understandably
skeptical about the Reagan Administration's promises to cleanse itself, will
conduct its own investigations of the roles played by the National Security
Council, the Central Intelligence Agency and other not-so-accountable dark
corners of the Government. Laws will surely be passed to prevent a repetition of
such abuses, and the nation will undoubtedly enter a period of foreign policy
''reform.'' It may be useful, in the midst of a situation that seems truly out
of control, to think back to the mid-1970's, when, with great hoopla, Congress
made an effort to assert control over the Federal intelligence agencies - to
rein them in by exposing past abuses and setting new standards.

Fired by post-Watergate Congressional bravado, fueled by spectacular revelations
in the press and fanned by the egos of key political figures, that effort was
cast as a serious blow to the intelligence community. Within the agencies
themselves, there was talk of ''a struggle for survival.''

Survival was never really an issue, of course, and although the various agencies
went through some rough times and a few heads rolled, the C.I.A., the National
Security Agency and other departments of Government surmounted this domestic
challenge quite well. As the events at the heart of the current crisis
demonstrate, they have continued to operate, for the most part, without any real
charter or precise legal definition of their responsibilities. The only recent
threat to them has come from the espionage of foreign powers and their
undetected American agents.

Indeed, never has the C.I.A. been so well funded, and so free to conduct its own
foreign policy, as under President Reagan and his Director of Central
Intelligence, William Casey. This is true despite the fact, highlighted by John
Prados in his exhaustive study, ''Presidents' Secret Wars,'' that American
covert and paramilitary actions since World War II have often failed.

The reform movement of the 70's, as Mr. Prados understates it, ''proved
abortive.'' There is no better way to find out why than by reading Loch K.
Johnson's book ''A Season of Inquiry,'' a chronicle of the 1975-76 Senate
investigation of intelligence abuses headed by Frank Church, then a Democratic
senator from Idaho, who died in 1984. Mr. Johnson, now teaching political
science at the University of Georgia, was an aide to the chairman of the Select
Committee on Intelligence Activities, and so he was an inside observer of an
extraordinary sequence of events.

What becomes clear at the outset of Mr. Johnson's account is that many members
of this elite Senate committee, which had a potentially historic mandate, did
not really care to rock the intelligence boat. They were cautious, quarrelsome
and interested primarily in publicity for their own benefit. This includes
Church, who, it turns out, put pressure on the majority leader at the time, Mike
Mansfield, to name him to the post (Mansfield's original choice was Senator
Philip Hart of Michigan, who was too ill to accept), and then used it to start a
late-blooming run for the 1976 Democratic Presidential nomination.

Mr. Johnson means to be kind to his mentor. But this inside tale of the Senate
intelligence investigation will hardly lead historians to look favorably on the
Idaho politician who was first elected to the Senate in 1956 and was regarded as
an often lonely beacon of liberalism for the next two decades.

The Frank Church we meet here is an indecisive, poorly organized, brooding,
angry man, who names a chief counsel and a staff director who cannot get along
and then abdicates any responsibility to deal with their rivalry. He gives the
C.I.A. the catchy epithet of ''rogue elephant,'' over the objections of fellow
committee members who feel this lets Presidents, secretaries of state and others
who approved or ignored C.I.A. abuses off the hook. And, perhaps most tellingly,
he finally advises Loch Johnson that the only briefings he cares to have before
holding public hearings are those that can be muttered to him while he strides
(Church was the master of the senatorial stride) from his office to the hearing
room.

The (some would say tragic) irony in all this is that although it did not
ultimately accomplish very much, the intelligence investigation stuck to Church
like the most insidious kind of fungus. The select committee became known in
common parlance as the Church committee, and the veteran liberal eventually had
to defend himself against accusations that he had personally weakened the
American intelligence community and, in the process, the nation's ability to
operate effectively in the world. Indeed, the efforts of former intelligence
officers helped defeat him for re-election in 1980.

Some readers would undoubtedly argue that Mr. Johnson makes too much of what
will someday seem like a minor interlude in the history of Congress and the
United States intelligence community. But he tells a good yarn, and even if it
sometimes appears a bit ingenuous, it provides important insights into the real
world of Capitol Hill; it also reveals just how uneven the odds are - as they
are now - when senators and their staffs go up against the intelligence
agencies.

Mr. Prados, who is the author of ''The Soviet Estimate: U.S. Intelligence and
Russian Military Strength,'' has written a far less engaging, although equally
important, book. His recounting of the often neglected early days of the C.I.A.
and its covert activities is especially enlightening. Few questions seem to have
been asked about the consequences, or the prospects for success, before agents
infiltrated the postwar Soviet lines to cause trouble. And in China, after the
Communist takeover, the angry C.I.A. chose to aid a renegade group that had no
hope of damaging the regime.

Indeed, with few exceptions, despite euphemistic, optimistic names like
''Valuable'' and ''Success,'' many of America's covert operations come across as
something out of ''The Mouse That Roared'' or ''The Gang That Couldn't Shoot
Straight'' - fumbling schemes that result in enormous losses of lives and money,
not to mention United States national honor. As Mr. Prados puts it, ''The CIA
was unleashed in the name of democracy, but democracy . . . came to mean
governments that followed pro-American policies.'' Regimes that were installed
or propped up in ostensibly successful C.I.A. operations - in Iran and
Guatemala, for example - tended to suspend elections and suppress dissent, all
in the name of fighting Communism.

Worst of all, these policies were carried out with little or no dissent within
the United States Government. When the C.I.A. removed the democratically elected
Prime Minister of Iran, Mohammed Mossadegh, in order to put the Shah back on his
throne, those who opposed the plan (including Loy Henderson, the American
Ambassador in Teheran at the time) remained silent.

The precedents set by, and the results that have flowed from, these events are
painfully obvious. The parallels today, in Nicaragua, Angola and other places
known and unknown, are clear. Alas, the C.I.A. becomes known for those efforts
rather than for the occasions when its advice goes against the grain (as when it
argued, correctly, that the United States could not win the war in Vietnam).

There is another important lesson in ''Presidents' Secret Wars'': that for the
most part, the C.I.A. has not behaved like a ''rogue elephant.'' On the
contrary, in its covert actions, it has usually carried out decisions made or
encouraged by others. It is those decisions -symptoms of a misbegotten foreign
policy of frustration - and the effort of Presidents and secretaries of state to
avoid responsibility for them that require much more attention.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A HERO IN THE WORST OF US

BYLINE: By Clancy Sigal; Clancy Sigal, who teaches journalism at the University
of Southern California, is the author of the novels ''Going Away'' and ''Zone of
the Interior.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 732 words


THE LAST WORTHLESS EVENING Four Novellas & Two Stories. By Andre Dubus. 214 pp.
Boston: David R. Godine. $15.95.

IN Andre Dubus's fine story ''Rose,'' a nameless former Marine Corps lieutenant
muses in a bar: ''We like to believe that in this last quarter of the century,
we know and are untouched by everything; yet it takes only a very small jolt, at
the right time, to knock us off balance for the rest of our lives.'' That could
be the keynote of the four novellas and two short stories in ''The Last
Worthless Evening,'' dealing mainly with ordinary people whose common bond is a
kind of ecstasy of despair, which can also be their source of strength.

Mr. Dubus's own strength - and weakness - is that he is compelled to tell his
stories at an angle, from left field, sometimes through an unlikely narrator
whose intrusive thoughts can divert and even blunt the natural rhythms of a
tale. He is much given to emphatic spiritual pondering, as if he doesn't quite
trust his characters to pull their weight. A pity, because Mr. Dubus's talent
lies in his love and sympathy for people - petty criminals, baseball players,
single mothers, drunks and addicts - who get their hands dirty with life.

Stripped of its fustian, ''Rose'' is about an alcoholic working-class woman who
lives at the bottom of a glass but whose brutish self-hatred is redeemed by a
single memory - the time she saved her two children from an apartment set afire
by her insanely frustrated husband. The narrator, a former Marine, links this
act of moral and physical assertion with an officer-candidate washout he once
saw superhumanly lift a huge barracks locker while sleepwalking. Even the worst
of us, Mr. Dubus seems to be saying, is capable of heroic selflessness under
certain extremes of pressure.

When Mr. Dubus lets his stories speak for themselves they have an undeniable
power and cleansing mercy. Yet he will interfere, indulgently letting his
characters ramble on in a sort of lachrymose Higher Brooding. This almost ruins
a potentially crackling story, ''Dressed Like Summer Leaves,'' in which an
11-year-old boy, casually dressed in camouflage trousers, triggers a Vietnam
veteran into mauling him in a local bar. The boy's precocious ruminations caused
me to lose confidence in the incident and its intent.

In perhaps the worst of these tales, ''Deaths at Sea,'' about a white Cajun
naval officer assigned a black bunkmate, the narrator tells the action through
letters back to his landlocked wife in frequently clumsy, even purple prose,
which muddies rather than enhances character. ''So mine is not true loneliness,
but closer to the love that saints feel for God: a sad and joyful longing. Like
St. Teresa of Avila.'' Yet in the middle of this soggy saga of race guilt and
accidental murder, there is a bracingly clear episode of pure action that
reflects Mr. Dubus at his sturdiest. A sailor has dropped a high-explosive
shell, bending the fuse pin and threatening the ship with catastrophe. A
damage-control chief petty officer and his ensign defuse the shell with dry,
direct movement that is a welcome relief from the fevers of the surrounding
prose.

This disjunction between workaday action and finely embroidered sentiments is
not to my taste. Yet Mr. Dubus's splintered vision can pay off handsomely.
''Land Where My Fathers Died'' is in effect a solid, somber murder thriller told
from different points of view, set in a small Massachusetts town. Its hero,
Archimedes Nionakis, is a second-generation Greek-American lawyer who, to save
his skid row client, has to find the killer of a local doctor who specialized in
exploiting fat and compulsively dieting women. Underneath his pretensions, Mr.
Dubus is an action writer, laconic and exciting when he restrains his
philosophic heavy breathing. Nionakis, who lives only to run in the annual
Boston Marathon, could easily be the central figure in a series of genuinely
offbeat detective fiction.

And, as if to confound criticism, Mr. Dubus's three-part novella ''Molly,''
about a teen-age girl and her loving, permissive mother - both in a sense
competing for life - is a stunner about the penalties and pride of consciously
raising a child to sing her own distinctive song. ''Molly'' has many of Mr.
Dubus's excesses of feeling and strained connections, yet it works because its
emotional heartbeat is so insistently truthful.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW HOME EASES VETERANS PLIGHT

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 18, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 784 words

DATELINE: PARAMUS


FOR 40-year-old John Viola, holidays are a time to share with family and
friends, and being at a veterans' nursing home that is only an hour away from
them is important.

''I can relate to some people here,'' Mr. Viola said of those in the home, ''but
seeing my family makes a big difference.''

A Navy veteran from Jersey City who served in Vietnam, Mr. Viola now has
multiple sclerosis. He lives at the New Jersey Veterans Home here, the newest of
three state-run facilities that offer round-the-clock care.

The $10 million home, on 22 acres of donated Bergen County land, began accepting
residents in August; many formerly had been at the state's veterans' homes in
Menlo Park or Vineland.

With a 112-bed capacity - it will be able to accommodate 238 more when a wing is
completed in late 1988 - the home here brings to nearly 1,000 the number of
long-term nursing-home beds for veterans in the state. But state health-care
officials and a veterans' group official say this is still far from what is
needed.

''I was on a waiting list for at least a year,'' said Mr. Viola, who is
wheelchair bound and is the home's youngest resident. ''But my number came up
and it's a godsend to be here.''

Existing wings, with 84 residents, are not yet at capacity, ''but it's just a
matter of time before all beds are filled,'' said Joseph D. Loudermilk of
Chatham, the nursing home's director.

''The World War II veterans and those older are experiencing a variety of
medical problems that require long-term care,'' Mr. Loudermilk said, adding that
the average age of those veterans is 65.

Common to many aging veterans are multiple infirmities, such as arthritis and
hearing loss, often complicated by service-related injuries that surface many
years afterward.

''It sometimes becomes a matter of dealing with one physical or mental problem
while trying to keep others in check,'' Mr. Loudermilk said.

Dr. Ohad Lifshitz of Livingston, the home's director of physical therapy, said
the therapy's aim was to set goals that residents could reach, goals ''that
allow physical improvement and an emotional encouragement.''

For example, a stroke victim, he said, ''may be only able to walk 5 feet on his
own one day, but if you can get that person to strive for 15 feet - say, the
next day - you have a 200 percent improvement and implant the thought that one
can go even further.''

With a full-time doctor and a service staff of 160, soon to increase to 2
physicians and a staff of 191, geriatric care for residents suffering from heart
ailments and Alzheimer's disease can be better met, the home's officials say.

''We're working with a $3.5 million budget now, which hopefully will increase to
$4 million next year,'' Mr. Loudermilk said.

The home, for which ground was broken in 1982, got nearly $6.5 million from the
Veterans Administration and $3.5 million from the state's Division of Veterans
Programs, an arm of the Department of Human Services, to complete construction.

The initial target date for accepting patients was late 1984, but construction
delays set that back.

The cost of resident care averages nearly $50 a day for each veteran, and the
V.A. reimburses the home $17.50. In addition, home officials said, residents
with disability pensions give part of those payments to the home.

To be admitted to a veterans' nursing home in the state, one must have received
an honorable or general discharge, have a physical or mental disability
requiring full-time medical attention, have an income of no more than $7,500 a
year for a single veteran or $15,000 for a veteran and spouse and have been a
New Jersey resident at least two years.

Veterans' widows and women whose sons were killed in action can also qualify.

Seventy people are currently waiting to get into the home here, ''and it's a
list that can only increase,'' said Mr. Loudermilk.

Throughout New Jersey, according to officials of the state's Department of Human
Resources and the Newark-based Disabled American Veterans, the number of
veterans needing nursing-home care currently ranges between 15,000 and 20,000.

In recent years, the state has had to place ailing veterans in private nursing
homes and hospitals, with long-range care carried out on an outpatient basis to
cut costs.

As Joseph Llewellen, a national service officer for the Disabled American
Veterans, put it:

''Across the country at this moment, you're looking at a veteran population -
those people 65 and older in need of care in one form or another - that's
estimated at 2.5 million.

''By the year 2000, you're talking about a population that will exceed 8.5
million, and there's too little health-care bed space for what we have right
now.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WAR'S TRIALS ''ONLY MEMORIES'' NOW

BYLINE: By Albert J. Parisi

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 19, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 432 words

DATELINE: PARAMUS


FROM a cafeteria window in the New Jersey Veterans Home here, a wheelchair-bound
resident watched a chilling rain fall on wet snow.

''It was like this when the Germans came through the Bulge - cold and
sad-looking,'' said the former infantryman, now in his 60's, who did not wish to
be identified.

''We had nowhere to go and, after a while, we and the snow became part of the
landscape.

''Here, at least, it's warm and safe.''

Sixty-six of the 84 current residents at the home are World War II veterans, 2
served in World War I, 14 in Korea and 2 in Vietnam.

''Some of the residents here,'' said Joseph D. Loudermilk, the director, ''have
no surviving family, and other residents and representatives of veterans' groups
become their families. They rely on each other.'' ''You're doing fine, John,
just fine,'' said Dr. Ohad Lifshitz, a physical therapist, as John Clarke, 69,
flexed a hand and stretched an arm. ''You're getting there.''

Mr. Clarke, a stroke victim who formerly lived in Cresskill, smiled.

Now wheelchair-bound, Mr. Clarke spent 13 months at the state's Menlo Park
nursing home before being transferred here in September. He said he had been on
a waiting list for about a year.

''The care you get here is about the same, but here my wife's only a short ride
away, and it's easier on her,'' he said.

Pointing to a Christmas tree in the dayroom, Mr. Clarke said: ''She decorated
that tree.''

Mr. Clarke said that his memories of flak-filled skies over Europe as an Army
Air Force tail-gunner on a B-17 were ''just that - memories.''

''My life's a bit more sedate now,'' he added.

Edith Bobin, 81, never saw active duty; however, as the widow of a veteran, she
is entitled to his benefits. Frail and petite, she is also wheelchair-bound.

''I came to America as a little girl from Sweden, and it was in this country
that I fell in love,'' Mrs. Bobin said, choosing her words carefully. ''My
husband has been gone six years now, but he's still taking care of me.''

Robert J. Regan, 63, of Belmar, who served aboard a destroyer escort in World
War II, suffers from a debilitating liver ailment and has spent the last 18
months in veterans' nursing homes.

He placed himself in nursing-home care, he said, because ''it was killing my
wife to have to take care of me all the time, and I love her too much to see her
suffer.''

Mr. Regan used to be in Vineland, but the trip was too long for his wife.

''Here in Paramus,'' he said, ''it's not as far, and we're all thankful for
that. God willing and, with a little luck, I'll be able to go home for
Christmas.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS: RIPPLES FAR AND WIDE;
SINGAPORE LEADER FEARS U.S. CONFUSION

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Dec. 16


Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew said today that a prolonged crisis over the Iran
arms deals could throw American foreign policy into confusion just as the Reagan
Administration had begun to give it coherence.

Mr. Lee, one of Washington's strongest supporters and oldest friends in Asia,
was speaking in an interview at his official residence here on a range of topics
from the future of Singapore's entrepreneurs to the promising role of China and
the limited prospects for the Soviet Union in a coming ''Pacific century.''

He predicted that in the next 100 years, ''the Pacific is where all the action
will be: a focal area of great advance, as the Atlantic was in the 19th and 20th
centuries.''

Asked about regional perceptions of the United States, Mr. Lee, 63 years old,
who has governed Singapore since it first achieved self-rule in 1959, said the
projection of a clearly defined American policy to this region had been
''getting much better under six years of President Reagan, until this Iranian
arms deal and the contribution from it to Nicaraguan contras.''

'Very Confused Period' Feared

''It looks as if we are in for another very confused period,'' he added. ''The
sooner this can be brought out into the open, dispatched with, and we can get
back to business, the better.''

The Prime Minister - who began his political career as a Socialist allied with
Communists in a postwar struggle for independence, but then rejected the left's
formulas in favor of democracy and free enterprise - outlined his perception of
American policies under Mr. Reagan this way:

''You stand firm and are not pushed around by more Soviet adventurism. You are
prepared to help freedom fighters fight tyranny wherever they are. That's
clear-cut and good.''

He went on: ''You are prepared to have rational dialogue and good relations with
different systems, like China, and to reach an accommodation if it is possible
without abandoning your friends.''

''You were not going to surrender the Pacific to the Soviet Union,'' he said.
''You were not going to approve the subjugation of Cambodia by Vietnam with the
help of the Soviet Union and Soviet arms.''

''You would not recognize Vietnam and exchange diplomatic relations with the
Vietnamese until they withdraw from Cambodia,'' he added. ''All those were very
well-defined positions.''

Cambodia Issue Stressed

Mr. Lee, looking casual in his shirtsleeves and speaking with characteristic
precision, said he thought the United States could do more to help the
anti-Vietnamese guerrillas fighting in Cambodia, who are supported by the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and China.

He also said he could understand why Brunei was prepared to contribute to
anti-Government rebels in Nicaragua, but he said Singapore had never helped the
rebels.

Prime Minister Lee, whose nation is multiracial but predominantly ethnic
Chinese, has been watching the rapid changes in China with interest. He recently
visited there and has also made trips to Japan, Australia, the Philippines and
Burma.

Singapore, one of Asia's smallest but richest and most developed countries, is
hoping to make use of its cultural and linguistic advantage in selling expertise
and services to the Chinese. Mr. Lee's former Deputy Prime Minister, Goh Keng
Swee, is now serving as a development consultant to Peking.

Deng's Program Cited

''Deng Xiaoping wants to make up for more than 20 years China has lost,'' Mr.
Lee, referring to the Chinese leader, said in a written reply to general
questions submitted to him before the interview.

''Deng knows what a free market has done in Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and
the Asean countries,'' Mr. Lee said. ''He wants to use the free market to boost
China's growth. But I do not think they want to dismantle the control the
Communist Party has over political life.''

Within the Asssociation of Southeast Asian Nations, to which Singapore belongs,
there is lingering suspicion of Peking, which once actively supported
insurrections in Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand, some of them
led by overseas Chinese. Singapore and Indonesia still do not have diplomatic
relations with China.

Mr. Lee said that if China continued on its present path, ''for Singapore and
Asean, such a China will be better than what she was,'' which was ''a supporter
of subversion and revolution.''

''China's role will effect the region's ethnic Chinese,'' Mr. Lee said.

''If China continues to concentrate on economic construction, then her relations
with the countries of the Pacific, especially Southeast Asia, will be
constructive,'' he continued. ''Indeed, it is possible that the ethnic Chinese
nationals of Asean countries may be perceived as useful partners of indigenous
Southeast Asian entrepreneurs for business ventures with China.''

Less Alarmist About Soviet

In discussing the Soviet Union's position in Asia and the Pacific, the Prime
Minister is less alarmist that many of his Asian counterparts.

Looking back, he said: ''The only Soviet success was Vietnam. But although they
succeeded in helping the North Vietnamese capture South Vietnam, they have not
succeeded in helping the North Vietnamese to subjugate Cambodia.''

''Mikhail Gorbachev's initiative for an Asia-Pacific collective security
conference did not win the Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's support when he
visited New Delhi recently,'' Mr. Lee added. ''It is doubtful if it will
succeed.''

He said that although he accepted that Moscow ''might be tempted to exploit a
situation'' like the Communist insurgency in the Philippines, ''they know that
false opportunism can be costly politically.''

Major Role for Japan

Mr. Lee, who has often spoken admiringly of Japan, sees a major role for Tokyo
in the region, even if China's economy expands greatly.

''China needs her for her modernization,'' he said of Japan, adding that the
Japanese may have to relocate many of its industries around the region because
of the cost of operating at home.

''Japan is now the world's biggest supplier of credit,'' he said. ''She will
also be a source of new technology.''

Will the United States turn increasingly eastward in the years to come, or
become, through immigration, a more Asian country itself?

''I do not foresee either Australia or the United States becoming more Asian as
a result of the Pacific century,'' Mr. Lee said. ''The to-ing and fro-ing of
peoples in the age of hypersonic travel will result in a more cosmopolitan
outlook in all the peoples of the Pacific.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew (Retuers)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BLACK AT HELM OF DALLAS SYMBOLIZES TRANSITION FROM CONSERVATIVE PAST

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Dec. 21


A 41-year-old black who began his working life pumping gas at his grandfather's
service station in rural middle Georgia has emerged as a powerful figure of
political transition in this city, which is saddled with a reputation for racial
intolerance.

The appointment last week of Richard Knight Jr. to City Manager, the top
municipal job, symbolizes not only the personal evolution of one black American
but also the stunning transformation of a city long dominated by a conservative
white business establishment.

''This is the one city people thought this would not happen - it's a
terrifically important symbolic step,'' said Lee Simpson, a former City
Councilman. ''It has to send a message to a lot of people in this community who
wondered if we'd reached the point where the color of skin was irrelevant.''

Skills Attract Attention

Mr. Knight's appointment was almost a complete surprise. His name was not among
the six formal candidates before the City Council last Tuesday night.

But ultimately the Council resolved its differences by turning to the Georgian
who in just four years since arriving in Dallas as an assistant city manager
came to be admired both for his abilities in the daily ''nuts and bolts'' of
running a city and for bridging the chasm between affluent mostly white North
Dallas and the city's growing black and Hispanic minorities.

''I have earned the reputation of being accepted in the business community and
in the minority community,'' Mr. Knight said in an interview. ''I think the
combination of those skills is good for Dallas at this time.''

Mr. Knight will need all the managerial and consensus skills he has, for he
assumes the helm of the nation's seventh largest city at a time of unaccustomed
duress. The Texas economic slump has finally spread to Dallas, forcing layoffs
and pay cuts for city workers. Also, a series of killings of innocent people by
police officers have stirred charges among black leaders that the Dallas Police
Department is trigger-happy.

Mr. Knight's appointment reflects the demographic changes in Dallas over the
last quarter of a century. The black population swelled from 19 percent in 1960
to 29 percent in 1980, according to the Census Bureau, and whites now make up
only 60 percent of the population.

Dallas is a city that ''works'' in a business sense. The garbage is picked up
and the streets are cleaned with almost the precision of Swiss trains. But the
city has neglected services for the poor; some years ago it refused Federal aid
to the poor, a gesture of defiance that cost the Dallas poor but not the
affluent leadership.

The affable Mr. Knight takes over at a time of growing demand for social
services as homelessness and other problems grow in Texas. He maintains these
needs can still be filled, even though city revenue is falling short.

Aim to Increase Productivity

''You do not have to assume there will be a decrease in services because of a
decrease in revenue,'' he said. ''You can have an increase in productivity, by
working with city employees.''

Dallas is the largest city in the country with a city manager, a system used
mostly by smaller and newer cities. He is by far the most powerful figure in the
city; he cannot be removed without a two-thirds vote of the Council, headed by
Mayor A. Starke Taylor, who has no administrative duties under the ''weak
mayor'' system.

In his 1984 book, ''Dallas U.S.A.,'' A. C. Greene credited the city-manager
system with keeping Dallas well-run and corruption-free. ''Dallas city
government has not been subjected to the in-and-out pressures of parties and
machines competing for minority, ethnic or single-interest group votes,'' he
wrote.

For decades Dallas was controlled by a white business oligarchy called the
Dallas Citizens Council. It was a benevolent dictatorship of sorts that managed
to keep racial peace but, historians say, gave away little power to minorities.
That ended in 1975, when redistricting finally gave electoral power to Dallas's
blacks. Since then, several blacks have been elected to the City Council.

From his appearance, the sharply but conservatively dressed City Manager could
well be a Dallas banker. But he has not forgotten his humble origins.

One of his first duties will be to calm the furor over the recent police
shootings, part of a long series of disputed incidents involving the police.

On Oct. 26, Etta Collins, a 70-year-old black, was shot to death by the police
who were responding to a burglary report next door to her South Dallas home. And
on Dec. 12, a Dallas police officer shot and killed a fellow officer from
suburban Addison in a bungled drug raid. Both shootings are still under
investigation.

Mr. Knight said the Police Department had suspended its training program on when
to shoot. ''We'll ask people from the outside to evaluate,'' he went on. ''We'll
also do some additional things in community relations.''

Less explosive but equally nettlesome is the city budget. In the last fiscal
year, Dallas had came up short by $13 million in its $805 million operating
budget, forcing a 3 percent pay cut for city workers and several hundred
layoffs. Reduced real estate appraisals could mean more trouble this year.

In these and other problems, Mr. Knight said he would use the conciliatory
tactics that won him praise for his handling of such issues as how to deal with
lead contamination from a smelter in a heavily black West Side neighborhood and
the demands of push-cart vendors for the right to sell on the streets.

In the push-cart matter, Mr. Knight resolved the complaints of restaurateurs by
getting the cart owners to adopt stricter sanitary measures and to operate from
fixed bases.

''He can listen to various groups and distill out what are the real issues and
come up with practical solutions,'' said Craig Holcomb, a City Councilman who
originally supported another candidate. ''Over the last four years we knew that
when a department was having serious problems, the manager would assign that
department to Richard Knight.''

Recruited by Predecessor

Mr. Knight was recruited for the $106,000 job by the former City Manager, Walter
Anderson, who resigned to head the Dallas Area Rapid Transit system.

A Vietnam veteran, jazz trumpet player, father of three, Mr. Knight has come a
long way from Fort Valley, the central Georgia town where he grew up. He was an
administrator in Durham, N.C., Carrboro, N.C., and Gainesville, Fla., before
coming to Dallas.

After four years here, he talks like a Dallas booster. ''When I first came here,
I wasn't into that everything-is-bigger-and-better-in-Texas thing,'' he said.
''But I am very high on the attitude here.''

But admirers say he is more than a booster. As Councilman Holcomb put it: ''He
is both progressive and traditional. Progressive in that Dallas is saying, yes,
we realize the best candidate may be male, female, black, white or brown.
Traditional in that he is a low-key administrator who will tend to the nuts and
bolts of keeping the city running.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 23, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A Dallas dispatch yesterday about Richard Knight Jr., the new City Manager,
misidentified his predecessor. He is Charles Anderson.

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Knight Jr.

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PLANE REACHES PACIFIC COAST AS IT AIMS FOR WORLD RECORD

BYLINE: By SANDRA BLAKESLEE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1665 words

DATELINE: MOJAVE, Calif., Dec. 22


The pilots of the Voyager reached the Pacific Coast of Mexico earlier than
expected today on their nonstop flight around the world and prepared to land at
their starting point in California.

The extralight paper-and-plastic plane was scheduled to touch down at Edwards
Air Force Base Tuesday shortly after dawn, having flown more than 26,000 miles
around the globe without refueling.

Fatigue and Headwinds

Fighting fatigue and high winds -some so strong they turned the craft upside
down at one point - Voyager crossed Central America, after flying west over the
Atlantic Ocean from Cameroon in West Africa, turned right and headed north
toward home.

Reports varied all day about precisely when Voyager would reach its goal,
because of the vagaries of the winds.

Concern about fuel supply was dispelled when the Voyager's designer, Burt Rutan,
told its pilots, Jeana Yeager and Richard G. Rutan, who is his brother, not to
worry. ''We have at least 30 hours of fuel left,'' he told the fliers this
afternoon.

Indeed, Burt Rutan said, ''We could maybe fly to New York and go another
thousand miles'' on the remaining fuel, much of which had been stored in the
plane's hollow wings.

In common with the Wright brothers, who took to the air just over 83 years ago,
the pilots flew into history on a shoestring: their plane was conceived,
designed, financed, built and flown as a family adventure.

Smithsonian Expresses Interest

''I would love to land on the Mall'' in Washington, Burt Rutan said, and roll
the craft right into the Smithsonian Institution. The museum has expressed
interest in displaying the Voyager with other historic airplanes such as the
Wright brothers' Kittyhawk and Charles A. Lindbergh's Spirit of St. Louis. The
mission was clearly motivated in part by the record-seekers inevitable desire
for publicity.

The plan called for the Voyager to circle the airfield until daylight, if it
arrived before dawn, because the pilots had no experience landing in the dark
and because they preferred to arrive formally when they could be seen by
spectators, reporters and photographers.

Another motivation for the expediation was the wish to demonstrate the potential
of new technology.

''When someone has the courage to put high-risk things together, it sets the
level of what can be done,'' said Burt Rutan, who is president of the Rutan
Aircraft Factory, in Mojave. The 43-year-old designer of the Voyager said he
believed the craft's overall simplicity was one of its chief strengths.

He described the two pilots as being on an emotional seesaw. They had to be
confined in very tight quarters throughout the flight. Sometimes, he said,
''they are up in good spirits.''

'We're Here in Tears'

''Other times,'' he continued, ''they are fatigued almost to the point of
incapacitation. When they left Africa and thought they'd have smooth sailing
across the Atlantic, they radioed: 'We're here in tears. We're both crying.' ''

Both pilots had been tossed about by turbulent air, said Burt Rutan, who added,
''Jeana is bruised.''

Late today, Mr. Rutan said that one of the rear engine's two electrical fuel
pumps had failed. The pilots switched to a mechanical backup pump. Mr. Rutan
said that the pump failure was not a serious problem. If the backup pumps should
fail, he said, the Voyager could still land using its front engine. The plane
has been cruising on its highly efficient rear engine for the last two days.

The Voyager's final route home was not divulged. According to Lee Herron, a
spokesman for the Voyager team, the Federal Aviation Administration issued a
warning telling all aircraft not associated with the flight to stay away from
the fragile Voyager as it approached the United States.

Three official chase planes that joined the Voyager today were ordered to report
the identity numbers of any airplanes that flew close to the Voyager. The
aviation agency was prepared to suspend the license of any pilot who did not
heed the warning, said Mr. Herron.

The Voyager's aim was to break the ''absolute'' world record for distance by an
airplane, regardless of type. The rule is that an airplane take off from a
point, fly as far as possible and land. The previous record was set in l962 by a
B-52H jet bomber that flew 12,532 miles from Okinawa to Spain.

The Voyager was built with one thing in mind: to more than double that distance
and fly all around the world on its one load of fuel. The airplane took five
years and $2 million to build. When empty, it weighs less than a compact car. It
carries five times its weight in fuel.

Nevertheless, throughout its flight there were serious concerns about whether
the plane would have enough fuel. Burt Rutan said that favorable tailwinds
throughout most of the voyage made all the difference.

The Voyager has two engines. One, mounted in the rear, propelled Voyager for
most of its flight. The other, mounted in front, helped the craft take off and
land as well as to fly above high mountains and treacherous weather.

In dodging storms, the pilots had to use the front engine more than expected,
according to Burt Rutan. This caused worry all along way because running both
engines burned extra fuel.

The Voyager's 17 gas tanks were used alternately in the flight, and gasoline was
pumped back and forth from one to the other for balance. But a possibly faulty
fuel gauge was said to have created constant worry.

Fully loaded with fuel, Voyager weighed 9,750 pounds when it began its takeoff
at 8:03 A.M. Dec. 14. The airplane had progressed just a few thousand feet, and
was still on the ground, when it encountered its first problem.

As Richard Rutan, the pilot, kept the plane's nose down to help gain speed, the
tips of the Voyager's wings scraped along the ground. The bottom surface of the
outer wing tips was torn away for several feet at either end. Two 18-inch high
structures, or winglets, on the top of the wing tips were attached only at the
top of the wing.

Fearing the winglets might become dislodged in flight and rupture a fuel tank,
the pilot ''side slipped'' the airplane, moving it side to side so that wind
pressure ripped the winglets clean off. After the maneuver, the Voyager headed
out over the Pacific on the first leg of its trip, cruising at 106 miles and
hour.

As the Voyager passed Hawaii, a chase plane inspected the airplane and
pronounced it in good condition. But on Dec. 16, the Voyager ran into its first
bout with bad weather. Typhoon Marge, hovering above Guam, generated massive
winds and turbulence. Voyager bounced around, skirted the storm and then hitched
a ride on tail winds that increased its speed to 147 miles and hour.

The airplane continued to dodge storms throughout Tuesday and early Wednesday as
it crossed the South China Sea. Mr. Rutan radioed that he made several 90-degree
turns and one complete turnabout, flying back toward California before turning
around again, to avoid choppy air. Meteorologists helped the pilots steer a
course clear of Indochina, where Mr. Rutan had flown 325 combat misions during
the Vietnam War.

After crossing the Malay peninsula on Wednesday, and dodging more lightning,
Voyager crossed the Bay of Bengal. About this time, concerns arose about
remaining fuel aboard the airplane. Some gasoline was apparently traveling
through a gauge two times before being burned. This left the pilots with the
impression that too much fuel was being burned.

On Thursday, the Voyager passed the half-way point of its journey. Cruising the
Indian Ocean at 8,000 feet, it broke the world distance record. The pilots were
happy but apprehensive as they approached the African continent late Thursday.
Weather in the tropics is notoriously unpredictable.

The crossing proved harrowing. Churning winds tossed the pilots around in their
tiny enclosures, causing some bruises.

To stay clear of mountains and avoid as much of the choppiness as possible, the
plane climbed to 20,000 feet at times, forcing the pilots to use oxygen masks.
At one point Mr. Rutan radioed: ''I'm in severe turbulence. How do I get out of
it?'' He was told to turn north, where the two-person crew did find smoother
going.

On Friday and Saturday, the Voyager crossed the Atlantic Ocean parallel to the
Equator. An intitally smooth ride again turned menacing, however, as the
airplane encountered more storms, and engine trouble.

A warning light indicated that oil pressure was falling and the rear engine was
heating up. The pilots hand-pumped oil to the engine, cut back on the throttle
and opened a ventilating device. The pressure returned to normal. Peter Riva,
another Voyager spokesman, said the exhausted pilots had probably neglected to
check the pressure on schedule.

Just north of the Equator and east of Brazil, the Voyager was suddenly enveloped
by violent clouds. Without warning, the airplane tipped over, one wing pointing
to the ocean below and the other wing straight up. After righting the plane, the
pilots spent a terrifying 15 minutes tossing about before getting clear of the
clouds.

Sunday and today brought a return to smooth weather as the airplane hugged the
northern coastlines of South America and made its way up the Pacific coast of
Mexico toward home.

The Voyager adventure bore many of the trapping of manned space flight as
conducted by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The Voyager
team, composed of aeronautical engineers, pilots and self-proclaimed ''airplane
nuts,'' tended to use NASA terms such as ''mission control,'' ''estimated time
of arrival'' and ''launch date.'' From 40 to 50 unpaid volunteers, dressed in
blue flight suits adorned with Voyager patches, greeted the public and answered
reporters' questions.

Their efforts were, they said, a bit of a parody on NASA. ''Most of the people
here are convinced that a big aerospace company or NASA could never have done
this,'' said Phil Patton, an author who is planning to write a book on Voyager's
history.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map traces course of the Voyager (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, DECEMBER 23, 1986


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 978 words


International

A3-15

The President considered pardoning Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter and Lieut. Col.
Oliver L. North in hopes that they would tell what they knew about Iran, but
then rejected the idea, the White House said.

Page A1

Canada said it had no entry record for the son of the Speaker of the Iranian
Parliament, who was reported to have fled there with $6 million in commissions
from Washington's secret arms deals with Iran.

A14

Iran said an Iraqi air raid killed more than 100 people in the western town of
Eslamabad-e Gharb, and it announced an extension of its reprisal shelling of
military and economic targets inside Iraq.

A15

A hint that Israelis had abducted him was flashed by a nuclear technician who
sold secrets to a British newspaper and was returned to Israel. He signaled that
he had been seized in Rome.

A1

Questions of Roman Catholic identity are being raised with increasing frequency
and urgency in the church after eight years of John Paul II's papacy.

A1

The first U.S. arms for Chad, a shipment of emergency military equipment,
arrived in Ndjamena. The shipments are being coordinated with France, which also
is giving emergency help in response to a Libyan offensive.

A3

The Shanghai police banned protests without a permit, effectively making any
public demonstration illegal, after three days of increasingly large and
tumultuous protests by university and college students.

A12

Vietnam is facing many problems, including a failing economy, Communist Party
factionalism, a disgruntled army and an uncooperative South, according to
scholars who are sifting through party documents.

A6

Catholic families have been ousted by an anti-Catholic force in Lisburn,
Northern Ireland. More than 100 families have been affected in nine months and
180 members of the Ulster Defense Association, a paramilitary group, have been
arrested.

A4

A Soviet poet met Margaret Thatcher in London to discuss the Soviet situation.
The poet, Irina Ratushinskaya, arrived Thursday on a three-month visa,
ostensibly to seek medical treatment.

A12

Uruguayan soldiers got amnesty for their part in the 1973-85 military rule when
many were accused of human rights violations. After much debate, President
Sanguinetti signed the amnesty bill into law.

A3

Oil prices advanced strongly on world markets as the oil community welcomed
OPEC's decision over the weekend to cut production. The key American and British
grades rose to about $17 a barrel by day's end.

D1



National

A16-18, B5-7

Voyager was in its last stretch when it reached Mexico's Coast earlier than
expected. Its crew prepared to head for Edwards Air Force Base in California to
conclude their record-breaking, nonstop round-the-world flight.

A1

A proposal to ban fuel economy rules came from a Government panel headed by Vice
President Bush, which said the regulations hurt domestic auto makers' ability to
respond to market demands.

B5

Jack Kemp said George Bush leads the race for the Republican nomination, which
Representative Kemp himself is seeking, and he played down Senator Bob Dole's
strong showing in an Iowa poll.

A14

Chemical cleanups in Ashland, Mass., illustrate the slow, expensive task of
undoing years of dumping. Ashland is one of the state's most hazardous waste
sites and is a target of the Federal program known as the superfund.

A16

Plans to rescind an Arizona holiday honoring Martin Luther King Jr. have angered
many residents and civil rights leaders. But when Evan Mecham becomes governor
next month, that is what he aims to do.

A16

Many whites support a sheriff who has been accused of racism in a predominantly
white section of New Orleans. He was criticized for saying that his deputies
would stop blacks seen in white neighborhoods.

A17

American adults who are disabled in some way make up one-fifth of the adult
population, a Census Bureau study said. The most common problems reported were
walking and lifting things.

B7

A call for major welfare revisions that would guarantee all Americans a minimum
standard of living came in a ''statement of principles'' drafted by a coalition
of individuals and national organizations.

B5

Child support collections are up under a Federal program that helped collect
$2.7 billion from absent parents last year. The Government said it expected the
1986 figure to reach nearly $3.2 billion.

B5

A case against Lyndon H. Larouche Jr.'s organizations and associates is focusing
on a former Ku Klux Klan leader and Government informer who served as a
consultant to the political extremist.

B6

Guilty pleas to insider trading felony charges were made by a former investment
banker with Lazard Freres & Company who had been accused of swapping tips about
pending corporate takeover bids.

D2

Death row commutations upheld

A17

Washington Talk

A18

Congress revises misinformation Forces get special attention Regional

B1-14

Three white youths were charged with second-degree murder today in the beating
last weekend of three black men in Howard Beach, Queens, one of whom was killed
by a car while fleeing.

A1

Racially motivated violence such as the Queens attack is a ''pervasive
problem,'' black leaders said, not an isolated one, as some have said. Their
outrage was echoed by civic and political leaders.

A1

A plan to rebuild the city's subways, buses and commuter rails and to freeze
fares for three years was agreed upon by Governor Cuomo and the legislative
leaders, who set aside $8.6 billion for the program but left financing plans
unresolved.

B1

A call to abolish the Taxi Commission went out to the city from the State
Commission of Investigation, a watchdog agency. It said the Mayor should be
ultimately responsible for regulating the taxi industry and setting rates.

B1

Neediest Cases

B6


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR HANOI CHIEFS, A LIST OF PROBLEMS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1049 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 22


Vietnam's poor economic performance was the overriding concern of Hanoi's
governing Communists when they assembled last week for their Sixth Party
Congress. But it is not the only problem to which the country's new leaders are
giving immediate attention, records of the meetings indicate.

As diplomats and scholars begin to sift through voluminous speeches, articles
and the comments of Vietnamese officials, they say it is apparent that the
leadership faces factionalism within the party, a disgruntled army and, most
important, a south that is still wayward and uncooperative. The south, in the
view of some Hanoi officials, is the source of corruption, political deviation
and ''many-faceted sabotage.''

''South Vietnam is in a state of moral secession,'' the party historian Thai
Quang Trung, who is based in Paris, said in a meeting with journalists in
Bangkok on Friday.

Mr. Trung, an exile who is critical of Hanoi, said that within Vietnam the
situation in the south was now being described by the Vietnamese aphorism, ''One
thousand pounds hanging by a hair.''

A Sign of Deference

According to Douglas Pike, the head of the Indochina Studies Program at the
University of California at Berkeley and the editor of the periodical Indochina
Chronology, the naming of Nguyen Van Linh as party chief is ''a clear sign of
deference to the south.''

Mr. Linh, who replaced Truong Chinh as General Secretary of the party on
Thursday, served for more than 40 years in southern Vietnam. He was first an
underground Communist organizer, then a liaison with the southern-based
Vietcong, which officials now decribe as a wing of Hanoi's Communist Party, and
finally, after the fall of the south, an administrator of Ho Chi Minh City,
formerly Saigon.

He was one of several important party officials with long experience in the
south who were promoted during the congress last week or are expected, according
to officials, to take high posts when the country's new Government lineup, as
distinct from party lineup, is announced, probably before the end of the year.

The others include Pham Hung, the second-ranking official in the party hierachy,
who may become head of the State Council, or President; Vo Chi Cong, who is in
line to become Prime Minister; Vo Van Kiet, the head of national planning, and
Mai Chi Tho, a security expert who was a popular and effective mayor of Ho Chi
Minh City. These men have also been associated with experiments in economic
liberalization.

Curbs on Repression Seen

''This may bring an end, or a scaling down, of more repressive measures against
the south,'' Mr. Pike said in a telephone interview.

''In 1975, Hanoi's initial instinct had been to go slow on the south,'' he said.
''But before the end of that year they decided to opt instead for total and
immediate integration. 'Breaking the machine,' they called it. What you may be
seeing now is a redressing of this.

''They may have made the decision that they really need the south,'' Mr. Pike
said. Mr. Trung believes that the Politburo is heavily weighted with people who
are thought to know ''how to deal with southerners - capitalists, Buddhists,
Catholics, all sorts of people.''

Vietnamese news organizations have begun to reflect a new attitude. A week ago,
when Vo Tran Chi, the party secretary for Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon,
spoke to the Congress, the official Hanoi radio described the former southern
capital as ''a dynamic example of economic development for provinces throughout
the country,'' according to a translation by the monitoring service of the
British Broadcasting Corporation.

Specific Economic Requests

Mr. Chi then proceeded to give a speech almost free of jargon and very specific
in its economic requests -more electricity to power a recovery, for example, and
more qualified personnel to speed development.

If the south can finally be pacified, while contributing its agricultural,
manufacturing and management skills to national development, experts say, the
new leadership of Hanoi will have a major achievement to its credit.

Problems with the army have some roots in the economy, according to military
publications. Both Mr. Trung and Mr. Pike, the author of a new history,
''P.A.V.N.: People's Army of Vietnam,'' believe that the army is probably the
country's strongest and least divided institution at this point, and that its
concerns must be addressed.

Early this month, a few days before the opening of the party congress, Quan Doi
Nhan Dan, the army daily newspaper, complained of a lack of attention to the
needs of troops. It portrayed a fighting force facing China that lacked warm
clothes and lived on boiled potatoes while sleeping in crowded tents.

Morale Has Declined

In Cambodia, where officials have acknowledged problems of indiscipline and
desertion compounded by malaria and many casualties from land mines, morale has
declined, military pubications say.

Diplomats and other observers of the Vietnamese military are not convinced,
however, that the departure from the Politburo last week of the country's
Defense Minister, Senior Gen. Van Tien Dung, reflects problems between the party
and army. His removal is thought by some to have a strictly political cause.

General Dung was thought to be close to Le Duc Tho, who also lost his Politburo
seat last week, and to Le Duan, the party General Secretary who died in July.
Mr. Chinh, who replaced Mr. Duan, had been a bitter rival of his predecessor for
many years. Mr. Linh, who now takes over, was a protege of Mr. Chinh, and
therefore it is thought that he may have helped engineer the dismissal of
General Dung as Defense Minister.

Scholars say the existence of continued party factionalism is hard to prove. But
Mr. Trung said some evidence, which he did not provide in detail, is emerging
from Hanoi that indicates that Mr. Chinh made a last-minute attempt to keep the
top party post but lost both that bid and a subsequent one to stay in the
Politburo.

According to Mr. Trung's analysis, a deadlock over Mr. Chinh's future was broken
by the simultaneous resignation of Mr. Chinh and Le Duc Tho, who was considered
an ally of Le Duan.

Pham Van Dong, the country's Prime Minister, who also resigned, was in ill
health and had been expected to retire.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: PENTAGON;
Some Special Attention For Special Forces

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 851 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 22


''Special operations'' is a military term of art encompassing commando tactics,
antiterrorism, insurgency and counterinsurgency, psychological warfare,
infiltration, foreign training, rescue and just about anything else short of
full-blown war. This little-understood facet of military affairs as practiced by
special units of the Army, Navy and Air Force has received increasing attention
in these days of terrorism and hostage-taking, and legislation was enacted last
fall to reorganize the hierarchy in charge of such forces.

As a result, a joint command is being created for a general who will control
military units dedicated to special operations. There will also be a new
assistant secretary of defense in charge of making policy for the forces.

Those who pay special attention to special operations are closely watching the
selection of individuals to fill the two new posts. Given the Pentagon's
opposition to the legislation, some observers who favor extra attention and
resources for the unorthodox commando units are wondering whether forceful
advocates for special operations will be nominated and whether a fight might
develop on Capitol Hill if the nominees are not forceful advocates.

Many lawmakers are said to want a proponent for the special forces within the
Pentagon. Ever since the infancy of the special forces in World War II, they
have been viewed with askance by more traditional military branches.

One name frequently mentioned as a candidate for Assistant Secretary of Defense
for Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict is Clinton Dan McKinnon, a
California Republican activist, publisher and broadcaster who once headed the
Civil Aeronautics Board.

Special Experience

Although he is a proven manager, his main experience in Government does not bear
directly upon special operations.

But Mr. McKinnon has some experience relating to special operations, including
work on terrorism stemming from his tenure at the airline regulatory agency. He
has written a new book, ''Everything You Need to Know Before You Are Hijacked.''
He is said to have done some work on assignment by the Central Intelligence
Agency, although details are not known. And he is the holder, since 1958, of the
Navy's helicopter rescue record, with a career total of 68 air-sea rescues.

Special operations specialists at the Pentagon and on Capitol Hill contend that
the job of supervising special operations requires great expertise in the field.
In fact, some Capitol Hill specialists say the nomination of Mr. McKinnon might
have difficulty passing muster with the legislators who enacted the new law.

In Congress, the name of William V. Cowan, an aide to Senator Warren B. Rudman,
Republican of New Hampshire, is frequently proffered for the assistant
secretary's job. Mr. Cowan, who worked on the legislation this year, is
described as a retired Marine lieutenant colonel, a decorated combat veteran
with experience in Vietnam as a counterinsurgency adviser and, more recently, as
a member of a clandestine anti-terrorist unit operating in such locations as
Beirut.

One Congressional aide who knows Mr. Cowan said such an appointment would meet
quick approval in confirmation hearings.

'Uniquely Qualified'

Some sources say Richard L. Armitage, Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Affairs, is pushing the appointment of Mr. McKinnon. Mr.
Armitage, while confirming that Mr. McKinnon and Mr. Cowan have both received
some support for the job, did not comment on his own preferences and said no
decisions had been made by the Defense Secretary or the White House.

Mr. Armitage is well known for having opposed some aspects of the reorganization
plan, specifically the provision to establish a new assistant secretary taking
over duties that formerly were his own.

In July, before the bill passed, Mr. Armitage said his own office contained
''precisely'' the expertise needed to deal with special operations and was
''uniquely qualified'' for the responsibility.

Special operations advocates also cite experience and advocacy as prerequisites
for the new job of commander of the Special Operations Forces Command, a
four-star billet set up by the new law.

Two retired Army generals are mentioned most often for this job: Edward C.
Meyer, former Army Chief of Staff, and Robert C. Kingston, who once headed the
Pentagon's rapid deployment force.

'The Only Qualified Man'

''What I have heard from the broad spectrum of the special operations community
that I have talked to,'' said John M. Collins, a specialist in such matters from
the Library of Congress, ''is that General Kingston is not only the best
qualified man, but perhaps the only qualified man.''

That may be an exaggeration. But influential legislators including
Representative Dan Daniel, the Virginia Democrat who inspired the law creating
the job, are promoting General Kingston.

They would like Lieut. Gen. Harley A. Hughes of the Air Force to be the
commander's deputy or to take the top spot if a decision is made not to bring
General Kingston back to active service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 24, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

They Tell Children That Violence Is O.K.

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 262 words


To the Editor:

Opposition to war toys is often portrayed as a concern of women, especially
mothers. But men care too. Adm. Gene La Rocque, director of the Center for
Defense Information in Washington, says that war toys are now a billion-dollar
industry, with sales up 600 percent since 1982, and that the ''association of
war with fun warps the imagination of our young people.'' When exposed to all
the war toys, video war games and television violence, children receive the
message that violence is O.K.

Whereas in the past we could say that war toys readied the young for survival in
actual combat, modern technology has changed war. Killing those with whom we
differ no longer takes care of the problem. Weapons don't teach us how to solve
problems, they only kill people and devastate the environment.

I asked several men about their views on war toys. A former Navy officer who
served during the Vietnam war feels it's a poor reflection on our society that
''last year, 7 out of 10 toys purchased were war toys.'' He said: ''The toys
glamorize war. But war is hell.'' A magazine editor, who played as a child with
a real musket (its firing mechanism removed) felt similarly. An art director who
served in the Army in Korea says war toys are ''culturally destructive.''

With our present technological capabilities, survival depends on our ability to
think harder, faster and more creatively than ever before. We ask young people
to say no to drugs and sex; are we adults able to say no to war toys?

DIANA M. MORLEY
Newtonville, Mass., Dec. 6, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 24, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REDUCING DISCORD OVER FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By James Q. Wilson; James Q. Wilson, professor of government at Harvard
and of management at the University of California at Los Angeles, is a member of
the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


In time, the investigation into the Iranian arms controversy will end. There may
be prosecutions, new laws, a reorganization of the National Security Council.
But one thing that is vitally necessary may not happen at all - creation of a
new compact between the executive and legislative branches that will permit the
United States to discharge more effectively its responsibilities as a great
power.

From Vietnam, through Watergate, to the present, in Democratic and Republican
Administrations, the estrangement between the White House and Capitol Hill has
deepened. Congress distrusts the President and insists on multiplying checks -
oversight committees, the War Powers Act, media leaks and legislative vetoes.
The White House responds in kind - building up the National Security Council
staff as an isolated and autonomous operational agency, appealing over the heads
of Congress to the public, managing its own pattern of leaks and counter-leaks.

I do not know all the facts, but it appears that use of the National Security
Council staff for the Iranian arms transfer may have reflected a desire to avoid
the seemingly inevitable public disclosures that have been facilitated by the
competitive and decentralized pattern of Congressional oversight of foreign
operations. If that is true, it means that the very methods Congress has put in
place to check the President's foreign policy powers have led to results wholly
at variance with what Congress intended. As we have so often learned, in
government good intentions are not enough.

With respect to foreign affairs, the Constitution is, as the late constitutional
scholar Edward Corwin put it, an ''invitation to struggle.'' That is desirable,
for it insures that essential checks and balances will operate. But of late the
struggle has become an alley fight - a cacophonous, decentralized, unmanaged
public quarrel over every detail of every policy.

From World War II to Vietnam, this struggle was moderated by a bipartisan
consensus as to the major aims and methods of foreign policy, a consensus given
effect by a strong pattern of leadership in Congress and a Presidency sensitive
to the need for Congressional support. Vietnam destroyed that consensus. It has
not been rebuilt. Perhaps it cannot be rebuilt, but reasonable people in both
branches of government want, and I believe can obtain, a moderation of the
inevitable discord.

We may disagree over foreign policy, but hardly any American interests are
served by extensive leaks about every sensitive operation we may wish to
undertake.

They are not served by detailed public reporting of financial contributions by
friendly governments to efforts made on behalf of Afghan rebels, even when
assistance to those rebels enjoys strong bipartisan support on Capitol Hill.

And they are not served by detailed disclosures of intelligence-gathering
operations.

People may disagree about how greatly all this helps the Soviet Union. But there
can be no disagreement about this: our allies increasingly do not trust us, and
we increasingly do not trust each other.

There is no point in assigning blame; both branches of government, always
information sieves, have of late become geysers. This torrent of leak and
counter-leak once did not exist, despite the separation of powers. This means
that it need not exist now, even though we retain the separation of powers.

I suggest that when the Iranian issue has subsided, the White House and Congress
attempt to establish a new compact that permits the fullest debate over the
goals and major methods of foreign policy without aiding and abetting the
media's understandable desire to track down and publish every secret, every
name, every Swiss bank account.

The compact might take the following form: 1. The White House will make clear
that the National Security Council and its staff exist for advisory purposes
only. They will not conduct sensitive operations. 2. Congress will merge the
House and Senate intelligence committees into a Joint Congressional Committee on
Intelligence with a small, bipartisan membership and a small, highly
professional and nonpartisan staff. 3. The executive branch will adopt and
enforce procedures designed to minimize intelligence leaks from its agencies.
These leaks occur for purposes of aggrandizing one's own agency and policies and
punishing those of one's bureaucratic rivals. (There is a widespread impression
that the executive branch already tries to detect and punish leakers. With rare
exceptions, it does not.) 4. Congress will adopt and enforce procedures designed
to detect and punish unauthorized leaks from the Joint Intelligence Committee.

None of this will prevent a spirited debate over our role in Central America and
the Middle East. And none of this is an adequate substitute for our lack of
national resolve to act like a great power with vital, often difficult
responsibilities. But it is a beginning.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 24, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Biography of Hanoi Leader

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 39 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 23


The Vietnamese radio has broadcast an official biography of the new Vietnamese
leader, Nguyen Van Linh. The broadcast last Thursday said that his real name is
Nguyen Van Cuc and that he was born in July 1915 in Hai Hung Province.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 24, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 943 words


ANYWHERE BUT HERE. By Mona Simpson. 406 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.

MONA SIMPSON'S stunning first novel opens simply with a glimpse of a mother and
a daughter driving westward in a Lincoln Continental. They are driving from
their hometown of Bay City, Wis., to California so that the girl - Ann - can
become a child star. In lieu of eating at restaurants, they steal vegetables
from convenient farm trucks, and they use a borrowed credit card to charge
gasoline and one-night stays at cheap motels. Behind them, to the east, is their
old life, a life of modest expectations, modest comforts and modest rewards;
ahead lies California, and all the glittering promises of that golden land.

In relating the story of Ann and her mother, Adele, Ms. Simpson not only creates
a compelling tale of family love and duplicity, but she also takes on - and
reinvents - many of America's essential myths, from our faith in the
ever-receding frontier to our uneasy mediation between small-town pieties and
big-time dreams. As in so much contemporary fiction, the fragmentation of the
family stands as one of this novel's central themes, as is the dichotomy between
rootlessness and freedom, domesticity and suffocation. But if ''Anywhere But
Here'' carries echoes of the ''on the road'' novel, the ''small town'' novel and
the Western-pioneer novel, Ms. Simpson also succeeds in creating a wholly
original work - a work stamped with the insignia of a distinctive voice and
animated by two idiosyncratic and memorable heroines.

At once optimistic and frightened, self-sacrificing and selfish, Adele thinks
little of using or hurting other people. Having been abandoned by Ann's father -
a vacuum-cleaner salesman who trades his dreams of becoming a songwriter to
marry a wealthy woman - she cavalierly leaves her second husband, Ted, and sets
out to begin a new life, tabula rasa. In the process, she lies about her
education, her job and her past, and she deludes herself, as well, as to her
prospects: convinced that one unlikely man after another will marry her, she
ends up disappointed but unbroken - one set of dreams replaced by yet another.

As a mother, she shamelessly tries to manipulate her daughter - she threatens
suicide when Ann goes out on a date, and whines about sacrificing to give her
daughter opportunities she actually craves for herself. Awful as Adele seems,
she is also a fiercely protective mother, and as seen through Ann's ambivalent
eyes, her pretensions (serving chateaubriand in a barely furnished apartment,
coining ''tasteful'' remarks, calculated to be overheard in public places) are
both touching and pathetic. Like the mother and daughter in ''Terms of
Endearment,'' she and Ann are bonded together by love and hate and history, and
as ''Anywhere But Here'' progresses, we observe both the differences that
separate them, and the similarities that bind them together. Ann learns how to
lie and steal from her mother, and while she yearns for a ''normal'' life free
of carelessness and self-delusion, she also inherits Adele's resentments and her
capacity to survive.

In the course of the novel -through flashbacks and looping reminiscences
delivered from disparate points of view - we see Ann grow from childhood into
adolescence and beyond, and thanks to Ms. Simpson's artistry, we are made to
feel both the pull of family history and the redeeming role of individual will.
In addition, we are given a wonderful montage of scenes that fix her life in our
minds with the clarity of snapshots from a photo album: Ann, as a child,
watching her father drive away from home for the last time in his brown Valiant
with his vacuum cleaners and a new suitcase; Ann, slightly older, clutching a
package of brightly colored headbands, given to her as a gift from her absent
father; Ann, at age 12, driving across the country with her mother, learning how
to apply makeup in gas-station restrooms, and Ann, as a teen-ager, sharing an
ice-cream sundae with her mother, in an effort to forget the humiliation of
being down and out in Beverly Hills.

Having carefully mapped out the dreams that Adele and Ann have borrowed from
slick magazines, Ms. Simpson goes on to delineate the reality of their furtive,
attenuated existence in California, orchestrating tiny social details and larger
emotional ones to give the reader a sense of the texture of their daily life:
Adele's increasingly desperate attempts to catch herself a husband; Ann's
desultory attempts to become a television star, and their growing antagonism
toward one another. In the interests of opening out her story to embrace a
larger slice of contemporary history, she occasionally cuts away from Ann and
Adele to sketch in the very different lives chosen by their relatives, who
stayed behind in Wisconsin. Although some of these digressions seem unnecessary,
even distracting - we don't really need to hear about childhood friends shipped
off to Vietnam or the infidelities of assorted friends - these other stories do
lend ballast to the tale of Ann and Adele; and they give ''Anywhere But Here''
the specific gravity of a shared history.

Indeed, it is one of Ms. Simpson's many achievements in this sad, fierce novel
that she makes us understand about families - how we are trapped by them and how
we can escape; how we are irrevocably shaped by the defections and betrayals of
others, and how we may transcend those losses through love and will. She makes
us understand the idea of home and what it means to lose that idea of safety and
place; and in doing so, she makes us apprehend the darkness that lies just
beneath the brightly painted surfaces of daily life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mona Simpson (Thomas Victor)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 25, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE HOMELESS AND VETERANS: TIME TO SHARE

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 983 words


Before the Christmas show began Tuesday in the Fort Washington Armory shelter
that night for 936 homeless men, one of them walked up to the makeshift stage.
''You a boonie rat?'' he asked Tom Bird, who was there to play Santa Claus.

''Yeah,'' Mr. Bird said. ''First Cavalry, Central Highlands.'' And then he and
the homeless man, whose name was Leonard, went through the ritual greeting both
remembered from the Vietnam War - a regular handshake, a soul handshake, a
finger clasp and an embrace.

It was the last show of the year that the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater
Company had brought to the city's homeless shelters, where nearly 40 percent of
the men are veterans, and half of those are veterans of Vietnam, according to
the Coalition for the Homeless. Those numbers are at least three times the
representation of veterans, and Vietnam veterans, in the city at large.

Special Christmas Present

This hour of diversion, of magic and song and dancing girls, was a Christmas
present from those who had made it all the way back to the comrades who were, in
some sense, still missing in the field.

''When America needed to find these guys to fight in Vietnam, it found them, all
right,'' said Mr. Bird, the artistic director of the theater company, which is
best known for its acclaimed Off Broadway play, ''Tracers.'' ''Now they're
squeezing them out of the system. They're at the bottom of the ladder.''

John Rowan, who has studied the problem of homeless veterans for the Vietnam
Veterans of America, said that while the situation is disturbing, it should not
be surprising. The very people who disproportionately fought the war - the poor,
the minorities, the less-educated, the unskilled - are the same ones with the
highest risk of becoming homeless, he said. Fighting an unpopular war, he added,
only further disenfranchised them. Some of the Vietnam veterans can be spotted
easily enough in the Fort Washington Armory - the ones who hang onto pieces of
their old uniforms as if the fatigue jackets, the camouflage pants and the
shoulder patches were invested with identity itself. But many other homeless
veterans would rather not discuss it, and their resignation sounds more
shattering than any anger.

''Being here doesn't bother me so much,'' said Phil Borosque, who served in the
Marines from 1969 to 1971. ''Life is like that.''

''My spirit is broken,'' said Stanley Smiley, an Army veteran who was in Vietnam
in 1967.

Leonard pointed to a man lying on a cot, his left arm constantly twitching. ''He
was in Vietnam,'' Leonard said matter-of-factly. ''He's not all there now.''

'That Could Be Me'

For the veterans on the other side of the stage, encountering their homeless
brethren is more than simply sad. It offers a concrete vision of what their own
lives could have become.

''Seeing these people is devastating,'' said Josh Cruz, the master of ceremonies
and a Marine veteran. ''Because when I got back from the war, I'd been severely
wounded. I had a drinking problem. I had problems with my wife. I had this macho
image of trying to work it all out without anyone's help. I was able to get
ahold of myself, but I look at these people and think, 'That could be me. I
could be in one of these places.' And how horrible it would have been.''

Three years ago, the Christmas show went to the Wards Island shelter. A man
named Bill Cooner came out of the audience and introduced himself to Mr. Bird as
a veteran and a poet. He began to walk daily from Wards Island to the theater
company's office on West 54th Street in Manhattan, doing odd jobs and writing in
spare moments.

By the next Christmas, Mr. Cooner had joined the company for the shelter shows.
At one performance, as he was reading a poem about his wanderings through New
York, a man from the audience knelt in front of him. ''You made it, man,'' the
stranger said. ''You made it.''

But neither rescue nor drama are common during the shows. A little relief is all
anyone reasonably expects.

From Gun to Banjo

So Jim Clark, a helicopter door gunner in the war, played the banjo. Seborn
Westbrook, who was in the infantry, told jokes. Bruce Bradley, a lieutenant
colonel in the Tactical Air Command during the Tet Offensive, sang British
music-hall songs in a cockney accent. David Fletcher, a chaplain's assistant,
did card tricks.

''It means lots to see them,'' said James Liddie, a homeless man who served in
the Army in 1966 and 1967. ''It seems like the Government doesn't care about the
guys who risked their lives. But we care about each other. I know that.''

Leonard felt the same way. ''It does me good to see veterans involved in
something good,'' he said. ''There's a reflected glory.''

The part of the show everyone liked the best were the veterans' female
colleagues: a belly dancer, Noura Aphrodite, and the Broadway gypsies Lisa
Semel, Eileen Grace and Mary McCatty. As they shimmied through ''Hey, Big
Spender,'' the crowd howled and a few men feigned rushes at the stage, Mr. Bird
shrugged and said, ''Just like a U.S.O. show.''

There was, in fact, something very military about the whole scene at the armory
off 169th Street - the rows of cots stretched under the arched, steel ceiling,
the National Guardsmen in olive-drab uniforms patrolling the aisles, even the
Christmas tree off in the hazy indoor distance.

It made Mr. Bird remember the staging area he passed through before being
assigned to an Army unit in 1965. Someone else suggested a refugee camp. ''From
the war of the streets,'' said Joan McCarthy, the director of the show.

And for the veterans in the audience, the show, too, loosened memories. ''It
reminds me of a lot of things,'' Mr. Borosque said. ''Some things I need to
remember. That there was a war. That there were people who didn't come back. It
also helps remind you it really is Christmas. And maybe we can survive for
another one.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Co. performing Christmas
show (NYT/Sara Krulwich)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 25, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, DECEMBER 25, 1986

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 909 words


International#2-11 The U.S. will offer to delay payment from 38 countries of
interest on military loans, the Reagan Administration has decided. The action
could cost $3.5 billion in uncollected revenue. Page 1 A French hostage was
freed by his Shiiite Moslem kidnappers in Lebanon in a good-will Christmas
gesture. Aurel Cornea, a soundman for a French television network, was kidnapped
nearly 10 months ago. #1 The release of a French hostage in Beirut came several
days after the arrest in a Paris suburb of six Arabs who sources say were Moslem
fundamentalist opponents of the Syrian Government. #10 Iran mounted a major
offensive against Iraq in the southern part of their war front, but Iraqi forces
had ''wiped out'' the leading edge of the Iranian force and blunted the attack,
Iraq reported. #8 $20 million intended for the contras, including $10 million
from the Sultan of Brunei and $10 million from private donors, has been traced
by the Reagan Administration, an Administration official said. #1 Andrei
Sakharov praised efforts by Mikhail Gorbachev to change the Soviet system and to
encourage public discussion. He said the new openness is important ''because
openness has always been in short supply.'' #3 News Analysis: Moscow's release
of Andrei D. Sakharov from his exile in Gorky appears to mark a potential
turning point in the Government's tolerance of dissent, Russians and Western
diplomats said. #3 The Pope can sound revolutionary in his advocacy for the
poor, but he has also battled unceasingly against Marxist influences on Catholic
theology and efforts to ''politicize'' the Gospel. #1 Pope at midnight mass 2
Letters to Santa Claus are answered by the chief of the Center of Mail Research
and 90 helpers in France. This week they were scrambling to answer more than
450,000 postcards and letters. #1 Bolivia has cut back on tin mining because of
the collapse in world tin prices and the country's outdated mining methods. The
new Government policy has brought mining towns to the verge of death. 4 Bleak
outlook in Nicaragua 10 Pretoria foe reported dead 11 National#12-15, 26 An
American wants to leave Moscow. Abe Stolar, from Chicago, has been trying for
more than a decade to leave the country with his family, but official permission
has been withheld. #12 Drought still affects the South. Although the effects
have been eased by heavy autumn rains, moisture levels in fields and pastures
are well below normal three months from the start of spring planting. #12 George
Bush's political strategy for gaining the Republican Presidential nomination by
stressing close ties to President Reagan may have been undermined by the Iran
affair, his aides and other supporters said. #8 The Howard Beach incident is the
latest in a growing number of incidents involving violence and intimidation
against minorities, according to national civil rights leaders and other
prominent blacks. #36 At least 14 people drowned when their 28-foot wooden boat,
which departed from the Dominican Republic, swamped within sight of Puerto Rico
Monday night. 12 High cholesterol levels appear to be linked to an increased
risk of colon cancer, researchers said. High cholesterol levels have been
previously shown to increase the risk of heart attacks and strokes. #14 14
whales had the flu when they beached themselves on Cape Cod, scientists have
found. One scientist said it was the first record of a large-scale influenza
outbreak in stranded whales. #14 More drunken drivers flee the scenes of traffic
accidents because of tougher laws, but stricter laws reduce the number of
alcohol-related accidents over all, according to a Purdue University study. #15
Ministers for Adoption, a Mississippi group of black clergy, is appealing to
families in congregations to adopt some of the abused and abandoned black
children in the state. #14 Hispanic boycott aimed at Japan 26 Baby Ruths
recalled 26 Court says Liddy owes taxes 26 3 Delaware convicts are caught 26
Washington Talk#14 President's Christmas message Regional#33-36 A beating victim
refused a subpoena from the Queens District Attorney, according to officials,
who said the case stemming from last week's racial attack in Howard Beach could
fall apart without him. #1 Gifts of art will not be accepted by the New York
City Art Commission until it can find out more about what it is getting. The
director said guidelines are needed to show that gifts will be judged by a high
standard. #33 Theater at homeless shelters, where nearly 40 percent of the men
are veterans and half of those veterans of Vietnam, is being performed by the
Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company. #1 Flexible buses are on city streets
again, but in Newark, not New York. N.J. Transit bought 120 of the vehicles,
which had been discarded by the Transit Authority as too dangerous, and
reinforced them. #33 A transit plan for disabled residents in New York City is
not finished, eight months after the Koch administration was required to give it
to Governor Cuomo, according to city officials. #35 Rents in New York's
Chinatown have been pushed up to the levels of midtown by a flood of immigrants
from Hong Kong, making the real estate among the most expensive in the United
States. #1 Crack down on peddlers 33 Postman puts shopping above duty 34 Clerics
express concerns 34 A new teaching tool 34 College gets $5.5 million gift 34
Hospital chief named 35 Southern mayors fault Koch 36 Neediest Cases#35

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 25, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LOYALTY TO REAGAN SEEN AS A PROBLEM FOR BUSH

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1140 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 24


The disclosures of arms shipments to Iran and the diversion of funds to the
Nicaraguan rebels have created a fundamental problem for Vice President Bush in
his effort to succeed President Reagan, aides and other supporters said today.

The problem, they said, is that much of his strategy has turned on his loyalty
to Mr. Reagan, which advisers have said is important among the conservatives who
will be influential in nominating the Republican Presidential candidate.

The disclosures have threatened to undermine that strategy, some of his advisers
acknowledged, and have caused a precipitate drop in his poll ratings among
Republicans.

The aides, who discussed the situation on the condition that their names be
withheld, said Mr. Bush, out of loyalty to Mr. Reagan, has placed himself in a
precarious situation by rejecting any suggestion that he distance himself from
the President over the Iran affair. In effect, the aides said, he is gambling
that the public clamor will subside.

Playing Out the Hand

The aides said Mr. Bush was unlikely to make major changes now in his carefully
mapped drive for the Presidency.

''In the narrow sense, there isn't anything at all he could do to distance
himself that would be useful,'' said one of his closest advisers. ''The fact is,
he has identified with the President's record over the last six years and if he
was to go now and claim independence, it would reflect on his character and
nothing is more important in politics that character.''

Another associate of the Vice President said, ''The best thing to do sometimes,
whether in politics or poker, is to play out the hand, and that's what he's
decided to do.''

But many aides express concern over the Vice President's recent acknowledgment
that he is ''no longer the front-runner'' because of the arms scandal. They fear
that such an admission could drain the support of politicians interested more in
backing a winner than in his politics.

Polls Show Drop in Popularity

Mr. Bush has said he was aware of the decision to sell arms to Iran but had no
knowledge of the diversion of profits to the Nicaraguan insurgents before it was
disclosed Nov. 25 by Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d. Mr. Reagan has said the
same thing.

The Vice President has experienced a sharp drop in popularity in a number of
recent polls. One showed Mr. Bush trailing Senator Bob Dole of Kansas for the
first time in a Presidential preference poll. Mr. Dole led among 205 Iowa
Republicans questioned by The Des Moines Register from Dec. 8 to Dec. 17,
although his edge was within the margin of sampling error if the poll results
were applied to all Iowa Republicans.

In a national New York Times/CBS News Poll taken Dec. 7-8, the Vice President's
approval rating from the public was placed at 29 percent, a drop of more than 10
percentage points from his rating of several months ago.

Mr. Bush said in a recent interview that he and Mr. Reagan would probably
recover in three to six months once the truth was known about the arms sales and
the diversion of profits to the Nicaraguan rebels.

Situation Like Humphrey's

But some of his aides and other political experts say that Mr. Bush's situation
is similar to that Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey faced in 1968 when some
advisers urged him to resign to put distance between himself and President
Johnson's Vietnam War policy. Mr. Humphrey refused, only to break with Mr.
Johnson five weeks before the election, which Richard M. Nixon won.

''The last thing that a President wants is a Vice President creating turmoil in
his Administration,'' said Ted Van Dyk, who served as a top assistant to Mr.
Humphrey. ''Mr. Bush is in a desperate situation.

''The only circumstances in which the Vice President doesn't harm himself is if
he is a running mate in an enormously popular Administration. Had this not
happened, it could have been that kind of situation, but that has been
shattered.''

Marlin Fitzwater, the press secretary to the Vice President, said Mr. Bush had
decided to respond to the crisis by ''working harder,'' including conducting a
more intense campaign effort in Iowa, the site of the first major test of the
1988 Presidential campaign. Mr. Fitzwater said no other political actions in
light of the crisis were being contemplated, although Mr. Bush has made two
major speeches on Iran designed to reassure the public that he believed that
mistakes had made and that he wanted to get the facts to the public.

Poll Showings Minimized

Aides to the Vice President assert that there has been no panic in the Bush
camp, although they acknowledge that he has discussed his recent political
troubles with key advisers and associates.

In such private conversations, they said Mr. Bush has made it clear that he
would not make any moves that would be perceived as distancing himself from Mr.
Reagan. In contrast, Mr. Dole, the Senate Republican leader, has publicly
criticized Mr. Reagan, saying that he had not yet convinced the American public
that he has done all he could to get at the truth.

Aides to Mr. Bush have tried to play down Mr. Dole's rise and the Vice
President's slide by saying they did not come as a surprise considering the
widespread criticism the disclosures have brought. In addition, the aides say
Mr. Dole has made four times as many appearances in Iowa as Mr. Bush has and
that Mr. Bush has also been harmed by resentment in the state to the
Administration's farm policy.

Mr. Bush carried Iowa in its Republican caucuses in 1980. But his margin of
victory over Mr. Reagan was less than three percentage points. ''That showed
that his support was a mile wide and an inch deep and not as strong as some
people were saying,'' said a top adviser to Mr. Bush.

Nomination as 'Fool's Gold'

Some officials in the Vice President's camp believe that Mr. Dole's approach
could backfire if Mr. Reagan's approval rating bounces back, because it could
make it more difficult to run as one who would carry on the Reagan Revolution.
Moreover, they said that Mr. Bush believes that if the overall backlash to the
disclosures is severe enough to damage his own chances to be nominated, then it
will also prevent a Republican candidate from winning the general election. ''If
the damage gets so bad that it deprives the Vice President of the nomination,
then the nomination is fool's gold in my judgment,'' said a close Bush
associate.

But even if it became clear that the Iranian affair could make it impossible for
him to be nominated, aides said Mr. Bush would not distance himself from the
President.

Some in his camp, however, believe that Mr. Bush must do more, such as
dismissing Donald Gregg, his national security adviser. Mr. Gregg has been
linked to at least one person involved in a private network to supply arms to
Nicaraguan insurgents.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vice President Bush (NYT/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 25, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM PARLEY ON NEW CHIEFS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 242 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 24


An important session of Vietnam's National Assembly opened today in Hanoi,
according to the official radio, the Voice of Vietnam.

The assembly is expected to name the country's President and Prime Minister. But
the Vietnamese Embassy here said there was no published timetable for this
assembly session, which follows the Sixth Communist Party Congress last week.
The official radio, heard in Bangkok tonight, also did not mention a schedule.

Over the last few days there have been reports from Hanoi suggesting that there
are still disagreements within the party over appointments and policies. The
pace and scope of economic change have been a major issue in Vietnam since the
last party congress in 1982.

According to Agence France-Presse, the only Western news organization with a
bureau in Hanoi, there has been a report in the Vietnamese Party theoretical
journal suggesting that ''revolutionary violence'' will have to been applied to
certain problem factions.

The Sixth Party Congress named a new party leader, Nguyen Van Linh. It also
elected a new Politburo, the composition of which normally provides strong clues
to who will take over top governmental positions, which are dominated by the
party hierarchy.

It had been predicted by diplomats and officials in Hanoi last week that the
presidency of the Council of Ministers, still held by Truong Chinh, who
relinquished the party leadership position last week, would go to Pham Hung.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 25, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWEST TEACHING TOOL: A VIDEO ENCYCLOPEDIA

BYLINE:  By PHILIP S. GUTIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 761 words

DATELINE: RIVERHEAD, L.I.


Gerald R. Ford's Presidency took on an element of immediacy here the other day
as a high school social studies class viewed footage of the fall of Vietnam,
from refugees in the countryside to the havoc at the United States Embassy as
the last evacuation helicopter pulled away from the roof.

Soon after, several students watched scenes of President John F. Kennedy as he
traveled the country lobbying for his economic and social programs.

Those images, among more than 2,235 bits of footage from 1893 to 1985, are
stored on 36 silver disks that comprise the Video Encyclopedia of the 20th
Century - one of the country's newest educational tools.

The students in Stephen J. Paskiewicz's 11th grade class at Riverhead High
School are among the first in the region to have access to the encyclopedia,
according to the Manhattan-based company that produced it, CEL Educational
Resources. Mr. Paskiewicz praised the encyclopedia as a research device that
''helps get kids to think critically, analyze and draw their own conclusions.''
#77 Hours of Film ''Kids are programmed into music and audio-visual
entertainment,'' he said, ''but this isn't entertainment, it's history.''

The Video Encyclopedia encompasses 77 hours of filmed events intended to serve
as primary source material for use in class discussions and for research papers.

Gathered from such sources as television news archives, presidential libraries
and the collections of government agencies, the footage has been edited and any
voice-over or narrative has been removed, the company said.

''In one sense it is an interesting use of technology,'' said Gladys
Chang-Hardy, an eduational consultant, ''but what is more important is what a
person can do with historical material that is made available in such
quantity.'' Ms. Chang-Hardy is a member of the CEL advisory board monitoring the
use of the encyclopedia.

The Cost: $10,000

Colleges and universities - besides buying sets for their own use - are looking
for new uses for the video encyclopedia. At Columbia University, the Teachers
College is working to combine the encyclopedia with personal computers to help
speed the retrieval process.

''One of the problems that I see in using the video encyclopedia is how to make
it maximally interactive so that one can respond on the spot with that clip that
really brings to life the question the class is discussing,'' said Robert
McClintock, the chairman of the Communication, Computing and Technology
Department at the college.

''We've long been aware of the superior motivating power of good video,'' he
said, ''but I think its educational potential has not been recognized until
now.''

Mr. Paskiewicz's class used its 50-minute period one day recently to learn about
the decisions President Ford made when he chose to pull out of Vietnam. Mr.
Paskiewicz alternated footage from the encyclopedia with his own commentary and
class discussion about the decision to leave behind hundreds of thousands of
American supporters.

Mr. Paskiewicz said he used the encyclopedia, which cost his school district
about $10,000, at least once a week. And he is showing other teachers at
Riverhead High how to use the encyclopedia, which includes six volumes of
written background material and an index.

Sprucing Up a Report

As part of an annual assignment, Mr. Paskiewicz's students are researching group
papers and oral reports comparing various Presidencies and how they affected
American life of the period. For the first time, though, students are to use the
video encyclopedia as a resource.

As her group watched images of President Kennedy, Georgette Papageorge, a member
of the team studying his Presidency, said that showing scenes from the video
encyclopedia ''will certainly spruce up our oral presentation.''

Another student, Steve Stubbs, is using the encyclopedia to put together an
entry for Suffolk County's Black History Month competition, which is sponsored
by the county Human Rights Commission.

Mr. Stubbs said he planned to make a videotape, weaving his commentary and
analysis around footage from the speeches of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
and Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu of Cape Town, South Africa, ''to see the impact
of each on society.''

Company officials say that about 500 encyclopedias have been sold since May,
when the product became available. It is being used across the nation and in
seven other countries. The New York City schools have purchased 34 sets, the
company said. Detroit's schools are now using 30 sets and Atlanta has bought 29.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Stephen J. Paskiewicz using Video Encyclopedia at Riverhead
High School (NYT/Barton Silverman)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE BUSHES OF FLORIDA, CUBAN 'BRIGADE' TRIES TO KEEP THE FLAME ALIVE

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 941 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Dec. 25


A burst of rifle fire rang out, and two squads of men in camouflage uniforms
dived for cover in the scrub brush.

Armed with loaded combat-style rifles, the men inched up to a gravel road,
darted across, one by one, and disappeared in the tall grass.

The men snaking through the bush were Cuban-Americans who say the most important
thing in their lives is fighting Communism and the man who brought it to their
homeland, Fidel Castro. If they can't get at him, they say, they'll do what they
can in Nicaragua, where, they say, he is heavily involved.

Every Sunday they get together at a camp here, where the vast Everglades blends
with the outskirts of Miami, to practice combat skills and talk about fighting
Communism.

Jokes About the Camp

Cuban-Americans have been involved with at least two other military training
camps in the vicinity of the Everglades in the last three years, but this is
believed to be the only one still functioning.

Some people in Miami, including some very committed anti-Communists, joke about
the camp and say that what really interests the regulars most is beer and
barbecue. Whether those are true sentiments or merely part of a smoke screen is
not clear. But the camp, which is run by a branch of the Association of the
Veterans of the Bay of Pigs, 2506 Brigade, is definitely not all talk.

It has been involved in a number of ways in aiding the Nicaraguan rebels, whose
sources of aid have come under close scrutiny since the downing of an
American-owned cargo plane filled with guns and ammunition in October and later
disclosures that profits from arms sales to Iran were diverted to the rebels.

At least a dozen Cuban-Americans who have fought with the Nicaraguan rebels have
been trained at the camp. Half of them were trained by Rene Corvo, a 46-year-old
former hospital worker and Bay of Pigs veteran, who has also been described as a
recruiter for the rebels.

A Shipment From Florida

He has also been identified by several witnesses as a participant in the
shipment of a DC-6 cargo planeload of weapons and ammunition from the Fort
Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport to the rebels, known as contras.

The camp leaders, who maintain a relationship with the rebel leaders, have
helped collect medical supplies, clothing and food for the rebels. Last month
several leaders of the camp visited rebel units and field hospitals in Honduras.

Congressional investigators and Federal officials say that a few days before the
guns and ammunition were shipped from Fort Lauderdale on March 6, 1985, there
was a celebration at the camp commemorating the event.

''That's a lie,'' said Pedro Rojas, a 64-year-old Bay of Pigs veteran who helps
run the camp.

Mr. Rojas said that the camp had its only 1985 party in March but that he could
not remember the date. He said that guests were charged $6 each and that the
proceeds went for the upkeep of the camp.

Says No Laws Are Broken

''We didn't have any festivities to celebrate the shipment of any arms,'' he
said. ''We don't celebrate arms shipments.''

Mr. Rojas asserted that nothing at the camp violated the Federal laws that
prohibit recruiting and training people for foreign wars or exporting weapons.

''We don't recruit anybody to go any place,'' Mr. Rojas said. ''If you go to my
camp for three days and after you leave you go to Vietnam or Afghanistan or
Cambodia or Nicaragua, there is nothing I can do about it. You are a grown
man.''

Some Congressional investigators have said they suspect that weapons may have
been mixed in with some of the nonlethal aid sent to the rebels by private
groups.

Mr. Rojas denied that his group had sent any weapons to the rebels. He said he
could not be certain that the rebels had not bought weapons with the $10,000 to
$12,000 in cash donations that men from the camp had helped collect, but he said
he understood it had gone for medicine and food.

Full Time for the Rebel Cause

About 18 months ago, Mr. Corvo, who reportedly gave up his hospital job more
than three years ago to devote full time to the rebel cause, used the camp for
three or four weeks to train six or eight Cuban-Americans who were later
reported to be operating on the southern border of Nicaragua, according to Mr.
Rojas and several others acquainted with Mr. Corvo.

''We opened our arms to him because he was our buddy from the Bay of Pigs,'' Mr.
Rojas said. ''We didn't ask any questions.''

One of the men trained by Mr. Corvo, Mario Rejas Lavas, was later captured by
Nicaraguan Government soldiers. A week later, another Cuban exile who said he
had been recruited by Mr. Corvo in Miami, Ubaldo Hernandez Perez, was also
captured. One or two other Cuban exiles - there are conflicting reports -
committed suicide after being severely wounded on the southern Nicaragua front.

In all, Cuban-Americans who are in close contact with military activities in
Central America say, 30 to 50 Cuban-Americans have fought alongside the
Nicaraguan rebels in the last three years.

Mr. Corvo has not responded to requests, sent through intermediaries, for an
interview. Mr. Rojas and others at the camp said they lost contact with Mr.
Corvo soon after his use of the camp.

Most of the men at the camp, including a plumber, a jeweler and a computer
programmer, have never been to war. At target practice, a dozen men took turns
firing at a metal gong before someone scored a hit.

''Tell the people we're dreamers,'' Mr. Rojas said. ''We dream of liberating our
country. We're trying to keep the flame alive. We lost 97 Cubans and 4 Americans
at the Bay of Pigs. Somebody has to be loyal to that memory.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of participants in a military training camp (NYT/Susan Greenwood)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: PENTAGON;
Military Medical Care Tries to Heal Itself

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1244 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 25


Among the biggest headaches suffered in the Pentagon has been the responsibility
for the medical care of 10 million people in peacetime and for the wartime
treatment of men and women wounded in battle.

By law, the 2.2 million members of the armed forces and their 2.8 million
dependents are entitled to free medical care, as are 5 million more retired
military people, dependents and widows. That free medical care is a strong point
used by recruiters trying to interest young people in enlisting in the armed
forces. But the military system that provides peacetime medical care has been
strained, Pentagon officials say. Overcrowded military hospitals try to treat 50
million outpatients a year. Costs of sending the overflow to civilian doctors
and hospitals approaches $2 billion a year. And the quality of the care has been
criticized in highly publicized cases of malpractice.

As for combat medicine, senior officials testified last year that, because of
insufficient doctors, nurses, field hospitals, supplies and transport, the armed
forces could care for only 3 of every 10 people wounded in conventional war. In
addition, a secret audit of American military medical facilities in Europe done
by the Pentagon's Inspector General reported last month that ''all major
deficiencies would not be corrected until 1992 or 1993'' because large sums have
been spent on arms and not enough on medical equipment and supplies.

Still, for all its defects, the military medical system is showing signs of
improvement, according to Dr. William Mayer, the Defense Department's senior
medical official. A new plan for shifting part of the peacetime burden to
civilian doctors and hospitals has been started; plans for recruiting doctors
into the reserves are under way; investment in combat medical equipment has been
increased; new teams to assist those wounded by terrorists have been formed.

Altogether, Dr. Mayer says, programs to improve peacetime and wartime care are
about half completed, though he says it will take several more years, into the
early 1990's, before military medical care for both can be termed fully
adequate.

Hazardous Activities

The system has been under strain because of the rapid tempo of training and
operations. Even without hostilities, military activities like driving tanks,
steaming ships and flying airplanes can be hazardous.

About 370 service personnel are killed in military accidents each year,
according to the Pentagon. Of those, 175 are in aviation accidents, 90 in other
operations, 70 in government motor vehicles and 35 in industrial accidents. An
additional 630 military people die each year in off-duty automobile or
motorcycle accidents.

The armed forces are short of doctors because the services cannot pay the wages
that doctors earn in civilian life. ''We just cannot compete economically,'' Dr.
Mayer said.

Further strains have been caused by a basic change in recent years as more
members of the services are married and have children than before. ''Even the
Marines,'' said Dr. Mayer, ''have more dependents than marines.''

Similarly, the increasing presence of women, who comprise about 10 percent of
the force, has required more doctors trained to treat illnesses common to women.
A growing population of retired military people adds pressure. In the 1950's,
the nation decided for the first time to maintain a large standing force.
Consequently, the system's number of retired people more than doubled between
1968 and 1982 alone.

Dr. Mayer says the same awareness of health that has swept through civilian
America has been obvious in military life, with members more demanding of
medical care than 10 to 15 years ago.

As in civilian life, the fear of liability haunts military doctors. Under
current law, they may not be sued for mistakes. But they are subject to peer
review, to discipline and to demotion for poor performance. Thus, Dr. Mayer
said, military doctors today insist on more tests, X-rays, consultations among
specialists and documentation than before. Junior medical people are kept under
closer supervision.

Medical readiness for combat operations deteriorated after the end of the war in
Vietnam, and little was done in the first years of the Reagan Administration
because weapons took top priority. Because of peacetime needs, the services
concentrated on recruiting doctors more suited to family practice than combat
medicine. Inter-service duplication further weakened readiness.

Another strain has been caused by a new mission that was to provide medical
assistance in terrorist incidents. The services stumbled after the bombing of a
Marine barracks in Beirut in 1983 because transport, emergency teams and
hospitals were not ready to take the surge of wounded.

In an effort to overcome all these problems, Dr. Mayer says, the Pentagon has
shifted emphasis from peacetime medicine to wartime readiness, and it will look
to civilian facilities to pick up a greater share of military family care. ''Our
primary mission,'' he said, ''is to answer the question: Are we ready to go to
war?''

With more investment, Dr. Mayer added, ''by 1988, we will have on order close to
90 percent of what we think is necessary to deploy medical equipment,'' such as
field operating rooms and recovery wards.

The Army, Navy and Air Force, he reports, have begun to standardize medical
equipment, which should make it less expensive. ''Fragmented planning is no
longer being done,'' he said.

The services are trying, with stipends and scholarships, to attract physicians
with the necessary training into the reserves to be available in crises. ''The
nature of warfare today,'' Dr. Mayer said, ''means we should be able to mobilize
medics faster than the draft.'' In one case, a medical student could get $645 a
month, with a three-year commitment to service for each year of stipends.

To help in terrorist incidents, medical teams have been formed and are poised to
move on short notice. Pallets of medicine and equipment are stored at the end of
runways for incidents in Europe, the Middle East, Central America and Asia, Dr.
Mayer said.

Those teams were mobilized when the passenger liner Achille Lauro was hijacked
and when a Trans World Airlines aircraft was seized in Beirut. And a team flew
into Karachi to aid passengers wounded when Pakistani soldiers stormed a
hijacked Pan American plane.

A Change in Civilian Program

To relieve family pressures on medical facilities, the Defense Department has
begun testing a change in the 25-year-old Civilian Health and Medical Program of
the Uniformed Services, known as Champus.

Civilian doctors and hospitals participating in this program were intended to
care for members of military families when military clinics were not available.
But the program's costs ''have been rising much faster than health care costs
generally,'' according to a Pentagon report.

''Champus is practically the only Federal program that continues to buy health
care primarily on the basis of simply paying providers' billed charges,'' the
report said. ''Under this system, there are no incentives for cost efficiency.''

In the program being tested, doctors and hospitals will provide care for a fixed
fee and military people will receive care for a nominal fee rather than the
current complicated system of deductibles. Another objective will be to improve
the way medical people on military bases cooperate with those in nearby
communities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 27, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S MERCENARIES ESCAPE BRAZIL TO TELL OF PLAN TO OVERTHROW AFRICAN LEADER

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1383 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. 26


Two American mercenaries have escaped from a Brazilian prison and returned to
the United States to tell a tangled tale of a foiled effort to overthrow the
Government of Ghana.

The two men, Timothy M. Carmody of San Francisco and Steven W. Hedrick of Ocala,
Fla., were among eight Americans arrested 10 months ago off Brazil, with a ship
bearing six tons of weapons. They say they were headed for the West African
country to join in a coup attempt aimed at the military Government of Lieut.
Jerry Rawlings.  Mr. Carmody and Mr. Hedrick said in interviews today that they
believed they were participating in a plan sanctioned by the United States
Government and led by Godfrey Osei, a Ghanaian dissident and expatriate living
in the New York City borough of Queens. Mr. Osei led a failed coup attempt in
1983.

Mr. Carmody, a Vietnam veteran and a co-founder of the Rhodesia Veterans
Association, a group of Americans who worked as private soldiers in Rhodesia in
the late 1970's, said that once in Ghana, they were to meet with supporters of
Mr. Osei who would attack the capital city of Accra while the Americans
attempted to free Ghanaian nationals jailed on charges that they were working
covertly for the Central Intelligence Agency.

C.I.A. Says It's 'Ridiculous'

The same story is told by Mr. Hedrick, who said that ''sources'' he would not
name had sent him coded messages in jail that reasssured him that the job had
the sanction of the American Government. ''I thought I had the blessing of my
country,'' Mr. Hedrick said of the work he signed on to do in Ghana. He said he
felt ''abandoned'' by the Government in his 10 months in various jails in
Brazil.

But George Lauder, a C.I.A. spokesman, today denied that the agency had anything
to do with an effort to overthrow the Government of Ghana, with which Washington
has had strained relations. ''Their charges are ridiculous,'' he said of the
men's comments today.

Pete Martinez, a State Department spokesman, said today that he had ''no
information at all'' on the men and was not aware of their whereabouts.

Mr. Hedrick and Mr. Carmody said they were determined to locate Mr. Osei and to
speak to a Texas commodities broker who arranged for the sale of arms to the
group, in an effort to sort out the information they were given.

Effort to Avoid Extradition

Though their conviction on arms-smuggling charges was overturned by a Brazilian
appeals court, four of the eight Americans escaped from a prison in Brasilia
Dec. 15, before they could be extradited to Argentina, where the arms had been
purchased and where they faced charges of illegally exporting military material.
Mr. Carmody and Mr. Hedrick, along with Sheldon W. Ainsworth of Omaha, arrived
in the United States Thursday. Frederick T. Verduin of Santa Rosa, Calif.,
separated from the others shortly after the escape and did not accompany them
home.

Those who remain imprisoned in Brasilia are John Early of Albuquerque, Robert E.
Foti of New York City, and Julio Rodriguez Larrazabal and Steven Villa Sosa,
both of Fayetteville, N.C.

According to Mr. Carmody, who was a graduate student in international relations
at San Francisco State University, he was recruited for the mission by Mr. Early
and Mr. Foti, fellow Vietnam veterans who also worked as private soldiers in
Rhodesia.

Mr. Early is particularly well known in the shadowy fraternity of adventurers,
mercenaries and arms dealers operating out of this country. Several people who
know him say he has been involved in clandestine activities in Laos in the
1960's and more recently in El Salvador.

Lawyer Claimed C.I.A. Tie

Mr. Early was also convicted in Federal District Court in San Diego in 1981 of
conspiracy to smuggle marijuana for his role in a large drug-smuggling
operation. According to Mr. Early's defense attorney, quoted in an article in
The San Diego Union at the time, the Central Intelligence Agency intervened in
the case to insure that Mr. Early's connections to the C.I.A. were not mentioned
during his trial.

It was Mr. Early who was to lead the group of eight in the mission to overthrow
the military Government of Ghana and install Mr. Osei as President.

According to Mr. Hedrick, the eight recruits assembled in the Miami airport on
Feb. 13 and flew to Buenos Aires where they were met by Ted Bishop, a
commodities broker from Texas. He said Mr. Bishop, who arranged for the purchase
of weapons from Argentine Government factories, introduced the men to Mr. Osei.

Reached at his office in Farmersville, Tex., Mr. Bishop acknowledged arranging
the purchase of arms on behalf of Mr. Osei, whom he said he had known for about
two years. He said he believed that Mr. Osei had proper documentation for the
legal purchase of the weapons.

Coffee Deal in Exchange

Mr. Bishop said his fee for the deal was an agreement that he would be the
exclusive broker for coffee and other products from Ghana should Mr. Osei
successfully take over the Government.

Members of Mr. Osei's family answering the phone at his apartment in Queens
have, over the past several weeks, said he was not there and it was not known
when he might return. When the same telephone number was called today, an
unidentified voice said ''wrong number'' and hung up.

Daniel C.K. Gyabaah, counselor at the Embassy of Ghana in Washington, said today
that his Government was aware that the three mercenaries had returned to the
United States. But he said he knew of no plans by his Government in response to
the escape.

Mr. Hedrick says that Mr. Osei told them that a New York City businessman named
''Solomon'' had helped Mr. Bishop raise $500,000 to finance the weapons
purchase, and that Mr. Bishop and Mr. Osei, when in Argentina to buy the
weapons, had called ''Solomon'' in New York.

A New York City commodities broker who has had business dealings with Mr.
Bishop, Solomon Schwartz, is currently charged in an unrelated 14-count Federal
racketeering indictment involving the illegal export of weapons.

Says He Didn't Know Them

But Mr. Schwartz, in a recent interview, said he had no involvement with the
Ghana plot and did not know the men arrested in Brazil.

He acknowledged that he had a business relationship with Ted Bishop, whom he
said had asked him about two years ago to try to work out some commodities
trading deals on produce from Mexico. He said that he met Mr. Bishop in New York
City on one occasion and that Mr. Bishop called him from Argentina attempting to
organize the sale of coffee, a deal that was never finalized.

''This fellow, Ted Bishop, as I understand it, knew those people,'' Mr. Schwartz
said of the mercenaries convicted in Brazil. ''But I had no connection with any
of those people.''

Mr. Schwartz and the three other defendants in the racketeering case have
pleaded not guilty in Federal District Court in Brooklyn. They also filed a
motion asking that they be permitted to argue at their trial that their actions
were authorized by the Government.

In a ruling in September, Judge Thomas C. Platt Jr. wrote that Mr. Schwartz
''had a relationship with certain agencies of the United States Government.''
but he denied the defense request, based on Government offcials' testimony in a
closed hearing.

Sale of Night-Vision Equipment

Among the charges against the defendants are that they agreed to illegally ship
sophisticated night-vision equipment to the Soviet Union and that Mr. Schwartz
illegally exported night-vision equipment made by Litton Industries to the
Government of Argentina during the 1982 Falkland Islands war with Britain.

A businessman who distributes Litton night-vision equipment on the East Coast,
Wally Grasheim, once employed two of the mercenaries arrested in Brazil, Steven
Villa Sosa and Julio Rodriguez Larrazabal, to demonstrate such equipment in El
Salvador, according to Betty Sosa, Mr. Sosa's wife.

Mr. Carmody, Mr. Hedrick and Mrs. Sosa all say that while the men were jailed in
Brazil, Mr. Grasheim traveled there to attempt to intercede in their behalf.

At Mr. Grasheim's office in Manhattan, an associate, Carmine Pelosi, said Mr.
Grasheim was out of town and could not be reached. But he said he knew all of
Mr. Grasheim's associates and that he had never heard of Mr. Sosa or Mr.
Rodriguez.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
DRAMAS WITH STRONG CASTS DELIVERED MOVING ENTERTAINMENT

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1484 words


The business of television was, more than ever, the significant factor
concerning what you may or may not have watched in 1986. The commercial networks
appeared to have stemmed, at least temporarily, the severe erosion of their
audiences. The enormous success of one sitcom, the two-year-old ''Cosby Show,''
continues to prove a boon not only to NBC and its much vaunted ratings victories
but also to industry statistics as a whole. As in the theater, a smash hit is
good for everybody's business.

At the same time, however, faced with new economic realities, most notably a
slackening in advertising sales, the networks have been drastically cutting both
staff levels and production budgets. There is little joy on Broadcast Row this
holiday season. And the corner-cuttings are slowly but surely being reflected in
on-screen product.

Cable development also seemed stalled on key levels. Too many cablecasters have
apparently decided that the future lies nostalgically in old network series or
in new sitcoms badly imitating old network sitcoms. In addition, viewers are
discovering that cable has its own economic realities. New York's political
scandals this year have been riddled with allegations about the awarding of
cable franchises, raising the always pertinent question as to why, after some 15
years, Manhattan is the only one of the city's five boroughs to be hooked up for
cable. And even in Manhattan, it borders on the incredible that subscribers
still cannot get such pay services as Bravo or the Disney Channel. Viewer
choice, obviously, depends as much on where you live as on how much you are
willing to spend.

In any event, looking over my lists of the year's more outstanding programs in
entertainment and the arts, I find that the one for the commercial networks is
only half as long as the combined total for public television and cable's Arts &
Entertainment network (which, of course, cannot be seen in most of New York
City). And, perhaps not surprisingly, the longer list is top-heavy with imports
from foreign broadcasting entities that periodically are willing to put more of
an emphasis on arts than on entertainment. And by ''arts,'' let me be clear, I
do not mean a steady, elevated diet of Shakespeare and Beethoven. Probably the
most effective TV drama of the year, certainly the one that generated the most
favorable comments from readers, was a small, exquisite British import on PBS
called ''Shadowland.'' Based on biographical material from the life of C. S.
Lewis, the British writer famed for his ''Narnia'' series for children, it told
of the author's late-life relationship with a dying woman who would bring him
into the mysteries of marriage and love. Moving performances by Claire Bloom and
Joss Ackland transformed a relatively modest production into a television gem.

As for continuing series, the networks were unable to come up this year with
another ''Cosby Show'' or ''Hill Street Blues.'' Among the new situation
comedies, only three of the current survivors are not instantly forgettable,
primarily because of some first-rate casting. On ABC, back-to-back on
Wednesdays, ''Perfect Strangers'' features the tightly meshed antics of Bronson
Pinchot and Mark Linn-Baker, while ''Head of the Class'' has the world-weary
Howard Hesseman, once the spaced disk-jockey on ''WKRP in Cincinnati,'' teaching
a thing or two to exceptionally bright and smirking students. And just recently,
CBS weighed in with ''The Cavanaughs,'' which not only provides a sturdy
showcase for Barnard Hughes and Christine Ebersole as wisecracking father and
daugher but also, in a departure for TV comedy, re-creates a reasonably good
facsimile of a household that is decidedly Irish-American.

Each of the three networks managed to offer at least one TV movie of the sort
that is usually nominated for awards. NBC had ''Unnatural Causes,'' starring
Alfre Woodard and John Ritter in a provocative drama supporting the cause of
Vietnam veterans who charge that they were severely damaged through contact in
the field with the defoliant known as Agent Orange. ABC's ''Nobody's Child''
starred Marlo Thomas in the based-on-fact story of a misdiagnosed woman who had
spent years of her life in mental institutions. And CBS offered several strong
candidates worthy of special attention: ''Penalty Phase,'' with Peter Strauss as
a California judge confronting political law-and-order pressures; ''Promise,''
with James Garner as a freewheeling bachelor coping with James Woods as his
schizophrenic brother; ''Blood and Orchids,'' with Jane Alexander as a wealthy
villainess covering up a racial incident that took place in Hawaii shortly
before the bombing of Pearl Harbor; ''Resting Place,'' with John Lithgow as an
Army officer trying to get a black soldier buried in a Southern town's
whites-only cemetery; and ''Second Serve,'' with Vanessa Redgrave giving a
riveting performance as the transsexual tennis star Renee Richards.

Over on public television, budget restraints were becoming even more ominous as
Exxon announced that it would be phasing out support for the ''Great
Performances'' series. Only ''American Playhouse'' remains as a major forum for
ambitious domestic ventures in drama. Among its stronger entries this year were
the miniseries ''Roanoke'' and a fine studio rendering of Tina Howe's play
''Painting Churches.'' Another series, ''American Masters,'' was at its best
with Perry Miller Adato's documentary ''Eugene O'Neill: A Glory of Ghosts.'' The
rest of the public-TV schedule relied almost wholly on imports or acquisitions
from independent producers.

On WNET, a couple of tributes to British-TV services brought a raft of goodies.
Channel Four, one of the recipients, sent over films such as ''Accounts,'' a
murder mystery wrapped in political and class attitudes, and the National
Theater's complete version of ''The Oresteia'' by Aeschylus, directed by Peter
Hall. A subsequent salute to BBC-TV, on the occasion of its 50th anniversary,
included ''Tango Mio,'' a superb portrait of life and dancing - they seem
inseparable - in Argentina.

The dominance of the British presence was eased somewhat by WNET's ''Channel
Crossings,'' a series of imports that goes farther afield for its acquisitions.
Among its highlights: the Dutch ''You Are My Mother,'' in which the actor Joop
Admiraal portrays both himself and his mother confined to an old-age home, and
the Indian ''36 Chowringhee Lane,'' the tender story of an Anglo-Indian teacher
of Shakespeare as she faces retirement and loneliness.

Rattling around elsewhere on the public-TV schedule were a couple of productions
assuring fans that a certain, almost eccentric style of British acting remains
alive and delightfully well. The series ''Mystery!,'' in addition to the
occasional treat of having Joan Hickson impersonate Agatha Christie's Miss
Marple, brought in Robin Bailey and Michael Aldridge as two marvelously
fuddy-duddy gentleman sleuths named ''Chalders and Caldicott.'' And then the
mini-series ''Mapp & Lucia,'' based on the novels of E. F. Benson, featured
Geraldine McEwan as wickedly scheming Lucia, Nigel Hawthorne as her insanely
fluttering friend Georgie, and Prunella Scales as the plumply hypocritical Mapp.
A memorable exercise in calculated froth. And public television's best
children's series of the year came from Canada in the form of ''Anne of Green
Gables,'' starring a charming young actress named Megan Fellows.

Cable's A&E service could be mistaken for a public-TV outlet except for the
commercial breaks - not an inconsiderable difference by any means. Having a
special business relationship with the BBC, the network gets, in addition to an
uneven assortment of BBC sitcoms and documentaries, a remarkable number of
accomplished dramas. This year's lineup included superb productions of Oscar
Wilde's ''Lady Windermere's Fan,'' Frederick Raphael's ''Oxbridge Blues,'' Anita
Brookner's ''Hotel du Lac'' and, starring Penelope Keith, N. C. Hunter's 1950's
play ''Waters of the Moon.''

Pay cable, or at least those services that can be seen in Manhattan, had a
generally quiet year, consolidating some of its gains, primarily in comedy
projects, and trying to avoid some of the dopier movie concepts it bought in
recent years. Showtime had some of its best moments with two plays: ''As Is''
and ''Picnic.'' Home Box Office offered ''Murrow,'' an overly somber but
accurate biography of the famed newscaster. Perhaps cable's low profile
complements the rest of the television picture for 1986, a year in which
respectable achievements must be measured against some notable disappointments.
While CBS had its ''Fresno'' - television's first comedy miniseries and a near
total bust - PBS had its ''Paradise Postponed,'' proving that even a writer of
John Mortimer's stature can overextend himself. That, apparently, is show
business, not to mention television.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Nicol Williamson in ''Story of English''; Photo of Nigel
Hawthorne in ''Mapp & Lucia''; Photo of scene from CBS's ''Vanishing Family'';
Photo of scene from ''Anne of Green Gables''; Photo of Alfre Woodard and John
Ritter in ''Unnatural Causes''; Photo of Marlo Thomas in CBS's ''Nobody's
Child''; Photo of Peter Strauss in ''Penalty Phase''; Photo of Vanessa Redgrave
in ''Second Serve'

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
IT WASN'T SUCH A BAD YEAR AFTER ALL

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2609 words


When in doubt, say it was a bad year. Nobody would dare question you. It also
means that you don't have to defend yourself. When you cite such
self-proclaiming lulus as Prince's ''Under the Cherry Moon'' and Willard Huyck's
''Howard the Duck,'' all can nod in safe agreement that movies are continuing
the downhill slide they began sometime before the advent of the talkies. I had
no idea of the extent of this alienation until, not long ago, a film scholar
said to me, quite seriously, ''I don't think I want to see 'The Birth of a
Nation' anymore.''

Yet, in fact, 1986 was an improvement over 1985, in spite of rising production
costs that bend the mind. While it was going on, it looked decidely grim. More
films were released, for the most part meaning more bad films, everything from
''Mountaintop Motel Massacre'' and ''Girls School Screamers'' to big-budget
flops like Alan Alda's ''Sweet Liberty'' and Roman Polanski's ''Pirates.''

If we analyze the year's hit movies as if they are our collective,
wish-fulfilling dreams, we are a nation of sentimental sadists and birdbrained
yahoos, permanently arrested in our 15th year.

Sylvester Stallone, as ''Cobra,'' shoots up California supermarkets in the name
of law-and-order. Tom Cruise, in some admittedly splendid aerial photography,
shoots up Russians in dogfights over the Indian Ocean in ''Top Gun.'' In ''The
Karate Kid, Part II,'' a nice, clean-cut American boy solves all his problems by
becoming a high-kicking Eastern mystic. John Hughes's ''Pretty in Pink'' deals
firmly with not one but two questions that probably never even get asked in
Russia: Should Molly Ringwald go to the senior prom and, if so, what frock
should she wear?

The year's most American film in spirit (as well as one of the year's most
popular) was made by Australians - ''Crocodile Dundee.''

However, in retrospect, it's now clear that 1986 hasn't been so bad after all.
Any calendar year that's more or less bracketed by the release of Woody Allen's
''Hannah and Her Sisters'' in February and Oliver Stone's ''Platoon'' in
December must be a little special.

There also were some exceptionally good documentaries, including Maximilian
Schell's tough, funny ''Marlene,'' made with the grudging cooperation of Marlene
Dietrich; Manfred Kirchheimer's ''We Were So Beloved,'' about Jews who escaped
from Germany before the Holocaust and settled in Manhattan's Washington Heights,
and Ken Burns's ''Huey Long,'' which is almost as much about the Great
Depression as it is about the Mississippi ''Kingfish.''

A wacky standout: Ross McElwee's ''Sherman's March,'' the film maker's
meditation on ''the possibility of romantic love in the South today,'' though
he's often sidetracked by other kinds of love that bump into him on Southern
sidewalks as he follows the trail of Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman, to the sea
and up the coast.

Federico Fellini's ''Fred and Ginger'' was a disappointment, partially because
all Fellini films are expected to match his masterpieces. Jonathan Demme's
''Something Wild'' doesn't rank with his ''Melvin and Howard'' and ''Handle With
Care,'' but it's still the work of one of our most exuberantly American
directors.

Deserving much more serious attention than it received from the public and the
critics was Penelope Spheeris's ''Boys Next Door,'' a remarkably terse,
beady-eyed tale of a couple of teen-agers who, without premeditation, turn a
weekend lark in Los Angeles into a three-day murder spree. It also features an
excellent performance by Charlie Sheen, Martin's boy, who becomes a star in
''Platoon'' (see below).

The year should not be wrapped up without mention of several other films that
made 1986 far more rewarding than it appeared to be at the time. I'm thinking of
Edgar Reitz's 16-hour ''Heimat,'' a chronicle of life in Germany from 1919 to
1982 and, really, a television mini-series, though shown here at the Public
Theater; Spike Lee's comedy, ''She's Gotta Have It'' and the very English
(screenplay by Harold Pinter) ''Turtle Diary,'' with its elegantly funny
performances by Glenda Jackson, Ben Kingsley and Michael Gambon.

All things considered - and allowing for biases that are indefensible - the 10
best films of 1986 are, in alphabetical order:

''Blue Velvet.'' On the basis of this arresting, scary comedy, about the demons
busily at work just beneath the lawns of Small Town, U.S.A., I'm now convinced
that David Lynch (''Eraserhead,'' ''Elephant Man'' and ''Dune'') is a
blood-brother of John Waters (''Pink Flamingos''), only Mr. Lynch has complete
command of his style and minds his manners a bit more. Both men are subversive
humorists.

''Blue Velvet'' is a revivifying example of the kind of idiosyncratic film
making that sometimes - miraculously - is allowed to assert itself in the me-too
world of commercial movie making. Beginning with the discovery of a human ear in
a vacant lot in the otherwise spotlessly clean little city of Lumberton, the
film goes on to weave its magic spell (accompanied by the title song) of moral,
physical and fiscal corruption. The screenplay, written by Mr. Lynch, involves a
masochistic, down-on-her-id singer (Isabella Rossellini), her homicidal lover
(Dennis Hopper) and the two kids next door, played by Kyle MacLachlan and Laura
Dern (see ''Smooth Talk'' below), who solve the mystery of the abandoned ear. A
crazy, all-American classic.

''The Color of Money.'' Taking off from ''The Hustler,'' Robert Rossen's
shapely, 1961 melodrama about the rise and fall of a pool hustler named Fast
Eddie Felson (Paul Newman), Martin Scorsese, the director, Richard Price, who
wrote the screenplay, and Mr. Newman, who plays Fast Eddie 25 years later, have
created a stunning comedy of character that stands on its own.

The film, about the aging Fast Eddie's attempts to make a pool star of a young
hustler much like himself 25 years ago, has a lot of the laconic wit and ease
that distinguished Hollywood movies in their pre-World War II Golden Age. Tom
Cruise is very good as the nervy kid, and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio is a
bright, brand-new film personality as the kid's sharp-as-nails girlfriend. The
film, however, belongs to Mr. Newman. He gives a rich, effortlessly commanding,
funny performance that both caps a career and leads it on to new possibilities.
Michael Ballhaus photographed Mr. Scorsese's fast-paced, neon-colored vision.

''Down by Law.'' ''Stranger Than Paradise,'' Jim Jarmusch's bleakly comic, 1984
fable, was not a fluke. This is triumphantly proved by ''Down by Law,'' Mr.
Jarmusch's far less bleak but no less eccentric comedy about three misfits (a
second-rate pimp, an out-of-work disk jockey and a Candide-like Italian tourist)
fleeing the Louisiana police. Heading the excellent cast: Tom Waits, Tom Lurie
(from ''Stranger Than Paradise''), Roberto Benigni and Ellen Barkin.

The narrative is most engaging, but it's only a small part of what Mr.
Jarmusch's films are all about. With the help of superior cameramen (in this
case, of Robby Muller), Mr. Jarmusch reminds us that the position of the camera,
whether it plays an active role or remains passive within a scene, the length of
the takes, the lighting - in other words, the ways in which we perceive the film
- are as important as any amount of clever acting or trumped-up storytelling.
Mr. Jarmusch makes movies that look like no one else's and, because of that,
they affect us like no others.

''Down by Law'' is by far the most original, most bold, most organically
cinematic American film of the year. With the exception of the films in this
list, it makes most other films look as stilted as slide shows featuring
vacation snaps.

''Hannah and Her Sisters.'' This is the chef d'oeuvre of the Woody Allen career
to date, a dramatic comedy about three spirited, loving, often wrongheaded,
quintessentially bourgeois Manhattan sisters, played with singular skill by Mia
Farrow, Dianne Wiest and Barbara Hershey. ''Hannah'' is another extraordinary
Allen original. Though it evokes Chekhov, the master-of-theater whom the film
maker most admires, it does so in Mr. Allen's own, utterly contemporary terms,
and through his own profoundly moving sensibility.

Like Chekhov, Mr. Allen discovers a muted kind of glory in characters who slide
between farce and tragedy, but who never receive consolation by being so easily
defined. The splendid cast also includes Mr. Allen, Michael Caine, Max Von
Sydow, Carrie Fisher, Daniel Stern, and, in a class by themselves, Maureen
O'Sullivan and the late Lloyd Nolan.

''Menage.'' Betrand Blier's priceless French farce about a bruiser of an ex-con
(Gerard Depardieu), an expert at breaking and entering, who destroys the
marrriage of a pair of engaging misfits. They are played by Michel Blanc and
Miou-Miou, who somehow manage to adapt to the situation when Mr. Depardieu falls
heedlessly in love with - and successfully seduces - the uptight little husband.

The film can be profitably analyzed, I suppose, but first it should be
experienced just for all of its manic, upside-down humor and for Mr. Depardieu's
extraordinary performance. ''Menage'' is the most accomplished comedy yet made
by Mr. Blier (''Going Places,'' ''Get Out Your Handkerchiefs''), and he gives
free rein to Mr. Depardieu. Watching the star barrel through ''Menage'' is as
astonishing as (but much funnier than) watching a hippo tap-dance on stilts.

''My Beautiful Laundrette.'' Written by Hanif Kureishi and directed by Stephen
Frears, this was the most surprising, most satisfying hit of the year - a
brilliant, cutting social comedy about exiled Pakistanis, making their way out
of the London slums, and about some of the poor English who get in their way.
It's also two sorrowful love stories, one of which is homosexual but doesn't
bother to speak its name. It's self-evident.

The film is candid, wise and immensely entertaining. The fine cast features
Saeed Jaffrey as a money-loving businessman, Gordon Warnecke as his
quick-to-learn nephew, and Daniel Day Lewis (see ''A Room With a View'' below),
in the year's most expert performance by a young actor, as the Cockney tough who
makes the romantic mistake of falling in love with Mr. Wrong.

''Platoon.'' Oliver Stone has done some flashy work before, including the
screenplays for ''Midnight Express'' and ''Scarface'' and both the direction of
and the screenplay for ''Salvador''; but ''Platoon'' is something else entirely
- one of the best films yet made about the fighting in Vietnam. It could be the
best. The film's focus is short. It recalls the Vietnam War through the
experiences of a single platoon of exhausted, amazingly resilient infantrymen,
characterized almost entirely through their daily grinds, which are alternately
deadly boring and just deadly.

Though it has a lot of worrying, moving things on its mind, ''Platoon'' contains
no overt political messages. It's pragmatic, like its soldiers. Instead of
messages, it dramatizes what fighting this war must have been like to those who
weren't thinking about issues, only about making it back to base - day after
day. Charlie Sheen plays the central role - beautifully - with excellent support
from Willem Dafoe, Tom Berenger, Kevin Dillon and Keith David. In a word,
smashing.

''A Room With a View.'' Those longtime collaborators - the producer Ismail
Merchant, the director James Ivory and the writer Ruth Prawer Jhabvala - top
their fine adaptation of Henry James's ''Bostonians'' with this even more
beautiful and rich adaptation of E. M. Forster's comedy of manners, ''A Room
With a View.'' They have transferred Forster's novel from page to screen,
seemingly intact, with dialogue, characters, settings, even ideas, not only
undamaged but illuminated.

Chief among the equals of the splendid cast are Helena Bonham Carter, as the
well-bred Edwardian girl who almost ruins her life - and the lives of everyone
around her - by marrying the suitable but wrong man, and Maggie Smith, Denholm
Elliott, Julian Sands and, in particular, Daniel Day Lewis as an insufferable
though winning prig. No ''Masterpiece Theater'' this. It's an adaptation, but
it's also an original.

''Smooth Talk.'' It has the shape of the Joyce Carol Oates short story (''Where
Are You Going, Where Have You Been?'') from which it was adapted - about a
pretty, gangly, sexually questing 15-year-old girl who, one day, happens to
attract every mother's nightmare, a rude, sexually questing ''older'' man of 30
or so. What happens to the active but innocent Connie (Laura Dern) is probably
fatal in the story and almost beside the point of this fascinating film.

In ''Smooth Talk,'' with the scope that a film automatically imposes on a
narrative, Joyce Chopra, the director, and Tom Cole, who wrote the screenplay,
tell not only the story of Laura and her menacing stranger (Treat Williams), but
also of an America that's like one of its formerly grand, Eastern cities. There
is no so-called ''inner city'' in this film. Like Laura's family, everybody
seems to live in a limbo that's not quite urban or exurban. There's no center of
gravity for the family. Thus, what happens to Laura is a foregone conclusion.
This is the best horror movie of the year, with riveting performances by Mr.
Williams, who snakes through the film in mirrored glasses, and Miss Dern, who,
though tall and physically grown up, still seems to have bits of eggshell in her
hair.

''Summer.'' Eric Rohmer's glowing miniature, a sad, sweet comedy about Delphine
(Marie Riviere), a restless, lonely young Parisian woman who'd probably be hell
to know but, as revealed by Mr. Rohmer and Miss Riviere, is a source of
continual delight. Delphine is every pretty, anonymous woman one's passed on the
street and wondered about. She's proud, funny and so stubbornly independent that
she drives all her friends to painless distraction. Marie's problem: where to go
on her summer vacation.

Though the problems seem small, they loom large, clear and as melancholic as
funny. Mr. Rohmer dramatizes them as if he were a microsurgeon. Real incisions
are made but no blood is let. ''Summer'' is not one of a kind, but the entire
body of Rohmer work is.

The 10 runners-up, in no special order of preference, are:

''That's Life,'' Blake Edwards's gaudy but introspective comedy about mortality
in Hollywood, starring Julie Andrews and Jack Lemmon, each at the peak of their
accumulated talents; ''Decline of the American Empire,'' Denys Arcand's
French-Canadian talkfest about a group of self-absorbed academicians who see the
Fall of the West in their own love lives; Bertrand Tavernier's '' 'Round
Midnight,'' a paean to bebop with an amazing, laid-back, bebop performance by
the musician Dexter Gordon; Alain Cavalier's ''Therese,'' a sweet, unphony,
radiantly beautiful contemplation of the life of St. Therese of Lisieux; David
Cronenberg's striking remake of ''The Fly,'' with Jeff Goldblum as the
soon-to-be-speck on the floor.

Also, the Japanese ''Pigs and Battleships,'' Shohei Imamura's 1961 melodramatic
comedy, loaded with armor-piercing satire; ''Ruthless People,'' the hilarious
update of O. Henry's ''Ransom of Red Chief,'' with Bette Midler and Danny
DeVito, directed by the ''Airplane!'' crew, Jim Abrahams and David and Jerry
Zucker; Neil Jordan's ''Mona Lisa,'' an eerie romance with superlative
performances by Bob Hoskins and Cathy Tyson; ''Uforia,'' John Binder's oddball,
Preston Sturges-like comedy, and Alex Cox's ''Sid and Nancy,'' which takes a
blunt look at the romantic lives of the terminally-addicted Sid Vicious and
Nancy Spungen in a way that probably would have astonished and delighted them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from ''My Beautiful Laundrette''; Photo of scene from
''Menage''; Photo of scene from ''The Color of Money''; Photo of scene from ''A
Room With A View''; Photo of scene from ''Blue Velvet''; Photo of scene from
''Platoon''; Photo of scene from ''Down By Law''; Photo of scene from ''Smooth
Talk''; Photo of scene from ''Summer''

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

It Takes More Than Poverty to Make Criminals;
Bring Back R.O.T.C.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 298 words


To the Editor:

In the context of the recent shootout between Larry Davis and the New York City
police, Don Wycliff speaks of domestic consequences of the elimination of the
military draft under the pressure of anti-Vietnam War sentiment in this country:
the lost opportunity for low-income minority youth to break away from the
restricting circumstances of their lives, and the crime, violence, unrest and
disorder that arise when these young people have nothing but such circumstances
in prospect.

The military draft was not the only opportunity lost to minority youth as a
result of antiwar sentiment, however: Reserve Officers Training Corps programs
on campuses also went into decline and the financial aid and career
opportunities that went with them.

The absence of R.O.T.C. programs is especially to be remarked at the four-year
colleges that form part of the City University of New York. These 11 colleges
have a combined enrollment of about 106,000 students, half of them black or
Hispanic and three-quarters dependent upon financial aid. Some among the City
University students qualified to enroll in R.O.T.C. would do so if the programs
were easily accessible; yet according to Peterson's Annual Guide for 1986, only
one of the colleges, the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, has an R.O.T.C.
program available for its 6,000 students.

The City University prides itself on the educational opportunities it affords
minority youth. It should expand those opportunities by including R.O.T.C. at
its four-year colleges, as a number of traditional black colleges, including
such schools as Howard University and Tuskegee Institute, have done.

BRUCE E. NEWLING
  New York, Dec. 14, 1986

The writer is an associate professor of economics at the City College.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

1986 SPORTS REVIEW;
ATHLETE'S DEATH DIMINISHES THE PRIDE AND GLORY

BYLINE: By DAVE ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 5; Page 1, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 3373 words


THE Mets won the World Series. Jack Nicklaus won his sixth Masters at age 46.
Bill Shoemaker won his fourth Kentucky Derby at age 54. Mike Tyson won the World
Boxing Council heavyweight championship at age 20. The Giants won 14 games, the
most victories in any of the pro football franchise's 62 seasons.

But in 1986, the glory of those success stories was diminished by the gloom of
the year's most significant sports story -the death of Len Bias at age 22 from
cocaine intoxication.

Shortly after dawn on June 19, the 6-foot-8-inch all-America forward collapsed
in his University of Maryland dormitory suite. Two days earlier, Bias had been
selected by the Boston Celtics with the second choice in the National Basketball
Association draft.

In the past, drug-related incidents in sports had surfaced periodically when
athletes checked into rehabilitation clinics, testified in court, were arrested
or were disciplined. But now cocaine had killed an all-America basketball player
about to join the reigning N.B.A. champions.

''God sometimes uses our best people to get our attention,'' the Rev. Jesse
Jackson said at the funeral. ''He called him to get the attention of this
generation. On a day the children mourn, I hope they learn.''

Don Rogers didn't learn. A week later, the day before he was to be married,
Rogers, a Cleveland Browns defensive back, also died from cocaine intoxication.
But with the aftershocks of Bias's death still rumbling, perhaps others have
learned. President Reagan intensified his campaign against drug abuse.
Switchboards of cocaine hotlines lit up. On the Maryland campus, disclosures of
academic laxity involving Bias and other basketball players prompted the
resignation of Lefty Driesell as coach and Dick Dull as athletic director. It's
a legacy the all-America forward had never imagined.

''Without a doubt,'' Len Bias had said at the N.B.A. draft, ''I'll be part of
the Celtic tradition.''

In both the World Series and the National League Championship Series, the Mets
took center stage in the sixth game.

In the World Series, the Mets were trailing the Boston Red Sox by two runs in
the bottom of the 10th inning with none on, two out and two strikes. But the
Mets rallied to win, 6-5, on singles by Gary Carter, Kevin Mitchell and Ray
Knight, a wild pitch by Bob Stanley, and Mookie Wilson's grounder that Bill
Buckner, the Red Sox first baseman, let slip through his aching legs. No team
had ever been that close without winning the Series.

In the decisive seventh game, the Mets trailed by three runs through five
innings. After a three-run rally in the sixth, Knight's leadoff homer in the
seventh provided the go-ahead run in their 8-5 triumph. It was the 116th victory
for the team that had won 108 games in finishing first in the N.L. East by 21
1/2 games. And against the Houston Astros in the N.L.C.S., the Mets had needed
sixth-game theatrics to survive.

After having trailed, 3-0, in the top of the ninth, the Mets forced extra
innings and finally won, 7-6, in the 16th. That victory averted a seventh-game
showdown with Mike Scott, the Astros' ace whom Davey Johnson, the Mets' manager,
had accused of ''scuffing'' the ball with sandpaper in winning the first and
fourth games.

The Red Sox had been on the brink of elimination in the fifth game of the
American League Championship Series with the California Angels. As the ninth
inning began in Anaheim, the California Angels' silver-haired manager, Gene
Mauch, appeared about to earn his first pennant. The Angels led, 5-2, but Don
Baylor and Dave Henderson each hit a two-run homer before the Angels forced
extra innings, only to lose, 7-6, in the llth.

Roger Clemens, the Red Sox right-hander, was voted both the Most Valuable Player
and the Cy Young Award in the A.L. after a 24-4 season that included a record 20
strikeouts in an early-season game. Don Mattingly's 238 hits and Dave Righetti's
record 46 saves lifted the Yankees into second place. And their principal owner,
George Steinbrenner, rehired Lou Piniella as manager with a two-year contract.

The first choice in the pro football draft, Bo Jackson, college football's
Heisman Trophy winner, chose to sign with the Kansas City Royals as an
outfielder. But the Royals were stunned when their manager, Dick Howser,
required brain-tumor surgery.

Currently not on any roster, Pete Rose, Steve Carlton and Tom Seaver may have
completed their Hall of Fame credentials - a record 4,256 hits for Rose, 318 and
311 victories for Carlton and Seaver, respectively.

At the start of spring training, 21 players were disciplined in various degrees
by Commissioner Peter Ueberroth for past drug involvement. Baseball's drug
headlines were minimal, but were replaced by police headlines, especially
involving the Mets - the arrest in July of Tim Teufel, Ron Darling, Bob Ojeda
and Rick Aguilera after a scuffle with Houston police, and the arrest two weeks
ago of Dwight Gooden after a scuffle with Tampa police.

As 1987 approached, the Mets obtained another ''foundation'' player, Kevin
McReynolds, a slugging outfielder from the San Diego Padres, but they chose to
allow Knight to depart as a free agent after a salary dispute. The Yankees
spurned an opportunity to sign Jack Morris, the right-hander with a 21-8 record
who decided to accept salary arbitration from the Detroit Tigers after having
tried to peddle himself as a free agent.

When the Astros were threatening the Mets in the 16th inning of the sixth
N.L.C.S. game, Keith Hernandez glared at Gary Carter. ''Kid,'' the first baseman
said to the catcher, ''if you call for any more fastballs, we're going to
fight.''

After having won Super Bowl XX with a 46-10 rout of the New England Patriots in
January, the Chicago Bears rolled to a 14-2 record this season with Doug Flutie
at quarterback lately instead of Jim McMahon, out with shoulder surgery. Over
two years, the Bears are 32-3. But as the Super Bowl XXI playoffs began today,
the Bears were being challenged for National Football League supremacy by the
Giants, a divisional winner for the first time since 1963.

Phil Simms passed for 3,487 yards and 22 touchdowns. Joe Morris rushed for 1,516
yards. Mark Bavaro caught 66 passes for 1,001 yards, only the seventh tight end
in N.F.L. history to go over 1,000 yards in a season. And the defensive unit
ranked second over all and first against the rush as the Giants qualified for
the playoffs for the third consecutive season in Bill Parcells's four years as
coach.

In their playoff opener next Sunday, the Giants will be trying to prolong a
nine-game winning streak, their longest since 1962. For the Giants, the season
turned in Minnesota when Simms completed a fourth-and-17 pass to Bobby Johnson
for a first down that propelled the Giants to a 22-20 victory on Raul Allegre's
field goal with 12 seconds remaining. After that, the Giants swept three
eventual playoff teams - the Denver Broncos, the San Francisco 49ers and the
Washington Redskins.

Despite a five-game losing streak, the Jets will oppose the Kansas City Chiefs
today in the American Conference wild-card game. Six weeks ago the Jets had the
N.F.L.'s best record, 10-1, before injuries depleted their defense. Joe Klecko
and Lance Mehl required knee surgery, Mark Gastineau suffered a damaged knee,
Marty Lyons a damaged shoulder. And without a defense, Ken O'Brien collapsed at
quarterback after having thrown 23 touchdown passes in 11 games and Pat Ryan
will start today against the Chiefs.

For the N.F.L. as an entity, its most triumphant moment occurred when a jury of
five women and one man awarded only $1, or $3 after being trebled, to the United
States Football League after a three-month antitrust trial. The U.S.F.L. had
hoped for as much as $1.69 billion in damages. After the verdict, many of the
U.S.F.L.'s best players joined N.F.L. teams. Herschel Walker signed with Dallas,
Jim Kelly with Buffalo, Kelvin Bryant with Washington.

The N.F.L.'s adoption of television instant replay as an officiating aid for
certain calls created some early controversies. As the season progressed, the
system appeared to be working better.

Unnecessary violence prompted Commissioner Pete Rozelle to suspend three players
- Charles Martin of the Green Bay Packers for two games, Greg Townsend of the
Los Angeles Raiders and Otis Wilson of the Chicago Bears each for one game.

In college football, the mythical No. 1 ranking will be settled Friday night
when undefeated Penn State opposes undefeated Miami in the Sunkist Fiesta Bowl.
Miami's quarterback, Vinny Testaverde, was voted the Heisman Trophy as the
nation's outstanding college player. Joe Paterno, the Penn State coach, was
chosen as the winner of the Bear Bryant Award as coach of the year, and
Sportsman of the Year, as named by Sports Illustrated magazine.

For the first time in several decades, a prominent two-way player emerged.
Gordon Lockbaum of Holy Cross, usually a flanker on offense and a safety on
defense, finished fifth in the Heisman balloting.

Brian Bosworth, the Oklahoma linebacker who was fourth in the Heisman voting,
was among several players declared ineligible for bowl games after having tested
positive for anabolic steroids.

Recruiting and academic scandals continued to tarnish college athletics.
Southern Methodist University faced the possibility of a two-year ban from
football. Jan Kemp, a 36-year-old University of Georgia instructor in remedial
English, was awarded $2.5 million by a Federal jury for lost wages, mental
anguish and punitive damages after she was demoted and then dismissed for having
spoken out against favored treatment for athletes. She agreed to a negotiated
settlement of $1.08 million and reinstatement to the faculty after a judge
reduced the award to $680,000.

''We may not be able to make a university student out of him,'' O. Hale Almand
Jr., the attorney who represented the University of Georgia, said of a
hypothetical athlete during the trial. ''But if we can teach him to read and
write, maybe he can work at the post office rather than as a garbage man when he
gets through with his athletic career.''

In the N.B.A., Larry Bird led the Celtics to their 16th championship and their
third in the last six years. Including the playoffs, the Celtics had an 82-18
record, the best in N.B.A. history. In the title series, they stopped the
Houston Rockets in six games after having eliminated the Chicago Bulls, the
Atlanta Hawks and the Milwaukee Bucks. Bird, the playoffs' most valuable player,
was earlier named the season's most valuable player for the third straight year.

The Rockets, with Akeem Olajuwon and Ralph Sampson, had dethroned the Los
Angeles Lakers in five games in the Western Conference final.

Despite the presence of Patrick Ewing, the rookie of the year, at center, the
Knicks missed the playoffs again. When they got off to a 4-12 start in the
current season with Bill Cartwright returning from two seasons on the injured
list, Hubie Brown was replaced as coach by Bob Hill, one of his assistant
coaches. The Nets are still reorganizing without Micheal Ray Richardson,
expelled by the N.B.A. midway through last season for repeated drug use.

Michael Jordan, the Bulls' flashy guard, set an N.B.A. playoff record with 63
points in a loss to the Celtics. Thus far in the current season he has been the
N.B.A.'s scoring leader with an average of more than 37 points a game.

In college basketball, the University of Louisville, coached by Denny Crum, won
its second National Collegiate Athletic Association title in seven years. Pervis
Ellison, a 6-foot-9-inch freshman center known as Never Nervous Pervis, produced
25 points and 11 rebounds in a 72-69 victory over Duke. St. John's, the Big East
champion, was eliminated by Auburn in the second round. Walter Berry, the
Redmen's center, was voted the Wooden Award as the nation's outstanding player.

As the current college season progrssed, many of the nation's coaches were
concerned that the 19-foot, 9-inch line for the 3-point shot was too close, that
it had changed the game. For the worse. In the locker room before winning the
N.B.A.'s 3-point shot contest during the All-Star weekend, Larry Bird looked
around at the other contestants and asked, ''Which one of you guys is going to
finish second?''

He was thought to be too old. He couldn't make the short putts anymore. He
didn't compete in enough tournaments. He was too busy designing courses instead
of playing them. He was too involved with his Golden Bear Inc. business
responsibilities. But in shooting a final-round 65 at Augusta National, he had
an eagle and six birdies over the last 10 holes. Jack Nicklaus put on the
Masters green jacket for a record sixth time in winning a record 20th major
tournament.

Two months later, 43-year-old Raymond Floyd won the United States Open at
Shinnecock Hills with a 66 in the final round.

Greg Norman had bogied the last hole at Augusta when a par would have forced a
playoff with Nicklaus, and he had been the 54-hole leader at Shinnecock Hills
despite an incident with some members of the gallery in Saturday's third round.
But the Great White Shark from Australia won the British Open and he led the
Professional Golfers Association championship until Bob Tway snatched the title
by holing a bunker shot at the final green.

With a total of 10 tournament victories around the world, Norman earned a record
$1.8 million in prize money.

On the women's tour, Pat Bradley won three of its grand-slam events -the Ladies
Professional Golfers championship, the Nabisco Dinah Shore, and the du Maurier
Classic. With a record of $492,021 in prize money, she became the first female
golfer to surpass $2 million in career money.

In tennis, Martina Navratilova, who returned to her homeland of Czechoslovakia
to dominate the Federation Cup, won both Wimbledon and the United States Open
but lost the French Open to Chris Evert Lloyd -the 13th consecutive year that
Lloyd has won at least one Grand Slam event. Ivan Lendl retained his United
States Open title at Flushing Meadows but lost at Wimbleldon to Boris Becker, a
teen-age champion there for the second consecutive year.

John McEnroe drifted out of contention for the major titles and had tennis
experts wondering how much longer he would compete. After a self-imposed exile
that coincided with the birth of his son and his marriage to the actress Tatum
O'Neal, he lost his first-round singles match at the United States Open, then
was defaulted in doubles for being late. He was later assessed a 42-day
suspension after having surpassed $7,500 in fines for on-court misconduct.

''Walking up the fairways on the last few holes, I had tears in my eyes, I just
welled up,'' Jack Nicklaus said after his Masters triumph. ''But then I told
myself, 'Hey, you've got golf to play.' ''

For nearly a decade, boxing has been clouded by two and lately three champions
in each division. Marvelous Marvin Hagler maintained some semblance of order as
the undisputed middleweight champion. And now Mike Tyson looms as the
heavyweight who will take all the letters out of boxing's alphabet soup. With a
second-round slaughter of Trevor Berbick, the 20-year-old protege of the late
Cus D'Amato emerged as the youngest heavyweight champion.

According to the Home Box Office format, Tyson will defend his World Boxing
Council title in March against James (Bonecrusher) Smith, who dethroned Tim
Witherspoon as World Boxing Association champion in a first-round knockout. The
winner will oppose Michael Spinks, the International Boxing Federation champion,
for the undisputed title. Spinks retained his crown with a second disputed
15-round decision over Larry Holmes, who later retired.

Hagler, meanwhile, is training for an April title bout against Sugar Ray
Leonard, who will have had one unimpressive fight in five years since his
detached-retina surgery on his left eye. Hagler has been guaranteed at least $12
million, Leonard at least $11 million.

In thoroughbred racing, Woody Stephens, then a 72-year-old trainer, won his
fifth consecutive Belmont Stakes with Danzig Connection, and a 73-year-old
trainer, Charlie Whittingham, won his first Kentucky Derby with Ferdinand. But
in winning his fourth Derby at age 54 on Ferdinand, the 4-foot-10-inch jockey,
Bill Shoemaker, stood taller than ever.

Snow Chief, the Derby favorite, took the Preakness, but Lady's Secret, a
4-year-old daughter of Secretariat, emerged as the likely Horse of the Year.
Owned by Eugene V. Klein and trained by Wayne Lukas, the filly won 10 of her 15
starts, including the $1 million Breeders' Cup Distaff at Santa Anita. Jose
Santos, the nation's leading rider at the time, was injured in a December spill
at Aqueduct, where Angel Cordero Jr. broke a leg in March.

In trotting, one of the Hall of Fame drivers, Billy Haughton, died at 62 after a
spill at Yonkers Raceway.

''I didn't bet a dime on you, Shoe,'' a horseplayer yelled at Bill Shoemaker
after the Kentucky Derby, ''but I'm happy for you.''

The two-time Stanley Cup champion Edmonton Oilers were stunned by the Calgary
Flames in the seventh game of their Smythe Division final when a rookie Oiler
defenseman, Steve Smith. inadvertently knocked the winning goal into his own
net. Then another rookie, Patrick Roy, the Montreal Canadiens' goaltender, led
the team with the seventh-best record during the National Hockey League's
regular season to its record 23d Cup.

Despite the 14th-best point total, the Rangers surprised the Philadelphia Flyers
and the Washington Capitals in the playoffs before losing to the Canadiens in
the Wales Conference final. John Vanbiesbrouck won the Vezina Trophy as the
N.H.L.'s best goaltender. But when the Rangers stumbled at the start of the
current season, Phil Esposito, who had replaced Craig Patrick as general
manager, dismissed Ted Sator as coach and hired Tom Webster.

After the Islanders were swept by the Capitals in their playoff opener, Al
Arbour moved into the front office. Terry Simpson succeeded the coach who had
guided the Islanders to four consecutive Stanley Cup titles. The Devils
continued their slow but steady improvement, compiling 59 points, but missed the
playoffs again.

Debi Thomas and Bruce Boitano, two Californians who grew up only a few miles
from each other, each spun to the world figure-skating gold medal.

Soccer's international showcase, the World Cup, was won by Argentina and its
dashing star, Diego Maradona. The Argentines defeated West Germany, 3-2, in the
final in Mexico City for their second World Cup title. In cycling, Greg LeMond,
from Reno, became the first American to win the Tour de France, cycling's most
prestigous event.

In auto racing, Bobby Rahal won the Indianapolis 500 for his longtime pal and
car-owner, Jim Trueman, who died of cancer less than two weeks later. Rahal also
won the Indy car title while earning more than $1 million. Dale Earnhardt drove
to his second stock-car championship. Alain Prost of France took the Formula One
title.

In track and field, Jackie Joyner twice established a world record in the
heptathlon as the first woman to shatter what had been the 7,000-point barrier.
At the first Goodwill Games in Moscow, she accumulated 7,148 points in the
seven-event competition. At the Olympic Festival in Houston a month later, she
raised the record to 7,161 points.

Sergei Bubka of the Soviet Union raised his world pole-vault record to 19 feet 8
1/2 inches at the Goodwill Games and Ben Johnson of Canada produced the fastest
time ever for 100 meters at sea level, 9.95 seconds.

In the America's Cup trials in Freemantle, Australia, the New York Yacht Club,
which lost the trophy to Australia in 1983 after 132 years, lost a chance to
recapture it when America II failed to qualify for the challenger semifinals.

Perhaps the most spirited athletic achievement of 1986 occurred at the New York
Marathon four days after Gianni Poli and Grete Waitz had won it. Swinging his
torso along on thick padded gloves, 40-year-old Bob Wieland, who lost his legs
in Vietnam, finally finished the 26-mile, 385-yard course in 98 hours 48
minutes, 17 seconds and countless tears of admiration from those who saw him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of sports figures who made a mark in 1986 in their respective
sports (UPI, AP, Reuters, NYT/Marilynn K. Yee, Barton Silverman, Don Hogan
Charles and Larry C. Morris)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: FICTION

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1247 words

1         1    16 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.)
                  Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman who
                  grew up in a small Maine town.
2         2     8 WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow,
                  $22.95.) Iran during the month following the Shah's
                  departure.
3         3    22 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.)
                  Without using nuclear weapons, the West staves off
                  the Russians in World War III.
4         4     9 A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $18.95.)
                  Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a brutal
                  double murder.
5         6    13 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton
                  Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family relationships in
                  South Carolina's low country and New York City.
6         5    11 HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &
                  Schuster, $18.95.) A top New York model encounters
                  three of Los Angeles's most dynamic men.
7         7     9 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                  Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                  Vietnam.
8         8    11 FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,
                  $16.95.) The hero of the ''Foundation'' series
                  searches for the lost planet Earth.
9         9    24 WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $17.95.)
                  A rich orphan comes of age while she travels the
                  world.
10       12    24 LAST OF THE BREED, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam,
                  $17.95.) The adventures of a United States Air
                  Force major in Siberia.
11       10    12 THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) Continuing the saga of a
                  turn-of-the-century New York family begun in
                  ''Evergreen.''
12              5 THE POLAR EXPRESS, written and illustrated by Chris
                  Van Allsburg. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) A small
                  boy's Christmas Eve train ride to the North Pole
                  and the magical events that follow.
13       11    17 THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random
                  House, $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and
                  greed mark a young woman's life in 18th-century
                  England and France.
14       15    13 ROGER'S VERSION, by John Updike. (Knopf, $17.95.)
                  A fiftyish professor wrestles with God, sex,
                  science, technology, mathematics and computers.
15       14    14 THE BEET QUEEN, by Louise Erdrich. (Holt, $16.95.)
                  Forty years in a small North Dakota town near an
                  Indian reservation.


(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

MARILYN, by Gloria Steinem. Photographs by George Barris. (Holt, $24.95.) A
thoughtful, absorbing biography of Marilyn Monroe, an unusually intelligent
woman the greatest of whose many misfortunes may have been her desire to please.


THE CENTURY'S DAUGHTER, by Pat Barker. (Putnam, $16.95.) This cheerfully
political novel encapsulates the miseries of the century in the final year of an
aged working-class Englishwoman.

THE FALL OF KELVIN WALKER: A Fable of the Sixties, by Alasdair Gray. (Braziller,
$14.95.) Mr. Gray, the Scottish visionary writer and painter, deploys his themes
of human subjugation and the corruption of language in the career of his novel's
hero, a naive, successful television interviewer.

THE PERPETUAL ORGY: Flaubert and Madame Bovary, by Mario Vargas Llosa. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) An account of the Peruvian novelist's obsession with
Flaubert's heroine and a brilliant discussion of the genesis, execution,
structure and technique of ''Madame Bovary.''

LEARNED PIGS & FIREPROOF WOMEN, by Ricky Jay. (Villard, $29.95.) Lively
accounts, richly illustrated, of some of history's most peculiar performers, by
a magician and archivist of magic.

WILLA CATHER: The Emerging Voice, by Sharon O'Brien. (Oxford University,
$24.95.) This scholarly, imaginative biography re-creates the first 40 years of
a life Cather tried to conceal - her struggle to find her stance as a woman and
as a writer.

COLLECTED STORIES: 1948-1986, by Wright Morris. (Harper & Row, $17.95.) Spare in
their furniture but impeccable in their detail, Mr. Morris's frugal stories
often focus on dislocation and the difficulty of adjusting to change.
1         1    34 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday,
                  $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from the
                  television star and father of five.
2         2     8 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                  Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                  recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.
3         3    12 HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.) From
                  Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized biography
                  of Frank Sinatra.
4         4    14 MCMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi. (Warner,
                  $16.95.) The autobiography of the quarterback for
                  the Chicago Bears.
5         5     6 WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Putnam,
                  $16.95.) A new collection of columns by the
                  journalist and television personality.
6         7    32 JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot.
                  (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire
                  veterinarian about his favorite animal.
7         6     5 LIFE: The First Fifty Years, 1936-1986. (Little,
                  Brown, $50.) The past half-century as seen in the
                  magazine's photographs.
8         8     4 THE CHRISTMAS DAY KITTEN, by James Herriot.
                  (St. Martin's, $9.95.) An illustrated true story.
9        10    42 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House,
                  $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in
                  pictures and rhyme; the first Dr. Seuss book for
                  adults.
10       11    13 ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden with Dave
                  Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations on
                  football by the television commentator and former
                  coach of the Oakland Raiders.
11        9     5 PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon
                  Eisenhower. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A biography
                  of the wife of the 37th President written by her
                  daughter.
12       12     9 ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Random House,
                  $18.95.) The comedian's autobiography, beginning
                  with her impoverished childhood in Hollywood.
13       13    12 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow,
                  $19.95.) The crisis in the American automobile
                  industry and Japan's role in it.
14       14    11 THE STORY OF ENGLISH, by Robert McCrum, William
                  Cran and Robert MacNeil. (Sifton/Viking, $24.95.)
                  Companion volume to the PBS series about the
                  world's most widely used language.
15       15     6 EISENHOWER AT WAR: 1943-1945, by David Eisenhower.
                  (Random House, $29.95.) A biography of the general
                  by his grandson.

1         1     9 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff
                  Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at
                  moderate cost.
2         2    46 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.
                  (Morrow, $14.95.) A television chef's inexpensive
                  dishes.
3         4     9  BE HAPPY YOU ARE LOVED, by Robert H. Schuller.
                  (Nelson, $15.95.) Inspiration from a California
                  clergyman.
4               1 BETTER HOMES AND GARDENS NEW COOK BOOK.
                  (Meredith, $16.95.) The ninth edition; ring-bound.
5         5     2 BETTY CROCKER'S COOKBOOK. (Golden Press/Western
                  Publishing, $19.95.) New, revised ring-bound
                  edition.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A FEW WORDS ABOUT MINIMALISM

BYLINE: By John Barth; John Barth's maximalist novel about a minimalist writer,
''The Tidewater Tales'' will be published next spring.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3400 words


''LESS is more,'' said Walter Gropius, or Alberto Giacometti, or Laszlo
Moholy-Nagy, or Henri Gaudier-Brzeska, or Constantin Brancusi, or Le Corbusier
or Ludwig Mies van der Rohe; the remark (first made in fact by Robert Browning)
has been severally attributed to all of those more or less celebrated more or
less minimalists. Like the bauhaus motto, ''Form follows function,'' it is
itself a memorable specimen of the minimalist esthetic, of which a cardinal
principle is that artistic effect may be enhanced by a radical economy of
artistic means, even where such parsimony compromises other values:
completeness, for example, or richness or precision of statement.

The power of that esthetic principle is easy to demonstrate: contrast my
eminently forgettable formulation of it above - ''artistic effect may be
enhanced,'' etc. - with the unforgettable assertion ''Less is more.'' Or
consider the following proposition, first with, and then without, its
parenthetical elements:

Minimalism (of one sort or another) is the principle (one of the principles,
anyhow) underlying (what I and many another interested observer consider to be
perhaps) the most impressive phenomenon on the current (North American,
especially the United States) literary scene (the gringo equivalent to el boom
int he latin American novel): I mean the new flowering of the (North) American
short story (in particular the kind of terse, oblique, realistic or
hyperrealistic, slightly polotted, extrospective, cool-surfaced fiction
associated int he last 5 to 10 years with such excellent writers as Frederick
Barthelme, Ann Beattie, Raymond Carver, Bobbie Ann Mason, James robison, Mary
Robison and Tobias Wolff, and both praised and damned under such labels as
''K-Mart realism,'' ''hick chic,'' ''Diet-Pepsi minimalism'' and ''post-Vietnam,
post-literary, postmodernist blue-collar neo-early-Hemingwayism'').

Like any clutch of artists collectively labeled, the wrtiers just mentioned are
at least as different from one another as they are similar. Minimalism,
moreover, is not the only and may not be the most important attribute that their
fiction mroe or less shares; those labels themselves suggest some other aspects
and concerns of the New American Short Story and its proportionate counterpart,
the three-eighth-inch novel. But it is their minimalism I shall speak of
(briefly) here, and its antecedence: the idea that, in art at least, less is
more.

IT is an idea surely as old, as enduringly attractive and as ubiquitous as its
opposite. In the beginning was the Word: only later came the bible, not to
mention the three-decker Victorian novel. The oracle at Delphi did not say,
''Exhaustive analysis and comprehension of one's own psyche may be prerequisite
to an understanding of one's behavior and of the world at large''; it said,
''Know theyself.'' Such inherently minimalist genres as oracles (fromthe Delphic
shrine of apollo to the modern fortune cookie), proverbs, maxims, aphorisms,
epigrams, pensees, mottoes, slogans and quips are popular in every human century
and culture - especially in oral cultures and subcultures, where mnemonic
staying power has high priority - and many specimens of them are self-reflexive
or self-demonstrative: minimalism about minimalism. ''Brevity is the soul of
wit.'' ''Silence is golden.'' ''Vita brevisest, ars longa'' Seneca warns
aspiring poets in his third Epistle; ''Eschew surplusage,'' recommends Mark
Twain.

Against the large-scale classical prose pleasures of Herodotus, Thucydides and
Petronius, there are the miniature delights of Aesop's fables and Theophrastus'
''Characters.'' Against such verse epics as the ''Iliad,'' the ''Odyssey'' and
the ''Aeneid'' - and the much longer Sanskrit ''Ramayana,'' ''Mahabharata'' and
''Ocean of Story'' - are such venerable supercompressive poetic forms as the
palindrome (there are long examples, but the ones we remeber are ''Madam, I'm
Adam'' and ''Sex at noon taxes''), or the single couplet (a modern instance is
Ogden Nash's ''Candy is dandy/But liquor is quicker''), or the feudal Japanese
haiku and its Western echoes inthe early-20th-century imagists up to the
contemporary ''skinny peoms'' of, say, Robert Creeley. There are even
single-word poems, or single words tha ought to be poems; the best one I know of
I found inthe Guinness Book of World Records, listed as the ''most succinct
word''; the Tierra del Fuegian word ''mamihlapinatapei.'' In the language of the
Land of Fire, ''mamihlapinatapei'' is said to mean: looking into each other's
eyes, each hoping that the other will initiate what both want to do but neither
chooses to commence.

The genre of the short story, as Poe distinguished it fromt he traditional tale
in his 1842 review of Hawthorne's first collection of stories, is an early
manifesto of modern narrative minimalism: ''In the whole composition there
should be no word written, of which the tendency...is not to the pre-established
design...Undue length is...to be avoided.'' Poe's codification informs such
later 19th-century masters of terseness, selectivity and implicitness (as
opposed to leisurely once-upon-a-timelessness, luxuriant abundance, explicit and
extended analysis) as Guy de Maupassant and Anton Chekhov. Show, don't tell,
said Henry James in effect and at length in his prefaces to the 1908 New York
edition of his novels. And don't tell a word more than you absolutely need to,
added young Ernest Hemingway, who thus described his ''new theory'' in the early
1920's: ''You could omit anything if you knew that you omitted, and the omitted
part would strengthen the story and make people feel something more than they
understood.''

The Bauhaus Functionalists were by then already busy unornamenting and
abstracting modern architecture, painting and design; and while functionalism
and minimalism are not the same thing, to say nothing of abstractionism and
minimalism (there is nothing abstract about those early Hemingway stories), they
spring from the same impulse: to strip away the superfluous in order to reveal
the necessary, the essential. Never mind that Voltaire had pointed out, a
century and a half before, how indispensable the superfluous can be (''Le
superflu, chose si necessaire''); just as, in modern painting, the process of
stripping away leads from Post-Impressionism thrugh Cubism to the radical
minimalism of Kasimir Malevich's ''White on White'' of 1918, and Ad Reinhardt's
all but imageless ''black paintings'' of the 1950's, so in 20th-century
literature the minimalist succession leads through Hemingway's ''new theory'' to
the shorter ficciones of Jorge Luis Borges and the ever-terser texts of Samuel
Beckett, perhaps culminating in his play ''Breath'' (1969): The curtain opens on
a dimly lit stage, empty but for scattered rubbish; there is heard a single
recorded human cry, then a single amplified inspiration and expiration of breath
accompanied by a brightening and redimming of the lights, then again the cry.
Thirty-five seconds after it opened, the curtain closes.

But it closes only on the play, not ont he modern tradition of literary
minimalism, which honorably continues in such next-generation writers as, in
America, Donald Barthelme (''The fragment is the only form I trust,'' says a
character in his slender novel ''Snow White'') and, in the literary generation
overlapping and following his, the plentiful authors of the New American Short
Story.

Old or new, fiction can be minimalist in any or all of several ways. There are
minimalisms of unit, form and scale: short words, short sentences and
paragraphs, super-short stories, those three-eighth-inch thin novels
aforementioned, and even minimal bibliographics (Borges's fiction adds up to a
few modest, though powerfully influential, short-story collections). There are
minimalisms of style: a stripped-down vocabulary; a stripped-down syntax that
avoids periodic sentences, serial predications and complex subordinating
constructions; a stripped-down rhetoric tha may eschew figurative language
altogether; a stripped-down, non-emotive tone. And there are minimalisms of
material: minimal characters, minimal exposition (''all that David Copperfield
kind of crap,'' says J.D. Salinger's catcher in the rye), minimal mises en
scene, minimal action, minimal plot.

Found together in their purest forms, these several minimalisms add up to an art
that - in the words of its arch-priest, Samuel Beckett, speaking of the painter
Bram Van Velde - expresses ''that there is nothing to express, nothing with
which to express, nothing from which to express, no power to express, no desire
to express - together with the obligation to express.'' But they are not always
found together. There are very short works of great rhetorical, emotional and
thematic richness, such as Borges's essential page, ''Borges and I''; and there
are instances of what may fairly be called long-winded minimalism, such as
Samuel Beckett's stark-monumental trilogy from the early 50's: ''Molloy,''
''Malone Dies'' and ''The Unnameable.'' Parallels abound in the other arts: the
miniature, in painting, is characteristically brimful (minaturism is not
minimalism); Joseph Cornell's little boxes contain universes. The large
paintings of mark Rothko, Franz Kline and Barnett Newman, on the other hand, are
as undetailed as the Washington Monument.

The medieval Roman Catholic Church recognized two opposite roads to grace: the
via negativa of the monk's cell and the hermit's cave, and the via affirmativa
of immersion in human affairs, of being n the world whether o not one is of it.
Critics have aptly borrowed those terms to characterize the difference between
Mr. Beckett, for example, and his erstwhile master James Joyce, himself a
maximalist except in his early works. Other than bone-deep disposition, which is
no doubt the great determinant, what inclines a writer - sometimes almost a
cultural generation of writers - to the Negational Path?

For individuals, it may be by their own acknowledgment largely a matter of past
or present personal circumstances. Raymond Carver writes of a literary
apprenticeship in which his short poems and stories were carved in precious
quarter-hours stolen from a harrowing domestic and economic situation; though he
now has professional time aplenty, the notion besets him that should he presume
to attempt even a short novel, he'll wake to find himself back in those wretched
circumstances. An opposite case was Borges's: his near-total blindness in his
latter decades obliged him to the short forms tha he had elected for other,
nonphysical reasons when he was sighted.

TO account for a trend, literary sociologists and culture watchingers point to
more general historical and philosophical factors - not excluding the factor of
powerful models like Borges and Beckett. The influence of early Hemingway on
Raymond Carver, say, is as apparent as the influence of Mr. Carver in turn on a
host of other New American Short-Story writers, and on a much more numerous host
of apprentices in American college fiction-writing programs. But why this model
rather than that, other than its mere and sheer artistic prowess, on which after
all it has no monopoly? Doubtless because this one is felt, by the writers thus
more or less influenced, to speak more strongly to their condition and tha of
their readers.

And what is that condition, in the case of the cool-surface realist-minimalist
storytellers of the American 1970's and 80's? In my conversation with them, my
reading of their crticis both positive and negative and my dealings with recent
and current apprentice writers, I have heard cited, among other factors, these
half-dozen, ranked here in no particular order. *Our national hangover from the
Vietnam War, felt by many to be a trauma literally and figuratively unspeakable.
''I don't want to talk about it'' is the characteristic attitude of ''Nam''
veterans in the fiction of Ann Beattie, Jayne Anne Phillips and Bobbie Ann Mason
- as it is among many of their real-life counterparts (and as it was among their
numberless 20th-century forerunners, especially after the First World War). This
is, of course, one of the two classic attitudes to trauma, the other being its
opposite, adn it can certainly conduce to hedged, nonintrospective, even
minimalist discourse: one remembers Hemingway's early story ''Solidar's Home.''
*The more or less coincifent energy crisis of 1973-76, and the associated
reaction against American excess adn the wastefulness in general. The popularity
of the subcompact car parallels that (in literary cricles, at least) of the
subcompact novel adn the minifiction - though not, one observes, of the
miniskirt, which had nothing to do with conserving material. *The national
decline in reading and writing skills, not only among the young (including even
young apprentice writers, as a group), but among their teachers, many of whom
are themselves the product of an ever-less-demanding educational system and a
society whose narrative-dramatic entertainment and tastes come far more from
movies and television than from literature. This is not to disparge the literacy
and general education of those writers mentioned above, or to suggest that the
great writers of the past were uniformly flawless spellers and grammarians, of
wide personal literary culture. Some were, some weren't; some of today's are,
some aren't. but at least among those of our aspiring writers promising enough
to be admitted into good graduate writing programs - and surely they are not the
inferior speciments of their breed - the general decline in basic language
skills over the last two decades is inarguable enough to make me worry in some
instances about their teaching undergraduates. Rarely in their own writing,
whatever its considerable other merits, will one find a sentence of any
syntactical complexity, for example, and inasmuch as a language's repertoire of
other-than-basic syntactical devices permits its users to articulate
other-than-basic thoughts and fellings, Dick-and-Jane prose tends to be
emotionally and intellectually poorer than Henry James prose. Among the great
minimalist writers, this impoverishment is elected and strategic: simplification
in the interest of strength, or of some other value. Among the less great it may
be faute de mieux. Among today's ''common readers'' it is pandemic. *Along with
this decline, an ever-dwindling readerly attention span. The long popular novel
still has its devotees, especially aboard large airplanes and on beaches; but it
can scarcely be doubted that many of the hours we bourgeois now spend with our
televisions and video cassette recorders, and in our cars and at the movies, we
used to spend reading novels and novellas and not-so-short stories, partly
because those glitzy other distractions weren't there and partly because we were
more generally conditioned for sustained concentration, in our pleasures as well
as in our work. The Austrian novelist Robert Musil was complaining by 1930 (in
his maxi-novel ''The Man Without Qualities'') that we live in ''the age of the
magazine,'' too impatient already inthe twitchy 20's to read books. Half a
century later, in America at least, even the large-circulation magazine market
for fiction had dwindled to a handful of outlets; the readers weren't there. It
is a touching paradox of the New American Short Story - so admirably
straightforward and democratic of access, so steeped in brand names and the
popular culture - that it perforce appears mainly in very small-circulation
literary quarterlies instead of in the likes of Collier's, Liberty and The
Saturday Evening Post. But The New Yorker and Esquire can't publish everybody.
*Together with all the above, a reaction on these authors' part against the
ironic, black-humoristic ''fabulism'' and/or the (sometimes academic)
intellectuality and/or the density, here byzantine, there baroque, of some of
their immediate American literary antecedents: the likes of Donald Barthelme,
Robert Coover, Stanley Elkin, William Heller, Thomas Pynchon, Kurt Vonnegut
(and, I shall presume, myself as well). This reaction, where it exists, would
seem to pertain as much to our successors' relentless realism as to their
minimalism: among the distinguished brothers Barthelme, Donald's productions are
no less lean than Frederick's or the up-and-coming Steven's; but their
characteristic material, angle of attack and resultant flavor are different
indeed. The formal intricacy of Elder Brother's story ''Sentence,'' for example
(a single nine-page nonsentence), or the direct though satirical intellectuality
of his ''Kierkegaard Unfair to Schlegel,'' are as foreign to the K-Mart Realists
as are the manic flights of ''Gravity's Rainbow.'' So it goes: The dialogue
between fantast and realist, fabulator and quotidianist, like the dialogue
between maximalist and minimalist, is as old as storytelling, and by no means
always adversary. There are innumerable combinations, coalitions, line-crossings
and workings of both sides of the street. *The reaction against the all but
inescapable hyperbole of American advertising, both commercial and political,
with its high-tech manipulativeness and glamorous lies, as ubiquitous as and
more polluted than the air we breathe. How understandable that such an ambiance,
together with whatever other items in this catalogue, might inspire a fiction
dedicated to homely, understated, programmatically unglamorous, even
minimalistic Telling It Like It Is.

That has ever been the ground inspriation, moral-philosophical in character, of
minimalism and its kissing cousin realism intheir many avatars over the
centuries, in the fine arts and elsewhere: the felling that the language (or
whatever) has for whatever reasons become excessive, cluttered, corrupted,
fancy, flase. It is the Puritans' reaction against baroque Catholicism; it is
Thoreau's putting behind him even the meager comforts of the village of Concord.

TO the Lost Generation of World War I survivors, says one of their famous
spokesmen (Frederic Henry in Hemingway's ''Farewell to Arms''), ''Abstract words
obscene.'' Wassily Kandinsky said he sought ''not the shell, but the nut.'' The
functionalism of the Bauhaus was inspired in part by admiration for machine
technology, in part by revulsion against the fancy clutter of the gilded Age, in
language as well as elsewhere. Teh sinking of the elegant Titanic has come to
symbolize the end of that age, as the sight of some workmen crushed by a falling
Victorian cornice symbolized for young Frank Lloyd Wright the dead weight of
functionless architectural decoration. Flaubert raged against the blague of
bourgeois speech, bureaucratic speech in particular; his passion for the mot
juste involved far more subtraction than addition. The baroque inspires its
opposite: after the excesses of scholasticism comes Descartes's radical
reductionism - let us doubt and discard everything not self-evident and see
whether anything indubitable remains upon which to rebuild. And among the
scholatics themselves, three centuries before Descartes, William of Ockham honed
his celebrated razor: Entia non sunt multiplicanda (''Entities are not to be
multiplied''). In short, less is more. Beyond their individual and historically
local impulses, then, the more or less minimalist authors of the New American
Short Story are re-enacting a cyclical correction in the history (and the
microhistories) of literature and of art in general: a cycle to be found as
well, with longer rhythms, in the history of philosophy, the history of the
culture. Renaisances beget Reformations, which then beget Counter-Reformations;
the seven fat years are succeeded by seven lean, after which we, no less than
the people of Genesis, may look forward to the recorrection.

For if there is much to admire in artistic austerity, its opposite is not
without merits and joys as well. There are the minimalist pleasures of Emily
Dickinson - ''Zero at the Bone'' - and the maximalist ones of Walt Whitman; the
low-fat rewards of Samuel Beckett's ''Texts for Nothing'' adn the high-calorie
delights of Gabriel Garcia Marquez's ''One Hundred Years of Solitude.'' There
truly are more ways than one to heaven. As between minimalism and its opposite,
I pity the reader - or the writer, or the age - too addicted to either to savor
the other.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Mixing Judges And Politics

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 19, Column 2; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 319 words


Many articles have been printed about replacing the system of electing state
judges with the system of appointing judges by an executive, usually the
governor [''Politics and Judges Shouldn't Mix,'' Opinion Page, Dec. 7]. No
evidence is ever presented that this would result in better judges; the people
would simply lose the vote for a questionable and unprovable benefit.

There is simply no proof that appointed judges are better qualified than elected
judges, or that appointed judges are less susceptible to influence than elected
judges. We need merely recall a Federal judge's actions in a famous Chicago
Vietnam-era case or President Nixon's visit to a Federal judge in a Pennsylvania
case to belie these assertions of reform.

Looking around the world, there does not exist a finer judiciary than we have in
America, where we have both appointed and elected judges.

If on occasion the people are wrong, they at least will bear the burden of their
error -they will be judged by incompetents but have the ability to remove that
person in an election. If the appointee makes an error, the people still bear
the burden but have no ability to remove.

It is true that in an election judges are forced to campaign. I see nothing
unseemly in a judge meeting his constituency. Politics is a great teacher - it
forces us to meet each other and be exposed to each other's problems. Good
politicians learn from this and are indeed better judges for the experience.

The argument that the people do not know their judges because of restraints in
debate is true. The answer, however, is to remove the restraints rather than
disenfranchise the voter.

Federal judges are appointed. New York judges are elected. This duality has
worked well. In the total absence of any proof that one system is superior to
the other, there is no reason for change.

MARVIN ZEVIN
  Mineola

The writer is a lawyer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOARD THE BATTLESHIP NEW JERSEY: 'ONE BIG HAPPY FAMILY'

BYLINE: By RALPH GINZBURG

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 1, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: LONG BEACH, CALIF.


''MAN, this is the place to be,'' said Victor Sampson of Vineland, the payroll
clerk on the battleship New Jersey. ''It's the world's best battleship. I mean
it's historic and a real thrill to be here. It's taken me to Hong Kong, Korea,
the Philippines, Thailand, Japan - places I'd never get to see. And I'm only 21.

''I even got to meet the Governor of New Jersey here. Kean visited our ship in
Thailand last September and threw a fancy-cake party for us guys from New
Jersey. There are 34 Jersey boys here on the Big J. We hang out together on ship
and even on shore. We're like one big happy family. No kidding.''

The New Jersey, which has fought 26 major engagements - she is, with 16 battle
stars and 13 other ribbons, medals and citations, the most highly decorated
battleship in American naval history - is permanently berthed here.

Career Navy men consider assignment to her a plum, and the Bureau of Navy
Personnel says it is perpetually backlogged with four times as many requests for
transfer to the New Jersey as she can accommodate.

New Jerseyans hold a cross-section of jobs aboard the battleship, ranging from
deckhand (the deck crew chief is Boatswain's Mate 1/C Alvin Rhodes of Salem), to
helmsman (Quartermaster Al Gidaro of Middletown) to Gunnery Officer (Lieut. John
Ebley of Pennsauken is the ship's senior New Jerseyan).

One of the ship's leading promoters in the Government is the Secretary of the
Navy, John Lehman, 43, who spends part of every summer at his parents' home in
Ocean City.

''We do our best to keep the crew happy,'' said the New Jersey's skipper, Capt.
W. Lewis Glenn Jr. ''They are superb sailors. ''And this is especially true of
crew members from the State of New Jersey, which has every right to be proud of
them. I hope their families will have to wait 30 years to get them back -till
they retire.''

Although the New Jersey spent many years mothballed in Bayonne, she has spent
almost none of her active-duty time in New Jersey waters.

In many ways, the battleship is now a Californian. Her home port is here in Long
Beach, her captain lives in Huntington Beach and most of her married crew
members maintain homes in the greater Los Angeles area.

Even the ship's wardroom bears a plaque proclaiming:

''Member of the Long Beach Chamber of Commerce.''

But although you can take the ship out of New Jersey, you can't take New Jersey
out of the ship.

When she is retired, the battleship will, under plans already completed, be
returned to New Jersey to become a historic memorial. Governor Kean, with the
concurrence of Federal officials, has established a U.S.S. New Jersey Battleship
Commission to make sure these plans are carried out.

Meanwhile, the ship is about to enter drydock for routine overhaul for the first
time in four years.

The ship's payroll, fuel, repairs and provisions cost $28.2 million a year. This
does not include the cost of ordinance, which is top secret, since the figure
would disclose whether the vessel carries nuclear weapons, something the Navy
keeps confidential.

Although laymen frequently question the wisdom and cost of maintaining a ship
that is approaching a half-century in age (she was christened on Dec. 7, 1942 -
one year to the day after the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor - by Mrs. Charles
Edison, wife of the Governor of New Jersey and former Secretary of the Navy),
naval officers are quick to reply that the New Jersey is a paradigm of cost
effectiveness and entirely consistent with Gramm-Rudman budgetary mandates.

''It's impossible to get more bang for the buck than by maintaining ships like
the New Jersey,'' Captain Glenn said. ''Replacement cost for a vessel with our
firepower exceeds $2 billion. And the U.S. doesn't even have the capacity to
roll steel to build a ship like this anymore.

''Moreover, the New Jersey is not the same ship she was during World War II. We
still project the image of a floating platform for gargantuan cannons, but our
arsenal of missiles is actually far more devastating.''

The battleship's missile arsenal includes Phalanx, Tomahawk and Harpoon Cruise
systems, some of which reportedly carry nuclear warheads. Her electronics -
radar, navigational, communications and gunfire control (some designed and built
by R.C.A. in Moorestown) - are among the world's most sophisticated.

Among the New Jersey's statistics are these:

* She is the only battleship ever to have served in three wars: World War II,
Korea and Vietnam. In May 1984, she supported Marines who were part of a United
Nations peace-keeping force in Beirut.

* Her armament includes 16-inch guns capable of hurling a projectile weighing as
much as an automobile (2,700 pounds) for 23 miles.

* She displaces 57,200 tons; her armor alone weighs more than the world's
largest cruiser.

* Her four steam-turbine engines generate nearly a quarter of a million
horsepower.

* Her top speed is a military secret, but is known to exceed 33 knots.

The total complement is 67 officers and 1,460 enlisted men, including a
contingent of 40 Marines. No women are aboard (the Navy bars women from service
aboard combat ships).

What's in the future for the active New Jersey?

The Navy's overall strategy calls for a 600-ship armada whose backbone will be
17 battle groups. Of these, 13 are centered on aircraft carriers, which remain
the foundation of American Naval power.

However, four battle groups will be predicated upon recommissioned battleships,
of which the New Jersey is the archetype.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of the battleship New Jersey; photo of John Lehman; photo of Al
Gidaro (Ralph Ginzburg)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PEACE IS HELL

BYLINE: By Robert Manning; Robert Manning is the editor in chief of the Boston
Publishing Company and its 23-volume history, ''The Vietnam Experience.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


BROTHER ENEMY The War After the War. By Nayan Chanda. Illustrated. 479 pp. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $24.95.

ELEVEN years after victory, Vietnam lurches in the company of the world's
poorest nations, far behind its non-Communist neighbors in Southeast Asia. Its
60 million people live in conditions not much better, and in some cases worse,
than prevailed during the 30 years of war. While unable to produce enough food
or goods, the Hanoi Government maintains the world's third-largest standing army
(after the Soviet Union and China), and uses it to subjugate its neighboring
country, Cambodia - just the way the big boys used to treat Vietnam. The
successors of the legendary Ho Chi Minh have made Vietnam a pariah among
nations, almost entirely dependent on parsimonious Soviet patronage and
continually threatened by its ancestral enemy, China.

''Life is unstable,'' says the country's Communist Party leader, Truong Chinh,
who along with Vietnam's other top leaders - Prime Minister Pham Van Dong and
Politburo member Le Duc Tho - recently took the highly unusual step of retiring
after a prolonged period of self-criticism over leadership failure. ''Negativism
has developed, traditional ethical and spiritual values are eroded and
socioeconomic activities are thrown into prolonged chaos. . . .'' Brilliant at
winning a war against frightful odds, Vietnamese leaders have failed miserably
at coping with peace. Laotians and Cambodians have few if any more blessings to
count.

Nayan Chanda, the Washington bureau chief of the Far Eastern Economic Review,
has devoted 15 years to reporting about Indochina. In ''Brother Enemy,'' he
offers much insight about why the Vietnamese victory over the United States is
proving to be so bitter. He focuses on the conflict between Vietnam and Cambodia
(the ''war after the war'') and relates in inexorable detail how the Chinese,
the Russians and the Americans have, by deed or omission, endeavored to
influence events in that benighted part of the world.

''As the Second Indochina War was ending,'' Mr. Chanda writes, ''a new war
between comrades and brothers was in the making. Hardly had the imperialist
enemy left the scene, when age-old rivalry and suspicion surfaced. The comrades
of yesterday [the Vietnamese Communists and the Khmer Rouge Communists of
Cambodia] started asserting their national interests against one another.''
First came the maniacal lust of Pol Pot's Cambodian Government to liquidate
Vietnamese living in Cambodia, then Pol Pot's genocide against his own people -
hundreds of thousands surely, and perhaps as many as two million of them shot or
hacked or tortured to death for reasons usually not even comprehended by their
killers. And after Pol Pot's military forays into Vietnamese territory, Vietnam
stormed across the border, took the capital of Phnom Penh and installed a
Government to do its bidding. After that came China's bloody invasion to ''teach
Vietnam a lesson,'' a lesson whose essence seems to be that China could not cow
its small neighbor. Oh, it's a bloody mess, all right, and not an easy one to
decipher, for all the intrepid reporting, interviewing and analyzing that Mr.
Chanda brings to bear on the subject. He makes a convincing case that China sent
its forces into Vietnam with ''discreet American blessing'' and that Washington
''quietly helped China by providing satellite intelligence.'' The irony of this
is mocking: ''Few cared to remember that one of the original justifications for
the American intervention in Vietnam was to stop 'Chinese expansionism' and that
the insignia of the U.S. Military Assistance Command in Vietnam (MACV) was an
American sword piercing a stylized Great Wall representing China.'' SEVERAL
threads run through this dense volume (among them the fascinating story of
Prince Norodom Sihanouk as a Cambodian leader and survivor who rose far above
the saxophone-blowing playboy image once purveyed by American periodicals). And
one theme in particular takes on a special color in the light of the present
furor over the role of the President's National Security Council.

President Carter's national security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski wanted to build
on his predecessor Henry Kissinger's success in resuming relations with China by
moving toward full diplomatic recognition. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and
one of his assistant secretaries, Richard Holbrooke, wanted instead to extend
diplomatic recognition to Vietnam, as a move in the bigger game of United
States-Soviet relations. Mr. Brzezinski believed American overtures toward
Vietnam would offend China. As Mr. Chanda tells it, the dueling between Mr.
Brzezinski and Mr. Holbrooke became a sort of personal self-aggrandizement
contest, each scheming and negotiating behind the other's back. The fellow
closest to the President won. Mr. Brzezinski ''shot down'' what he considered to
be an insidious effort by Mr. Holbrooke to make the Vietnamese more tractable,
and President Carter went on to normalize relations with Communist China. Cyrus
Vance and Richard Holbrooke, Mr. Chanda writes, ''lost the bureaucratic battle
to the Manichaean anti-Sovietism of Zbigniew Brzezinski.''

It was the Vietnamese and Cambodians, of course, who lost the most. Such are the
fruits of victory in Southeast Asia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Pol Pot, former leader of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
But Do We Believe?

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 742 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The year of the Constitution is upon us. Through 1987 we shall be celebrating
the 200th birthday of the extraordinary document that created our country. There
is every reason to celebrate. But there is also reason to wonder whether we
really understand and believe in the essential idea of the Constitution.

The men who framed it in Philadelphia 200 years ago put their faith in limited
government. They had seen unlimited power in the hands of the King and they
feared it. So they divided power in the government they made, hedged it about
with rules, made it accountable to the people.

All that is schoolbook stuff, and we shall be hearing a good deal more about it
in the year ahead. But if you look at what American Presidents actually do, you
may wonder whether the idea of limited government survives except in textbooks
and patriotic sermons.

Over the last 20 years, Presidents of both parties have acted in foreign affairs
as if they had - or ought to have - all the rights of kings. They have treated
efforts by Congress or the public to control their power as illegitimate.

The Constitution confers upon Congress alone the power to declare war. But
Lyndon Johnson slipped us into a terrible war in Vietnam, all the while denying
what he was doing. Richard Nixon took the war into Cambodia, bombing there in
secret and then objecting when Congress finally asserted its right to limit the
war.

The same anti-constitutional belief in a Presidency of unlimited powers
underlies the Reagan Administration's activities in Nicaragua and Iran. Here
again a President and his men ignored the rules - ignored the law - because they
thought they were entitled to impose on America the policy they wanted.

When President Reagan first set out to overthrow the Government of Nicaragua, he
well knew that Congress would not endorse such a policy. He went about it in
secret, so he could not be held accountable. When Congress found out and drew
the line, his people connived at ways to tunnel under it. And similarly in Iran:
the President adopted in secret a policy of trading arms for hostages that the
country would overwhelmingly have rejected if he had told us about it.

In the Iran-Nicaragua affair, as in all the others, we are told that the
President had to act - for reasons of national security. He saw the dangers more
clearly. He had the intelligence reports. He had the responsibility as Commander
in Chief. He was the leader. And if some rules were bent or broken, well, they
had to be. In the words of Patrick Buchanan, President Reagan's communications
director, Oliver North was a hero because in helping the Nicaraguan contras ''he
was buying time for his own distracted and indifferent countrymen.'' This is the
modern world, a dangerous world, and we cannot pause for all the niceties of the
18th century. So the argument goes.

But that is exactly what the Framers of our Constitution rejected at their
convention in Philadelphia. They refused to put their trust in the perfect
wisdom of leaders. They bet their country's future instead on a system of checks
and balances.

The Iran affair thus represents much more than a particular foolish and damaging
policy. It is an acute example of a continuing attempt in this country to get
away from the constraints of the Constitution - to let the President rule in
foreign affairs as if by divine right.

Why is it happening, this thrust for unlimited Presidential power in foreign
affairs? It is not just a hunger for power in Washington, I think. It must also
be a response to a public yearning for ''leadership,'' for some figure who will
solve all our problems in this complicated world without bothering us about the
details.

In the television age the President is more than ever the focus of our hopes. It
is like the scene in Shakespeare's ''Henry the Fifth'' when the King reflects
unhappily that in his soldiers' thoughts he bears their burdens: ''Upon the
King! Let us our lives, our souls, our debts, our careful wives, our children
and our sins, lay on the King!''

But that was not the vision of those who framed our Constitution. The structure
they built often seems awkward, slow, inconvenient. But is there really a
convincing case that America would do better under royal leadership or its
modern authoritarian equivalent? This country has become what it is, the freest
and most prosperous on earth, because of its faith in the Constitution, not in
spite of it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SCHOOL MARKS 25 YEARS OF SKIING, RAFTING AND SELF-DISCOVERY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Dec. 28


Outward Bound, the rigorous program that develops inner strengths as well as
skills in outdoor activities, opened its first school in the United States 25
years ago in a Colorado mountain town.

It was an offshoot of a program founded in Wales in World War II to help
merchant seamen survive German torpedo attacks by teaching them leadership,
teamwork and self-confidence.

When Outward Bound began here the program took on a distinctly American
character, although its emphasis remained the same.

Five schools now offer courses in activities such as white-water rafting and
cross-country skiing. But today Outward Bound also helps high school students in
New York City to improve their reading skills, Vietnam veterans to cope with
their painful memories and cancer patients to adjust to their illness.

Outward Bound is using its 25th anniversary as an occasion for re-evaluation.

Middle-Class Luxury

Enrollment has doubled but fund-raising has lagged. Courses cost about $60 a
day, and many now regard Outward Bound as a middle-class luxury.

Striving to return to its original goal of being affordable to all, Outward
Bound Inc., has begun a fund-raising drive and has set a five-year goal of $12.3
million. The not-for-profit organization, based in Greenwich, Conn., charters
schools and oversees them.

In the summer of 1962, 100 teen-age boys signed up for three 26-day
mountaineering courses held near Marble, 20 miles southwest of Aspen. The
Colorado school served its 50,000th student this summer.

Along with its other schools in Maine, North Carolina, Oregon and Minnesota, the
United States Outward Bound program claims 160,000 alumni.

Famous Alumni

These alumni include John Whitehead, the Deputy Secretary of State ; Arthur
Levitt Jr., chairman of the American Stock Exchange; the NBC News anchorman Tom
Brokaw, and daughters of the entertainer Bill Cosby.

The International Business Machines Company, Xerox and Burger King are among the
corporations that have sent employees to Outward Bound courses.

Each year more than 15,000 students learn rappelling, cross-country skiing and
white-water rafting in courses lasting a few days to a few months. But the skill
is not the most important thing. The students say the courses force them to
discover reserves of inner strength and shades of character they never knew they
had.

''It really doesn't matter to an instructor if he runs across the best natural
rock climber ever to hit the planet on his course,'' said Steve Truitt, Outward
Bound's director of development for the Colorado school.

'Can I Make It?'

''What's more Outward Bound is the student that struggles up the cliff and that
has to face some real 'Can I make it?' 'I want help,' 'Let me down' kind of
conflict.''

Outward Bound was established by Kurt Hahn, an Oxford-educated Jew who was an
educational pioneer in Germany before fleeing the Nazis. He opened the
Gordonstoun school for boys in Scotland in 1934, and its students have included
Prince Philip, the current Outward Bound patron in England, and Prince Charles.

In World War II, Sir Lawrence Holt, head of a British shipping firm, asked Mr.
Hahn for help in solving a problem: When ships were hit by torpedoes, many
younger seamen died while waiting in life rafts for rescue.

Mr. Hahn proposed a program to boost the sailors' confidence. Sir Holt suggested
it be called Outward Bound, a nautical expression referring to the moment a ship
leaves safe harbor for the open sea.

The Outward Bound school opened at Aberdovey, Wales, in 1941. Its month-long
course combined small-boat training, athletics, route-finding, rescue, land and
sea expeditions and service to the community.

Word Travels to United States

Word of Outward Bound traveled across the Atlantic. Joshua Miner, an American
boarding school teacher, was sent by his father-in-law, the textile magnate J.
P. Stevens, to report on Mr. Hahn's ideas.

Mr. Miner became a founding trustee of the American school, which was chartered
in 1961.

In Outward Bound's first year in the United States, more than half the students
were on scholarship. Today, fewer than 20 percent of its students receive
financial aid. Just five years ago one-third received grants or loans.

''Our enrollment has doubled, but our endowment has not doubled,'' John
Raynolds, president of Outward Bound USA, said.

Teens-Agers Are Focus

He said teen-agers remained Outward Bound's primary focus but the program has
evolved into one that serves adults as well. The median age of students is now
22 years old.

''You don't stop changing and you don't stop growing just because you're not a
teen-ager,'' he said.

John Whitehead, who has been on 10 Outward Bound trips, agrees.

Speaking in Denver at the 25th anniversary dinner for Colorado's Outward Bound
program, he said that young people often spoke of profound personal changes
after taking a course.

''Well, at the advanced age of 54, Outward Bound changed my life, too,'' he
said.

''It let me feel the exhilaration of hard physical work, the joy of discovering
how quickly a group of diverse amateurs can become a team of near-experts.''

He added: ''It stretched my mind and my body to do things which I thought I
could not do. It restored my soul.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: WORKING PROFILE;
INFORMATION CHIEF WHO STAYS CLOSE TO REAGAN: CHARLES Z. WICK

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 981 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 28


As Ronald Reagan spends the last days of his troubled year in relative seclusion
in Los Angeles and Palm Springs, he and his wife, Nancy, are surrounding
themselves with longtime friends.

One of these friends, Charles Z. Wick, director of the United States Information
Agency, has been especially close to President Reagan in recent days. Mr. Wick
spent Christmas Eve and Christmas Day with Mr. Reagan and plans to join the
Reagans on New Years Eve in Palm Springs at the estate of Walter Annenberg, the
millionaire publisher and friend of the Reagans.

''The President has great resilience, great self-confidence, his mood is
certainly not one of being battered,'' said Mr. Wick, a former Hollywood agent
and business executive. ''His mood is, 'Let's get the job done and do what's
necessary.' ''

Mr. Wick was asked if Mr. Reagan was in a ''down'' state, as he had appeared to
be.

''There are degrees of being down,'' said Mr. Wick. ''He's very much aware of
the problems at hand, and he's certainly not demoralized or paralyzed.

'A Man of Deep Commitment'

''It's not the happiest of times, but I can honestly say the President is no
different now than any other prior holiday. It's a mark of the man. He's a man
of deep commitment to what he thinks is the right thing. He's been through a lot
of trials and tribulations. Look at the way he reacted when he was shot: he was
almost mortally wounded and he started kidding.

''I'm sure he's come out of this thing fine. Sure he makes mistakes -but so does
everyone. He's a man at peace with himself.''

Asked about Mrs. Reagan, who is reportedly deeply troubled at the criticisms
dircted at her husband, Mr. Wick said: ''Nancy is much more susceptible to
anything that happens to him, but she's very strong and positive too.'' Mr.
Wick, speaking a telephone interview, was asked if Mrs. Reagan was upset. ''You
can draw your own conclusion,'' he replied.

Mr. Wick and his wife, Mary Jane, grew friendly with the Reagans in the 1960's
when both families' children attended private school in Bel Air. Since then,
Mrs. Wick and Mrs. Reagan have been especially close friends and Mr. Wick worked
actively in Mr. Reagan's election campaigns.

Mr. Wick makes it clear that he prefers not to discuss his friendship with Mr.
Reagan and insists that he would ''never abuse'' his closeness to him to seek a
favor.

''The last thing in the world I'd try to do is any influence in any
inappropriate way,'' Mr. Wick said. ''I go through regular channels: State and
Defense. I would never do anything in a personal way unless I thought it was in
the national interest.''

Mr. Wick declined to say if he had discussed with Mr. Reagan the possibility of
staff changes, including the resignation of Donald T. Regan, the chief of staff.

''You do what friends do,'' said Mr. Wick. ''In Washington, you're in the
Beltway syndrome. There's no such thing as divorcement of day-to-day
perceptions. Nothing is ever ruled out.''

Mr. Wick himself, after a relatively stormy start in his Federal information
post, has not only survived the criticism but even earned applause from critics
for expanding the information agency's budget and modernizing its technology.
The agency itself is responsible for the Government's overseas information,
educational exchange and cultural programs.

He Denies Stridency

In the agency, some critics say privately that the commentaries amd editorials
beamed to the Soviet Union are strident and bombastic.

''

Totally untrue,'' said Mr. Wick. ''Just come in and look and listen. We're
anything but strident. We're very factual.''

What is perhaps most curious about Mr. Wick's tenure at the United States
Information Agency, according to officials there, is the relatively conciliatory
recent efforts toward the Soviet Union in recent years. Initially, Mr. Wick was
one of the most vocal anti-Communist voices in the Administration.

He came up with the idea of a televsion spectacular, ''Let Poland Be Poland,''
which was broadcast abroad. It deplored the lack of freedom in Poland. He also
sought funds from Congress to counter what he termed ''the massive Soviet
campaign of disinformation and misinformation about us.''

Thoughts of an Exchange

Recently, however, Mr. Wick has openly sought exchanges and accommodation with
the Soviet Union. As a result of his talks in Iceland at the summit meeting in
October between President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader,
Mr. Wick has made tentative plans to beam Voice of America broadcasts over
Soviet domestic stations in return for allowing Moscow radio programs to be
carried by stations in the United States.

Mr. Wick said that after the first of the year he also planned to discuss an
exchange of books and movies with the Soviet Union. Mr. Wick plans to meet
Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, the Soviet Communist Party secretary in charge of
propaganda. The two initially held an unpublicized meeting at the time of the
Iceland summit.

Has Mr. Wick mellowed? ''I don't really agree with that,'' he said. ''I came
here trying to do a job. I don't regard myself as an idealogue. I never have.
I'm just trying to do the job that the President wants me to do.''

Total of Employees Rises

Mr. Wick said that when he moved into his job, in 1981, the agency ''had very
little visibility,'' and a poor transmission set-up for overseas. ''There wasn't
too much forward momentum to what they were doing,'' he said.

Mr. Wick said that the number of agency employees had climbed from 7,600 in 1981
to 9,000 this year. (In 1968, at it peak, it employed 12,500, but this was
probably an effect of the Vietnam War). The budget, with Mr. Reagan's approval,
has substantially increased.

''The President has been very supportive and approving,'' said Mr. Wick. ''He
understands what we try to do. He is, after all, the great communicator.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Charles Z. Wick (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
REVIVING THE DRAFT: PARTISAN DEBATE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 28


The revival of a military draft is an issue that endures even though the present
volunteer force shows every sign of success.

Now, for the first time in many years, the issue appears to have become
partisan, with many Democrats favoring a return to conscription. When they take
control of the Congress in January, they have indicated that a new draft will be
considered.

In marked contrast, most Republicans, including President Reagan and Secretary
of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, oppose compulsory duty. Mr. Reagan, however,
compromised on a 1980 campaign pledge to do away with draft registration,
keeping it on the books.

Similarly, most senior military leaders today favor the volunteer force and say
a peacetime draft will not be needed so long as the Administration and the
Congress maintain the pay and benefits level. Five years ago, many military
leaders wanted the draft back.

National-Service Plans

In the most recent turn, proposals for some form of national service have come
into vogue. They appear to be thinly disguised efforts to have the draft resumed
eventually; they call for young men and women to devote up to two years, either
voluntarily or under compulsion, to military service or to civilian social
welfare projects.

Advocates of conscription have called for national service even though the armed
forces have for three years running more than filled recruiting quotas. Of all
recruits, more than 90 percent have been high school graduates who consistently
perform better than nongraduates.

The advocates argue that because the numbers of young men and women of military
age will drop in the next 10 years, recruiting will become difficult. They
contend that a draft would draw from all sectors of society rather than from
those needing jobs. They assert that military duty is an obligation.

Constitution Is a Factor

Opponents of military conscription argue that national service would violate the
Constitution. They say returning to the draft would cost more than the volunteer
force and argue that recruiting of volunteers can be maintained in peacetime.
They also acknowledge that a draft would be needed in a war.

After the United States withdrew from Vietnam in 1973, President Nixon allowed
the draft to expire. In response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979,
President Carter persuaded Congress to renew draft registration in 1980. But
there is no current law authorizing conscription and induction.

The Democratic Leadership Council, headed by former Gov. Charles S. Robb of
Virginia, said in September that the decline in the number of young men and
women of military age over the next 10 years would make it difficult to maintain
the volunteer force.

Thus, the council said, mandatory national service should be examined. ''A
program of national service could bolster our national strength and foster a new
spirit of citizenship and patriotism,'' the council said in a publication,
''Defending America.''

'System of Civilian Soldiers'

The next month, a panel of the Coalition for a Democratic Majority led by
Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma proposed ''a program of voluntary
national service.'' It was devised largely by Charles C. Moskos, a sociologist
at Northwestern who specializes in military personnel.

The coalition, in a statement, said, ''If international tensions ever required
us to revive the draft, the system of citizen soldiers would already be in place
to ease such a transition.''

In the election campaign in November, Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, who is to be
the new chairman of the Armed Services Committee, said, ''It was a mistake to
abolish the draft, but we have done that now and the question is where do we go
from here.''

Mr. Nunn foresaw a ''series of forums around the country on the whole question
of the draft and national service.'' He said that it would be ''a principal
issue in the 100th Congress.''

Another longtime proponent of the draft, Martin Binkin of the Brookings
Institution, published a book last fall, ''Military Technology and Defense
Manpower'' in which he asserted that young men and women might be unable to
operate advanced weapons.

Need for Skills Discussed

''By the early 1990's,'' he wrote, ''the nation's armed forces could be caught
between a growing requirement for skilled people to operate and maintain
sophisticated weaponry and a diminishing supply of youthful recruits capable of
absorbing complex training.''

On the other side, opponents of national service point to the 13th Amendment
prohibiting ''involuntary servitude.'' The Constitution charges Congress with
raising and supporting armies and providing for a navy; the Supreme Court has
ruled that those clauses permit a draft. It has also ruled that women may not be
drafted. Beyond that, opponents say, compulsory service for other than military
duty would be unconstitutional.

Moreover, a recent study for the Joint Chiefs of Staff has concluded that a
drafted force equal in effectiveness to the volunteer force would increase costs
unless pay was cut more than 80 percent. The study said that ''the introduction
of a draft with a 50 percent reduction in basic pay could require budget
expenditures in excess of $1.5 billion'' to get the same quality of personnel.

Money could be saved in recruiting costs, enlistment bonuses and college tuition
programs. But that would be offset by the cost of the Selective Service System,
bonuses to get people to re-enlist and the cost of disciplinary problems that
history has shown to be greater than in the volunteer force.

'Not Cause for Great Alarm'

An extensive study for the House Armed Services Committee by an Air Force team
found that ''the declining male youth population, by itself, is not cause for
great alarm .'' The team pointed to factors that would benefit recruiting.

Among them were more women in the civilian labor force; rising rates of
immigration, both legal and illegal; cuts in Federal job training programs, and
a decline in school enrollments of young men. Other researchers have said that
unemployment among young people, especially blacks, will remain high.

The study team concluded that Air Force recruitment of high-quality young men
and women, meaning high school graduates who score in the upper half of entry
tests, could rise by 3 percent in 1993 compared with 1984, a banner year. For
the Army, the drop would be only 1 percent.

''By this measure,'' the study concluded, ''the future of the all-volunteer
military is bright, not bleak.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEW 'BLUE DE VILLE' ON NBC, AN ON-THE-ROAD TALE

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 765 words


CONSIDERED by many to be the Great Reflector of society at large, television
entertainment is watched closely for supposed trends. During the last several
years, for instance, a somewhat conservative bent in manners and life styles has
been detected among the inhabitants of television sitcoms and movies. Marriage
is in again, having children is fun, making money is bliss - that sort of thing.
What, then, is one supposed to make of ''Blue DeVille,'' the television movie
being slipped into NBC's schedule tonight at 9? Here is a genially dopey
on-the-road caper that laughingly rejects weddings and family togetherness in
favor of having, as the writers put it, ''some stupid, crazy times.''

The executive producers and writers, Eugenie Ross-Leming and Brad Buckner, begin
their tale in St. Louis. J. C. Swift (Jennifer Runyon), looking like Barbie come
to life, is about to marry upwardly mobile Kevin (Robert Prescott) and assume an
obviously promising position in her father's company. J. C. spends a good deal
of her time at home doing crossword puzzles. Meanwhile, Gus Valentine (Kimberly
Pistone) is saying goodbye to her mother (Micole Mercurio), an aging hippie
concerned about nobody but herself. Gus, for Augusta, is on her own, setting out
for Colorado in search of the Vietnam-veteran father she has never met. To
envision Gus, think of Cyndi Lauper.

Just as J. C. is in the middle of her bridal shower, putting away the stacks of
electric pencil sharpeners, Gus appears wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with the
message ''This Way Out.'' Gazing into her new computer terminal, J. C. discovers
the message, ''Welcome to the beginning of the rest of your life.'' That does
it. In the next scene, J. C. is climbing on the back of Gus's gaudily painted
(could it be psychedelic?) motorcycle, and the two head off for the unknown,
past the famous arch that frames St. Louis like some giant tribute to
McDonald's. On their first stop, in the middle of a farm field, J. C. asks,
''What's that smell?'' Gus replies: ''I think it's fresh air.''

Experiencing an America not normally found in amiable sitcoms, the two young
women find themselves staggering out of a rainstorm into a roadside joint called
the Desperado Cafe. The other patrons include a prom-partying gang of the local
rich kids trying desperately and loudly to go through the motions of their idea
of fun. ''Spoiled little creeps,'' Gus reasonably concludes, ''you gotta beat
them at their own game.'' And she does, besting the biggest of the toughs in a
weird electric-shock competition. Instead of having to go to bed with her
opponent, she walks off with the keys to his prized car, which turns out to be a
blue 1959 Cadillac deVille convertible, in mint condition. J. C. and Gus resume
their journey in style as the radio blares forth Mitch Ryder's ''Devil With the
Blue Dress On.''

The women are soon joined by a seemingly carefree wanderer named Rod Sandusky
(Mark Thomas Miller) who, when not complaining about who ate the last of the
glazed doughnuts, is given to playing, badly, ''I'm in the Mood for Love.''
Eyeing Rod's physique dispassionately, Gus has to admit that ''the pecs show
some effort and the gluteals are off the chart,'' but she remains wary,
observing that ''he's like every jerk my mother ever fell in love with.''
Directed by Jim Johnston, ''Blue DeVille'' trips along goofily, never taking
itself or anything else too seriously as it heads for a dreadfully silly
conclusion in and around the vicinity of Taos, N.M.

Technically, the movie is first-rate. NBC broadcasts most of its programming in
stereo, and in this instance, the soundtrack pays off with the vivid delivery of
music ranging from Bob Seger's ''Till It Shines'' to Joe Turner's ''Losing You''
and ''On the Run.'' In addition, the visual style of the film borders on those
computerized depictions of heartland America used in commercials, which turn
highways and star-filled skies into slightly unreal landscapes that could have
been plucked from a Disney feature. And one scene, featuring a bus used by a
touring rock group, is set very effectively in a kind of magical mist that
rivals Steven Spielberg's patented otherworldliness.

In the end, though, ''Blue DeVille'' leaves an impression, admittedly fleeting,
because it rejects current doctrines of denial and sobriety in favor of ''doing
a lot of stupid and crazy things.'' The argument is made that ''we get that out
of our system and then move on.'' But the heroes of this film aren't so sure
it's something we should get out of our system. Anyone for a trend?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 30, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THAI REFUGEE CAMP, DOOR OF HOPE, WILL BE CLOSED

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 29


Thailand announced today that it was closing Indochina's most famous refugee
camp, a symbol of hope to hundreds of thousands of Cambodians escaping a decade
of death and dislocation.

The closing of the camp, Khao I Dang, is to take effect Wednesday. It means not
only that the camp's more than 26,000 Cambodians will be displaced but also that
they will lose their legal status as refugees. Instead, they will become
''displaced persons'' who can be returned to their war-torn nation when
conditions there permit.

A permanent refugee presence is ''troublesome to Thailand and her people at the
present time,'' said Prasong Soonsiri, secretary general to the Prime Minister.

He added that Thailand intended to phase out all long-term refugee camps and to
limit Thailand's role to a nation of temporary asylum.

Thai officials said today that the closing of Khao I Dang - the backdrop for the
final scenes in the film ''The Killing Fields'' - signaled the end of Thai hopes
that the remaining refugees in the camp, a sprawling city of bamboo and thatch
that once housed 140,000 people, would get new lives abroad.

''The West could have done more than this,'' Mr. Prasong said in an interview
after his formal announcement of the camp's closing.

''But so many have only promised, and have taken no action,'' he said, adding
that he had postponed the closing of Khao I Dang earlier this year at the
request of Western governments only to see no significant increase in the
processing of camp residents for emigration.

Most of the refugees remaining in the camp, now looked after by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees' regional office in Bangkok, lack family
connections abroad or skills deemed desirable by foreign governments. Others
have been suspected of having ties to the Khmer Rouge regime that ruled Cambodia
in a reign of terror from April 1975 to January 1979, leaving hundreds of
thousands dead by execution or by disease and starvation wrought by a program of
agrarian relocation that caused the collapse of the Cambodian economy.

After the closing Wednesday, Thai authorities will begin moving the camp's
population to settlements closer to the border. The camp is across the Thai
border from Cambodia, about 12 miles north of the town of Aranyaprathet.

Unlike Khao I Dang, the border camps are under the administration of civilian
followers of three Cambodian resistance groups - the army of Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, the Khmer Peoples' National Liberation Front of Son Sann and the Khmer
Rouge - that have been fighting the Vietnamese and the Government Hanoi
installed in Cambodia in 1979.

Mr. Prasong said 665,354 Cambodians, Laotians and Vietnamese had fled to
Thailand since 1975. He said 546,958 had been resettled abroad and at least
44,000 had returned home ''voluntarily.'' But he added that 120,620, a number
that includes tens of thousands of babies born in the camps, remain.

To add to Thailand's problem, he said, another quarter million Cambodians,
classified as ''displaced persons,'' have entered the country since early 1985,
pushed over the border by attacks on guerrilla-administered camps on Cambodian
territory.

''It has now been 11 years that Thailand has dealt with the Indochinese refugee
problem,'' Mr. Prasong said in his formal statement at the news conference.

Officials have said the existence of the refugee camps has contributed to
law-and-order breakdowns in the poverty-stricken, mountainous scrubland along
the Cambodian border.

Fighting to Get In

Refugees have bribed and sometimes shot their way into the barbed-wire enclosure
of Khao I Dang because it was believed that to get into the camp was a sure
route to resettlement abroad. Black markets thrive around the camps.

There have also been documented reports of torture of Cambodians by Thai border
forces when arguments or battles erupted between them.

The emptying of Khao I Dang could take as long as three months, Thai officials
say. Border forces will now prevent any newcomers from entering the camp.

The first group of existing residents to be moved will be about 4,300 people who
have been found to have entered the camp illegally. They will go to a border
settlement called Site B in Buriram province in northeastern Thailand. That camp
is adminstered by the Sihanouk group.

The next group, some 6,000 to 7,000 people who held ration cards but did not
qualify for full refugee status, will go to Site B or the Liberation Front
settlement called Site 2, near Ta Phrya.

The Last Group

The last group of about 16,000 people, some of them refugees who have been in
Khao I Dang since it opened in 1980, will lose refugee status but will be
allowed to choose their new homes among the border settlements.

Mr. Prasong said that no one from Khao I Dang would be placed in a Khmer Rouge
camp. The largest of these camps, Site 8, houses more than 30,000 people.

A hospital run by the International Committee of the Red Cross will be allowed
to continue operations at Khao I Dang, Thai officials say. It will treat serious
medical cases from the whole border area.

But activities by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees office will
be limited to casework in the border region from now on, Mr. Prasong said.

''There will be no new U.N.H.C.R. camps for Khmer,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Thailand highlighting Khao I Dang (page A6)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 30, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PROTEST AT THE PENTAGON

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 48 words


Police removing members of the Atlantic Life Community from an entrance to the
Pentagon. The group is opposed to United States nuclear policy, including
Trident submarines, MX missiles and nuclear testing. At left is Philip Berrigan,
the former priest and Vietnam War protester. (AP)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 372 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 31, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC SCENE;
The Year Of the Scold

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 852 words


NINETEEN EIGHTY-SIX was the year of the common scold. Almost everybody was
severely criticized by almost everybody else - and usually with good cause.

The United States was roundly attacked for fiscal irresponsibility. The National
Consumers League, a nonpartisan group that calls itself the nation's oldest
consumer organization, handed the Reagan Administration a grade of ''F'' for its
economic policy, saying, ''The Administration has failed to exercise any real
leadership on budget issues.'' Japan, West Germany and most of America's other
allies agreed.

But Japan and the others did not get off scot-free. Karel G. van Wolferen, the
longtime East Asia correspondent of the Dutch daily NRC Handelsblad, charged
that Japan had long pursued a deceptive trade and economic policy, pretending to
cooperate with the United States but undermining its economy.

In an article in the winter issue of Foreign Affairs that made waves all the way
to Tokyo, Mr. van Wolferen wrote: ''The Japanese political-economic system
fosters inward-looking attitudes. It is incapable of selfless gestures, but it
can react with alacrity once it is imbued with a pervasive sense of crisis. In
the growing conflict with America no significant Japanese adjustments can be
expected until the entire establishment has been thoroughly imbued with the idea
that there is a new reality to which it must adjust, like the reality created by
OPEC. No verbal threats serve this purpose, because they have for many years
proved quite empty.''

Nineteen eighty-six appeared to provide fresh evidence for this charge of
Japan's imperviousness to persuasion to act in any other interest but its own.
Less than two months after the United States and Japan agreed that Tokyo would
give a substantial fiscal stimulus to the economy, the Government approved the
smallest spending rise in three decades.

Mr. van Wolferen urged a get-tough policy with Japan, which he recognized would
inevitably set off a hue and cry that Japan was being punished. ''Quite the
contrary,'' he said, ''by preventing waves of uncontrollable protectionism,
these measures will most probably preserve the health of the Japanese economy,
considering how dependent it is on exports, and thereby promote continued
political stability.''

Plenty of other countries came in for heavy criticism last year: South Africa
for exploiting and terrorizing blacks and crushing its white and black critics;
the Soviet Union for trying to conceal the effects of the Chernobyl nuclear
disaster; the United States for its Iran-contra play, which it carried out
covertly while urging other countries not to sell arms to Iran and while
pressing an anti-terrorist campaign to oppose making deals to free hostages.

Iran achieved a high place on most lists of ''most immoral nation of the year.''
It offered to sell the hostages but, for the most part, it did not deliver.

In the realm of microeconomic incompetence, the United States won a high place
by its negotiating failures with Iran, as well as, on conventional trading
issues such as manufactured goods and agriculture, with Japan and Europe.

The private sector was not too far behind the public sector in 1986 in the
realms of nefariousness, disinformation and deceptivity. The top winner, in the
judgment of most critics, was Ivan F. Boesky, the arbitrager, who agreed to pay
penalties of $100 million, when charged by the Securities and Exchange
Commission with insider trading.

But the S.E.C. itself scored high on the critics' list when it permitted Mr.
Boesky to sell off hundreds of millions of dollars of highly leveraged equity
(curious word) before the public was informed that Mr. Boesky had pleaded guilty
and had been barred from the securities markets forever, that is, forever after
he had unloaded more than a billion dollars worth of stocks.

The S.E.C. explained that it had not wanted to shake up the securities markets.
Investors left holding the bag could console themselves with the knowledge that
they had served the public interest.

In the world of higher education and deep thought, president Derek Bok, at
Harvard University's 350th anniversary celebration, cautioned some scholars
about being caught up in the continual pursuit of affluence, undermining the
mission of the university. ''A generation of scholars is coming of age that grew
up in Watergate and Vietnam and inherited a pervasive distrust of established
institutions,'' Mr. Bok said. ''In a world that honors success and opulent life
styles, we could easily find ourselves harboring more and more professors who
try to combine the freedom and security of a tenured academic post with the
income and visibility traditionally reserved for people who take much greater
risks and work at much less elevating tasks.''

With the disclosure that some scholars at the Harvard Medical School had faked
evidence for research findings, it appeared that the pursuit of honors could be
as undermining as the pursuit of affluence.

Nineteen eighty-seven may bring greater sobriety and integrity. But keep your
wallet and your faith in a safe place.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
