
                               1 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 1, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

OFFER BY GROMYKO TO HAIG REPORTED

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 972 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 30


The Soviet Union has asked the United States to agree to a new set of principles
governing their relations, with each side pledging not to seek military
advantage over the other, a senior State Department official said today.

The official, in a briefing in New York before Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig Jr. returned here, provided some details on Mr.  Haig's nine hours of
discussions with Foreign Minister Andrei A.  Gromyko on Sept. 23 and 28.

While Mr. Gromyko stressed the value of an accord on military parity, the
official said, Mr. Haig focused on issues like Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan, support for Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia and backing of rebels
in Africa and Latin America.

The Soviet Union has pressed for agreements in principle ever since the first
meeting between Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, and President Richard M.
Nixon in 1972. In that year the two sides agreed to a set of principles
governing their relations. In 1973, they agreed on another set of principles to
avoid nuclear war.

U.S. Cool to Soviet Proposal
While the State Department official did not dismiss the latest pr oposal out of
hand, he did not welcome it either. He said the pr oposal, along with the
American concern about specific problems, wo uld be discussed further when Mr.
Haig and Mr. Gromyko meet again, pr obably in Geneva, early next year.

The Reagan Administration has accused the Soviet Union of failing to live up to
the 1972 set of principles, committing each side not to seek unilateral
advantage over the other.

The main result of the Haig-Gromyko talks was an agreement to resume ne goti
ations in Geneva on Nov. 30 on limiting medium-range nuclear force s in Europe.
The official said he expected these talks to be ''very difficult and perhaps
prolonged.''

He said the Soviet Union wanted to limit the negotiations to weapon systems with
''defined European target capabilities.'' On the Soviet side, the official said,
this would mean only those SS-20 mobile missiles that are currently targeted on
Western Europe.

Broader Coverage Sought by U.S.

The United States contends that the Soviet Union, in addition to 175 missiles
targeted on Western Europe, has about 75 in other locations, or a total of about
250. Each missile is mobile and can carry three warheads.

Because of its mobility, Mr. Haig told Mr. Gromyko, the United States wants all
the SS-20's included in the negotiations. The United States also wants the
Soviet Union to dismantle all missiles beyond any agreed numerical limits, and
not simply move them out of European range, the briefing official said.

The Western allies have no missile system comparable to the SS-20, the official
said, and will not begin to catch up with the Russians until 1983-84 when the
first of a new series of medium-range missiles are installed in Western Europe.
They would give the Atlantic alliance in Europe a total of 572 nuclear warheads,
less than the 750 already installed on the SS-20's.

The official said Mr. Gromyko also wanted the talks to cover American
fighter-bombers based in Western Europe and on aircraft carriers, but Mr. Haig
insisted on limiting negotiations initially to land-based missiles.

Verification Is Termed Difficult

Verification will be difficult, according to the briefing official, because of
the mobility of the SS-20's.  He said the Soviet Union now appeared to view the
negotiations on medium-range forces in Europe as distinct from talks on the
limitation of strategic, or long-range, nuclear forces.

In the past, the Russians said any missile fired at the Soviet Union would be
devastating, whether launched from Western Europe or from the United States. The
Americans interpreted this to mean that the issue of medium-range forces in
Europe could be included within the overall framework of the strategic arms
limitation process.

''The Soviets have suddenly seemed to want to disassociate it from the
process,'' the official said of the Haig-Gromyko discussion.  Beyond the
discussion of a new set of principles, the American official said, Mr. Gromyko
asked when the United States would be ready to resume the strategic arms talks.
The Russian also discussed problems of trade discrimination against the Soviet
Union and ''American rhetoric,'' the official said.

Haig Calls '79 Pact 'Behind Us'

On strategic arms, the official said, Mr. Haig replied that the treaty signed in
1979 but not approved by the Senate ''was behind us and that a new basis for
strategic arms control talks would have to be launched.'' Mr. Gromyko was told
that the treaty ''had fallen on the rocky shoals of Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan as well as on substantive deficiencies'' in the document, the
official said.

On trade, Mr. Gromyko was told that improvements were related ''to overall
Soviet international behavior.'' As to the Soviet complaint about ''rhetoric,''
the official said, Mr. Haig ''underscored reciprocity, suggesting that one side
could not expect to be restrained if the other indulged in outrageous
propagandistic patterns.''

''There is no justification for euphoria or inflated expectation,'' the briefing
official said, summing up the talks.  ''But we can derive satisfaction from the
fact of the talks and the reality that a process has started which the United
States side will insist must be characterized by a whole new character, one
which would be marked by reciprocity.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 1, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE VOTES TO END BAN ON AID TO ANGOLAN REBELS

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Spec ial to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 565 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 30


The Senate voted today to repeal an amendment that bars the United States from
aiding rebels fighting the Marxist regime in Angola.

Known as the Clark Amendment, after former Senator Dick Clark, an Iowa Democrat,
the aid ban was removed from the foreign assistance bill by voice vote. An
earlier attempt by liberal Democrats to make the repeal contingent on progress
toward peace in southern Africa was defeated by a vote of 66 to 29.

In other actions, the Senate approved an amendment that opened the way to repeal
of a ban on military sales to Argentina; approved a resolution calling on the
President to fill the office of Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights,
and approved a sense of the Senate resolution supporting aid to Pakistan. All
were by voice vote.

Repeal of the Clark Amendment has been strongly supported by the Reagan
Administration, which desires greater flexibility in conducting its foreign
policy in southern Africa.

''If we're a world power - and I think we are,'' Senator Barry Goldwater,
Republican of Arizona, said today, ''we need muscle in the President's office to
act like a world power.''

But repeal of the Clark Amendment faces serious opposition in the House, where
the Foreign Affairs Committee voted 19 to 5 in favor of retaining the provision.

In recent days, moreover, House Democrats have indicated that they might not
even bring the foreign aid bill to the floor, because they lack the votes for
enactment. If that happens, the foreign aid program would probably be extended
at current levels of funding, and there would be no legislative vehicle this
year to enact repeal of the Clark Amendment.

The Clark Amendment was adopted in 1976, after it was disclosed that the Ford
Administration was secretly aiding anti-Marxist guerrillas in the Angolan civil
war. Congress was still scarred by the experience of Vietnam, and as Senator
Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, noted today, the amendment was
''an expression of Congressional distrust of the Presidency in the exercise of
foreign policy.''

Senator John Heinz, Republican of Pennsylvania, said that repealing the Clark
Amendment would correct the impression in Africa that Angola was considered to
be of ''no significant interest to this country.''

Senator Alan Cranston, Democrat of California and a supporter of the amendment,
said that repeal at this time would ''send the wrong signals'' to African
governments, which might fear greater American involvement in Africa.

In particular, supporters worry that repeal would anger the Angolan Government,
and thus discourage it from helping to seek a peaceful solution to the conflict
in neighboring South-West Africa, the South African-administered territory also
known as Namibia.

At the suggestion of Senator Charles H. Percy, chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee, the repeal proposal contained a statement that Congress was not
endorsing a renewal of aid to Angolan rebels at this time. The Illinois
Republican also conveyed assurances from the White House that ''no decision''
had been reached on the aid issue, and that if President Reagan ever decided to
help the rebels, ''Congress will know about it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 1, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

7 VIETNAMESE DIE ON SHIP

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Sept. 30


Seven out of 69 Vietnamese refugees aboard a small boat died of thirst and
exposure in the South China Sea before the survivors were rescued by a United
States Navy ship, refugee officials said today.  Fifteen other refugees had to
be treated in hospitals when the Southern Cross landed them in Singapore on
Monday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AND THE SAUDIS;
News An alysis

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1


In assuming office in January, the Reagan Administration said President Jimmy
Carter had been ''clumsy and illadvised'' to pledge protection of the Persian
Gulf because the United States lacked the military forces to sustain the
commitment.

Yet, with little appreciable improvement in American capacity, President Reagan
took the commitment a step further today with his assertion that the United
States would not let Saudi Arabia ''be an Iran,'' would not allow it to fall
into the hands of ''anyone that would shut off'' vital oil supplies to the West.

A White House aide said the comment was ''the Reagan codicil to the Carter
doctrine,'' an allusion to Mr. Carter's declaration, in January 1980, that any
attempt by an outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf would ''be
repelled by any means necessary, including military force.''

Reagan's Intention Is Confirmed

Mr. Reagan's allusion to the internal upheaval in Iran that toppled Shah
Mohammed Riza Pahlevi in 1979 was taken to mean that the President was now
pledging to support the Saudi monarchy against internal as well as external
threats. A White House aide said that this was indeed Mr. Reagan's intention.

The President and his advisers have long held the view that the Shah would not
have been deposed if the United States had been steadfast in its backing.
Officials said today that Mr. Reagan did not intend to make the same mistake
with the Saudi royal family and that his language was intended to demonstrate
support, especially in view of the possibility that Congress may block a
proposed sale of advanced radar planes to Saudi Arabia.

Since he declined to discuss specifics, it was unclear whether he had in mind
only political measures and arms sales, or military actions as well. An aide
said the United States would not telegraph its response to any contingency but
that any of the various measures was possible.

Since the seizure of the Grand Mosque at Mecca by religious rebels in 1979, the
United States has been working with the Saudis to upgrade their military ability
to deal with internal subversion or an attempt to overthrow the monarchy.

Both the force of Mr. Reagan's language and the acquiescent Congressional
reaction reflected a shifting political mood here as memories of the Vietnam
experience are outweighed by concern about the Russians' intervention in
Afghanistan and their proximity to Middle East oil.

Angola Curbs Lifted by Se nate

Quite deliberately, Congress has begun to roll back the Vietnamera restrictions
on Presidential authority in foreign policy.  Just yesterday, the Senate voted
to repeal restrictions voted in 1976 to bar the United States from providing
covert military aid to anti-Marxist rebels in Angola.

Although the House of Representatives has yet to act, the move signaled a
political climate changed from that of the 1970's, when a wary Congress limited
the authority of the President to commit American power overseas.

A 1979 Senate resolution called for Congressional approval of any decision to
use American armed forces abroad. Another Senate resolution, passed in 1972,
required approval of executive agreements with foreign countries to prevent any
secret accords. And in 1973, the War Powers Act put a 60-day limit on the
President's authority to commit forces abroad without Congressional approval.

As the Reagan Administration moves to reassert United States power abroad,
Congress is now in a mood to help the President rather than restrict him.
Although Republican leaders in the Senate said they had not been consulted about
Mr. Reagan's comments today, they said they were comfortable with his
pronouncements.

''I don't look upon the President's statement as a formalized commitment,'' said
Senator Charles Percy, the Foreign Relations Committee chairman. ''It signifies
the President's determination to support a friendly country. I have known for
some time that it was his intent to bolster the security and shore up the
stability of friendly countries. And these statements serve to prevent a
miscalculation by our adversaries.''

For the Administration, this approach represents a contrast to what Reagan
policy-makers regard as the dangerous vagueness of such officials as former
Secretary of State Dean Acheson. In 1950, Mr.  Acheson failed to bring South
Korea explicitly under the umbrella of American protection. This is the kind of
omission that, in the view of Reagan str ategists, invited North Korea's attack
on South Korea.

A Policy of Forceful Response

The Reagan Administration has moved deliberately toward a more explicit policy
of forceful response when American interests are challenged. That was the
message intended by the United States in August when its jet fighters downed two
Libyan planes that fired on them, according to officials.

As the Reagan Administration moves to persuade Congress and the nation to go
along with an ambitious military buildup, the President and his advisers are
also moving step by step to change foreign perceptions of American willingness
to use military power when vital interests are at stake.

And whatever misgivings the Administration may still have about American
military capacity, Mr. Reagan appears to have decided that an assertion of
American will, such as he made today, is an essential element of protecting
friends and deterring adversaries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET IS TARGET AT THE COMMONWEALTH TALKS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 578 words

DATELINE: MELBOURNE, Australia, Oct. 1


The Soviet Union was made the principal target of strong denunciations by four
Prime Ministers of the Commonwealth here today during a debate on the
international situation.

Moscow thus joined South Africa as the major villain in the eyes of the 41 prime
ministers, presidents or foreign ministers leading their countries' delegations
to the biennial meeting of Commonwealth heads of government, which opened
yesterday.

Much of the criticism centered on the Soviet threat to Poland.  After condemning
Moscow for its intervention in Afghanistan and holding it responsible for
Vietnam's conquest and continued occupation of Cambodia, Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher of Britain urged the Soviet Union to allow Poles to settle their
affairs by themselves.

Implicitly responding to criticisms by leaders of developing countries,
particularly Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India, of the resumption of the
arms race by the major powers, the British leader placed the responsibility
fully on the Soviet Union. Moscow's growing military strength and its readiness
to make war, directly, as in Afghanistan, or by proxy, as in Cambodia, Mrs.
Thatcher said, forced Western powers to respond by raising their power to deter
such aggression.

China's Preoccupations 'Domestic'

Prime Ministers Malcolm Fraser of Australia and Robert D. Muldoon of New Zealand
expressed similar views. Mr. Muldoon, referring to a recent meeting with
President Reagan, voiced certainty that the United States was ''prepared to
consult with and assist developing countries which want to preserve their
sovereignty and that of their neighbors against Soviet-supported adventurism.''

At the same time, he said, China was making no moves that would destabilize its
region.  Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore coupled his vigorous
denunciations of the Soviet Union with a markedly condescending dismissal of
former President Jimmy Carter, whom by implication he held responsible for
Soviet gains during his presidency. In a view often heard from Southeast Asian
leaders in private but rarely pronounced in public, Mr. Lee described American
reaction to Soviet moves in Cambodia and Afghanistan as ''this benign spirit of
tolerance.''

''All this was manageable as long as America was under Jimmy Carter,'' the Prime
Minister declared. ''He was a well-meaning, peace-loving man. In Vienna in June
1979, he had kissed, or been kissed by, President Brezhnev on both cheeks after
the signature of SALT II. And in retaliation for the invasion of Afghanistan
that December, Jimmy Carter boycotted the Moscow Olympic s and prohibited grain
sales. President Brezhnev was unimprese d.''

''The American people were also unimpressed,'' Mr. Lee continued.  ''In November
1980, they voted Ronald Reagan for President.''

Reagan's Attitude Praised

The Singapore leader went on to praise Mr. Reagan's tough attitude toward
Vietnam and his willingness to consider arms sales to China, as well as his
readiness to supply arms to Pakistan. He suggested that the stern Reagan
policies had caused Moscow to show ''circumspection and caution, for the time
being,'' in reacting to the Polish challenge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Chase Planning Appeal

SECTION: Section D; Page 11, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 245 words


The Chase Manhattan Bank said yesterday that it would appeal a decision by the
United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit that would enable 11
Vietnamese to recover about $450,000, plus 26.5 percent interest, that had been
on deposit at its Saigon branch.

The funds, in local currency, were lost when the Chase closed the branch six
days before the city fell to the Communists on April 30, 1975.

Judge Robert L. Carter earlier dismissed a claim to the funds by Nguyen Thi Cham
and the principals in 10 now-defunct shipping companies in Manhattan Federal
court, ruling that the real defendant was Chase's former Saigon branch. But on
Tuesday a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit, also in New York, reversed Judge Carter's decision.

Tran Dinh Truong, a major shareholder of the companies, joined Miss Cham in the
suit but is not a plaintiff.  Judge Walter R. Mansfield, who wrote the appeals
court decision, rejected Chase's contention that the funds were payable only in
piastres at its Saigon branch and said the record did not support Chase's view
that the depositors should look to the new Vietnamese Government for payment.

He rejected ''force majeure'' as a defense and said the present
''worthlessness'' of the South Vietnamese currency was ''no barrier to
recovery.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 3, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC PLAN'S GAP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 158 words


To the Editor:

President Reagan, in his Sept. 24 television address, failed to mention the
Vietnam War and the Middle East oil cut-off and price increases as principal
causes of today's inflation, unemployment, high interest rates and the high
Federal debt. Instead, he blames the ''extravag anc e'' of big government and
calls for additional moneyflow shi fts to an unregulated marketplace.

His conservative economic proposals are commendable theory, but they do not
address the real political-economic problems - which are involvement and
partisan intervention in costly foreign wa rs and regional disputes. In fact,
his proposals for higher military expenditures and related pronouncements would
suggest the same pattern of foreign policy mistakes -followed by additional
domestic economic disarray. If his ''conservative'' do mestic formula doesn't
work, the trouble will be compounded.
ALLAN NIXON, Binghamt on, N.Y., Sept. 26, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 3, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

New York;
PULLING THE WINGS OFF PEOPLE;
by Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


There may be no new words or phrases to describe the awesome crime in this city
or the frightening fact that more and more of it is being committed by children,
but it is fairly obvious that if we do not address it with at least as much
energy as we devote to acquiring a new television set, things are going to get
worse.

Police Commissioner Robert J. McGuire, a caring man of many sensitivities,
talked about youth crime for a couple of hours in his office this week. Here are
some of the things he said:

''There's no question that so much of the crime now has to do with kids. Not
just quality-of-life crime like senseless vandalism, ripping up park benches,
but serious, violent crime. It has become a fact in this city that older people
are afraid of kids.

''Sometimes I ask myself, 'Are we being hysterical? Wasn't there crime before?
Are we getting old and old-fashioned?' No. This isn't the same. The statistics
are three, four, five times what they were 20 years ago. And the pathology is
much worse.

''The kids who prey on people have a look in their eyes that says 'your life
isn't worth anything to me.' Whether they injure you is irrelevant to them.
Random. Gratuitous. Like pulling wings off butterflies, only the butterflies are
people.

''None of our discussions at the governmental level ever get to the question of
14- and 15-year-old kids who have no sense of what human life is worth, that
it's precious.''

If you were God for one day, he was asked, and could do what you thought was
most important, what would it be?  ''I would try to understand it. I would try
to figure it out. What are the dynamics? It can't be just poverty. That's a
factor but there must be so many others. The poor live cheek by jowl with those
who have more. Television gives them instant communication about the good things
in life - and about violence.

''What about mal-education? No parental control? Moral breakdown?  No respect
for authority?  ''There's been Vietnam, Watergate, pornography, divorce, no one
goes to church anymore. And then we expect kids to be God-fearing.  I'm not
trying to be self-righteous, but you are reaping what you're sowing.

''Is there a commitment by government and community leaders to do something
about it? The answer is no. I even find it hard to frame the right questions.
Where would I start? What would I study?

''If I were God? Sure, I'd want to provide all the infrastructure - counselling
, remedial reading, full employment. But would this do it?

''I'd like to believe that every teenager could get a job in this city. I'd feel
a lot less guilty then about sending a 14-year-old away.

''At what age do you have to try to save the child? By 10, his character is by
and large formed. If he's stabbing someone at 10, it's probably too late.

''People say it's racial, because those in the subculture, at t he bottom of the
economic ladder, are mostly min orities. Yes, blacks andHispanics are committing
most of the violent crime. But that's too simplistic.

''What about kids from the same, poor, black family? One becomes a violent,
career criminal. But the other goes through the system - school, college, the
rest - and comes out O.K.

''And there are a lot of white kids in trouble. Something is happening to kids
across the board. You may not be as afraid of the white street kids in
Yorkville, but they can take your wings off as quickly as anyone.

''A reporter said to me last week, 'Hey, there's a lot of crime.  You're the
Commissioner. What are you doing about it?' Look, there has to be
self-enforcement. Like the income tax laws. We have limited police. People have
to share responsibility. If the social contract is breaking apart, then all the
police can do is conduct a holding action.

''Everything always works its way back to the things people don't want to face,
don't want to talk about - morality, application of values, anything other than
their obsession with instant gratification.

''What does it mean down the road? If people in New York City will no longer
have a sense of their own safety - if you feel compelled to put six locks on
your door, if your son from Long Island has to come in to buy the groceries
because you're afraid to go out - then what's the next step? Is that an
acceptable society?

''I'm a liberal but, down the road, if I have to admit the police can't protect
people, will the hard-liners be proved right? Will we need a more oppressive and
repressive society? Will we have to bring in the National Guard for emergency
patrols? How far behind, then, would the Army be and the Joint Chiefs of Staff?

''Unless we come up with better responses, what's ahead is going to be worse
than what we have now.'' The community dialogue and commitment the Commissioner
is groping for is more than a little important to everyone who lives in this
city. He could use some company in his search for the right questions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 3, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

'ECONOMIC MIGRANTS';
by Leo Cherne

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 804 words


As the Admi nistration and Congress proceed with consultations on the number of
Indochinese refugees to be admitted tothe United St ates starting this month, I
deplore the growing tendencyhere and abro ad to identify the refugees as
''economic migrants.'' Wemust be deepl y concerned that refugees so identified
may be subject to mass repat riation without steps to ensure their safety.

Those who label groups of legitimate refugees ''economic migrants'' too often
overlook the close intertwining of economic and political factors in repressive
countries. Collectivization, new economic zones, forced-labor camps are locked
into a system in which the state is both the employer and wielder of absolute
power - creating such unbearable conditions that even peop le who ha ve no clear
perception of the root cause of their suffering flee at great risk to their
lives.

Acceptance of the designation ''economic migrant'' by many decent people would
be less disturbing were it not such a painful reminder of what happened in the
1930's. The expression itself - Wirschaftsemigrant - was coined for Hitler's
victims who were seeking a haven abroad but were found wanting because, after
all, they lost only jobs or businesses, or could not send their children to
school.  If they were later forced to wear yellow stars, that could perhaps be
considered harassment but not persecution. It was only in the third stage that
they were rounded up and sent to extermination camps, and by then it was too
late to help them.

Not so long ago, it was considered necessary to continue the fighting in
Indochina in order to prevent a bloodbath. The bloodbath happened - in Cambodia
- and three million people perished. We are being told today that the Vietnamese
''boat people'' now risk seeing their children drown and their wives and
daughters raped by pirates for no reason other than hope of economic betterment.
Are we now to deny refugee status to Cambodians who escaped when escape became
possible?

Cambodia and Laos are occupied countries. Their occupier, Vietnam, is a nation
at war, with a terrible price being paid by its citizens. The national
minorities of Indochina (the Hmong hill people in Laos and ethnic Chinese) are
under heaviest pressure, and other groups such as the Roman Catholics in

Vietnam are being singled out for persecution. United States allegations that
toxic substances are used against Indochinese come as no surprise to those of us
who served on the Citizens Commission on Indochinese Refugees. In December 1978,
after interviews in Thailand with Hmong refugees, we recommended a thorough
investigation.

Individuals who reach other Asian countries, having been persecuted or fearing
persecution if returned, are refugees within the explicit meaning of the United
Nations Refugee Convention and the United States Refugee Act of 1980. Refugees
must not be confused with the far greater number of persons who apply for
admission to this country as immigrants, nor with undocumented aliens such as
those who cross the Mexican border.

''Voluntary repatriation,'' an idea with a growing number of advocates, is a
complex, sensitive issue. As long as repatriation is voluntary it is
unobjectionable as an idea. But illegal flight from a repressive state is
considered a crime against the regime, which is not inclined to forgive
insubordination. Moreover, the line between voluntary and involuntary
repatriation can become easily blurred.

Nearly 550,000 Indochinese refugees have come to this country since 1975.
Following the fall of Saigon on April 30, 1975, some 135,000 Vietnamese and
5,000 Cambodians were brought here. In the years that followed, the numbers
fluctuated, depending on the ceilings determined by Administrations and
Congress. The fiscal 1981 ceiling was 168,000, but fewer than 130,000 came. The
ceiling being discussed for the new fiscal year ranges from a generous 120,000
approved by the White House to only 60,000, being urged by some senators and
Congressman; others are even urging a moratorium on all Indochinese refugees
admissions in fiscal 1982.

Even as apathy toward refugees has grown in certain cirles, and hostility in
others, there remains a vast reservoir of willingness to extend a welcoming hand
to those who flee tyranny. We have never had reason to regret the asylum we have
offered to people ''who yearn to breathe free.'' We will not regret a
continuation of this humanitarian tradition.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Leo Cherne is chairman of the International Rescue Committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 3, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 3, 1981

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 970 words


International
American assistance with the Awacs is necessary, a State Department spokesman
said after a meeting in New York between Saudi Arabia'a Foreign Minister, Prince
Saud al-Faisal, and Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. American aid for
''the support'' of the five surveillance planes that the Administration proposes
to sell to the Saudis would be necessary well into the 1990's, the spokesman
said.  But Defense Department estimates of the time needed to train Saudi crews
are much less than 10 years. (Page 1, Column 2.)
National
MX missiles will be housed in silos being vacated by Titan missiles rather than
shuttled among shelters in the Western deserts, as had been proposed, President
Reagan told newsmen, ending several days of speculation about the basing of the
intercontinental nuclear missiles. Their deployment will be part of what the
President called a comprehensive plan to revive the nation's strategic nuclear
deterrent. He also revived plans for the long-range B-1 bomber, which had been
canceled by the Carter Administration and proposed the construction of 100 of
them. ''This is the strategic program America can afford,'' the President said.
Defense Department officials said the program would cost $180.3 billion over the
next six fiscal years, starting with the year that began Wednesday. (1:6.))
Congress generally welcomed the decision by President Reagan to reject costly
plans for a new basing system for the MX missile, but his proposal to build 100
B-1 bombers appears to face serious political problems. One critic of the MX
decision, Senator John Tower, the Texas Republican who heads the Armed Services
Committee, said he was ''gravely disappointed'' by the Administration's
preference for existing silos in which to deploy the missiles. ''The program is
far less powerful than than was implied by the original Reagan defense budget
request,'' he said. (14:3-6.)
The unemployment rate rose to 7.5 percent of the total work force in September,
marking the second successive increase after three months of decline last
summer, the Bureau of Labor Statistics announced.  September's rate was
three-tenths of a percentage point higher than the level in August. Dr. Janet L.
Norwood, Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, told the Joint
Congressional Economic Committee that layoffs had been most noticeable in
industries highly sensitive to high interest rates, saying the figures indicated
that ''at best the economy is very flat.'' (1:1)
Additional design errors at the Diablo Canyon nuclear plant in San Luis Obispo,
Calif., have been found in the plant's earthquake safeguards and extend to the
support structure for the plant's electrical cabling system, the Pacific Gas and
Electric Company has told Federal authorities. The utility recently reported
that the use of the wrong blueprint had led to the improper placement of
earthquake supports designed to protect several the plant's cooling systems.
(8:1.)
Richard M. Nixon was accused of filing in court a ''false and misleading''
description of a tape-recorded conversation he had on May 5, 1971, with H.R.
Haldeman, who was then his White House chief of staff, in which the former
President endorsed a suggestion that Teamster Unio n ''thugs'' be employed to
assault anti-Vietnam War protesters. T he charge was made in court papers filed
by a lawyer representing 1,200 antiwar demonstrators who were arrested
unconstitutio nally on the Capitol steps on the day the tape recordingwas made.
(28 :1-3.)
Harry Golden, civil rights champion, died at his home in Charlotte, N.C., at the
age of 79. A Southerner transplanted from New York's Lower East Side, he was the
publisher of The Carolina Israelite, a one-man periodical with a national
circulation, that he used to fight racial bigotry with a sard onic wit. He wrote
several books; among them was ''Only in America,'' which was a best-seller when
it was published in 1958. He stopped publishing his paper in 1968.  (33:1-3.)
Metropolitan
A new leak at the Indian Point 3 plant has delayed plans of the New York Power
Autority to restore the nuclear plant to service after it was shut down during
several weeks of routine maintenance. Indian Point 3, one two adjacent plants in
Westchester County operated by Consolidated Edison, is among 17 in the country
whose tubing has been eroded by rust. (1:3.)
Hunting regulations will be eased in New York State this fall because of the
large increase in the number of deer, which are flourishing along with geese,
wild turkeys, beavers, and other wildlife. The number of deer is estimated at
650,000. (1:1-3.)
New York City's jobless rate rose slightly in September, while the statewide
rate for New York and New Jersey declined. The city's rate increased to 8.4
percent from 8.1 percent in August, the regional office of the Bureau of Labor
Statistics reported. The seasonally adjusted statewide rate declined to 6.8
percent from 7.1 percent in August. In New Jersey, the rate dropped to 6.6
percent from 6.8 percent in August. (15:1.)
The F.D.R. Drive will be overhauled along with the Harlem River Drive at a cost
of $110 million, the Koch administration announced.  Officials said that the the
reconstruction of the two highways, extending 12 miles from the Battery to
Dyckman Street in northern Manhattan, will take until the end of the decade if
work begins in 1984 as scheduled. (29:6.)

Business Digest, Page Page 35

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

House Backs Medical Status For 'Agent Orange' Veterans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 139 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 3


The House has passed a bill giving priority medical care in Veterans
Administration clinics to Vietnam veterans who believe their health has been
affected by exposure to Agent Orange or other defoliants.

The measure, adopted yesterday, goes to the Senate. It would also give a similar
priority to veterans exposed to iodizing radiation from nuclear tests after
World War II.

Representative G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery, Democrat of Mississippi, chairman of the
Veterans Affairs Committee, said that the legislation would also assist Vietnam
veterans with problems in adjusting to civilian life.

''The period of time a Vietnam veteran may use his GI Bill educational benefits
to pursue on-the-job or vocational training would be extended for two years, ''
he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PUERTO RICO SCHOOL HALTS CLASSES AFTER MELEE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 35, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: SAN JUAN, P.@R., Oct. 2


University authorities have indefinitely suspended classes at the largest branch
of the state-operated University of Puerto Rico in the wake of student uprisings
over the first tuition increase in 31 years.

The Council on Higher Education, the university's governing board, went into
emergency session Thursday and decreed that the classes be suspended until it
appeared that the situation was returning to normal.

The decision followed an incident late last month when shots were fired on the
campus in Rio Pedras, one of San Juan's four boroughs, and a maintenance worker
was wounded in the right arm.

University authorities contended the shots were fired by the students. Witnesses
said they appeared to come from a cluster of university guards, who are not
authorized to carry firearms.
Tuition Had Been Tripled

Few classes had been held at the campus, which has an enrollment of23,000, since
Sept. 3, when 3,000 students at an assembly cheered theGeneral Stude nt
Council's call for a strike after tuition was tripled.

The next day, students supporting the strike moved through campus buildings,
urging those attending classes to join the strike.  Professors and nonstriking
students said that some desks and chairs were overturned when students refused
to leave their classrooms, and that some doors were nailed shut with classes
still going on inside.

Efforts were made to resume classes on thre e occasions, but hostilities between
striking and nonstriking students and the university guards escalated from
demonstratio ns and shouting matches to the gunfire and stone-throwing melee.

No Support on Other Campuses

At the start of the strike, students from Rio Piedras visited each of the other
nine divisions of the 52,000-student public university system in an unsuccessful
effort to increase support.

The university authorities contend that the strike is unjustified because the
tuition increase to $15 per credit hour from $5, would be almost completely
absorbed for needy students by increases in Federal Basic Education Opportunity
Grants and local Government aid.

The university president, Ismael Almodovar, said the amount of financial aid
would rise in proportion to the tuition increase, so that each student would
have to pay only $50 more annually out of his own pocket than he did last year.

The authorities also argue that the tuition is still much lower than that of any
other public university in the United States.

Critical Report

One of the reasons the university raised the tuition was that an accrediting
team from the Middle States Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools issued
a report on deficiencies at the Rio Piedras campus. The team found severe
shortcomings in the physical plant and the library system and hinted that
accreditation might be withdrawn if the deficiencies were not corrected.

The student council agreed the increase was needed but disagreed on the way it
should be put into effect. A student referendum favored a system based on the
student's ability to pay. The university rejected the proposal as too
cumbersome.

The issue is complicated by the schism in the island, a United States
commonwealth, between those favoring statehood or independence and those who
prefer continuation of commonwealth status. The campus has a relatively high
number of radical students and faculty who favor independence. Those favoring a
commonwealth view the strike as an attempt by the radicals to embarrass the
university authorities and the Government.

The campus was the scene of many riots in the late 1960's and early 70's as
radical youths opposed to the Vietnam War and to the Reserve Officer Training
Corps program battled with police and R.O.T.C.  cadets. A woman student who
favored independence was killed in a riot in 1970. The next year, two police
officers and a R.O.T.C. cadet were killed and more than 60 persons were injured
in another riot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WAR HERO SEIZED AS DESERTER

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 72, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 452 words

DATELINE: GRAPEVINE, Tex., Oct. 3


For almost seven years Roque Vela gave his best to the United States Army. He
fought in one of Vietnam's most difficult battle zones until a hand grenade
knocked him out of the war.

Thirteen years later he endured the humiliation of being hauled out of a
birthday party by the Military Police, spread-eagled against a patrol car and
searched in front of his friends, and of being held four days while the Army
sorted through a bureaucratic blunder.

The Army thought Mr. Vela was a deserter, ignoring his protests and offer to
show proof of his honorable discharge.  ''I was in hell for 10 months in Vietnam
as a platoon sergeant in the Mekong Delta, one of the nastiest theaters of the
war,'' said Mr. Vela, who joined the Army in June 1961 and was discharged in
January 1968. ''I didn't have to go, but I felt it was my duty after all the
years that they had trained me. Now it makes me feel heartsick because I have
always felt it was an honor to serve in the Army, the same Army that could do
this thing.''

In a stop at Dallas-Fort Worth Airport Wednesday, while returning to his home in
Laredo, Tex., from a military jail at Fort Sill, Okla., the 37-year-old former
infantryman told his story.

Last Saturday, while he was at a birthday party, Military Police arrived with a
warrant for his arrest. After trying to convince them that it was a mistake and
that his honorable discharge certificate was at home, Mr. Vela was searched,
while his friends watched in shock, and driven to the Webb County Jail. He
repeatedly asked the Military Police to get in touch with the provost marshal's
office at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio where his record could be verified.

But Mr. Ve la was held in jail, having been informed that he had been consider
ed absent without leave since July 15, 1967.  He was rele ased Tuesday after a
lawyer, Joe Rubio, hired retired Sgt. Maj. Lui s Ladin to cut through red tape
and find the problem.  The Pentago n file on Mr. Vela had not been kept up to
date and a field file wa s burned with thousands of others in a 1973 fire at a
St. Louis rec ords center.

Mr. Vela was awarded the Army Commendation Medal for Valor for organizing his
troops under fire in an ambush in Vietnam. He was wounded by hand grenade
fragments in early July 1967 and was awarded a Purple Heart.

Senator John Tower of Texas, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee,
apologized yesterday to Mr. Vela, saying: ''On behalf of all Americans who
appreciate your valorous service in Vietnam, I wish to extend my apologies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
CEASE-FIRE IN SALVADOR

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR


Whatever you have heard about the troubles in El Salvador is doubtless part of
the truth.  There is an extreme gap between poor and rich, who made a deal with
the army to rule and get richer. The army canceled the election of Jose Napoleon
Duarte in 1972, and many date intense repression from that time.

There was a coup in 1979 that brought back Mr. Duarte as President, led to
proclamation (but not yet much implementation) of some basic reforms and
infuriated the ruthless far right. Leftist guerrillas, encouraged by the
Nicaraguan revolution, launched major attacks and received arms from Cuba to
supplement black-market weapons bought with kidnap ransom.

Security forces began wanton killings of anyone suspected of leftist sympathies
and of many innocents in a campaign of counterterror. Nobody is tried and
punished.

The ferocit y of the extremes has increased, polarizing issues and escalating a
bitter local power struggle into a test of U.S. will andintentions facing
pro-Soviet probes. Most peo ple live in anguish and yearn above all for
tranquility and work; bot h are slipping away.

How does all this add up? A regional United Nations official said, ''There is no
center in Central America.'' That's wrong in the sense that the great majority
of people would like nothing better than peaceful reform, but sadly true in the
sense that the majority cannot impose its will. Power remains with the guns.

The U.S. is blamed by all sides for their grievances and yet asked by all sides
for its support or indulgence. That seems to be the one unifying facto r; direct
American troop action would bring practically e verybody together against the
U.S. It gives an ironic assurance aga inst another Vietnam in Salvador.

Otherwise, the local adversaries are themselves divided into mistrustful
factions with varying goals. It seems evident that the only way to turn things
around is to try to detach the majority of moderates from their violent allies.
Nobody talks of ending the violence soon. The most optimistic backers of
President Duarte's election plan say the killing will go on for four or five
years, though at diminishing levels.

Mr. Duarte's trip to the U.S. last month was seen by opponents on both left and
right as a resounding failure. It is probably just as well for the cause of
peace, although people from the moderate left fear it will be taken by the army
to mean that Mr. Duarte can't deliver enough American support and might as well
be dumped in favor of an even harder line.

That seems unlikely. Even though they claim ''the people are with us,'' the
military doesn't suppose it could survive a complete cutoff by the U.S. But it
does show how tricky the situation is and how inevitably any American attitude,
including indifference, is a form of intervention. It has helped bring
acknowledgment of the real need for pursuing reform.

Msgr. Ricardo Urioste, Vicar General, pleads for a ''more humanistic American
policy. You back your friends, but you should worry less about regimes that
claim to be friendly and care more for human needs.''

He, and many others here, welcomed last week's Senate vote putting mild but
significantly cautionary strings on U.S. aid. It helps diminish illusions of
unconditional U.S. support for the right or hostility for the left.

But it's only a nudge. More creative realism is needed. There is a military
stalemate. Neither the guerrillas nor the Government can win by force of arms
unless circumstances change drastically, and they seem to know it.

Mr. Duarte says elections will change the context. But the left is certainly not
going to lay down arms and participate so long as it is targeted; even
internationally-certified ''free elections'' can't mean anything without the
opposition.

France and Mexico, with ambiguous acceptance by the left, call for negotiations
without saying on what. That doesn't seem likely either.  In any case, it's hard
to see how either elections or negotiations can settle anything while the
fighting rages. The first need is a cease-fire, not the proposed deposal of arms
by guerrillas, but a standstill in which both sides agree not to attack.

There is some interest in the idea within the Government, and some chary
interest on the left. But there is also resistance on both sides, partly with
self-serving arguments and partly because of the real question of how much
control each side has over its fighters.

All the more reason to insist. If the Government offers, the left would have a
harder time refusing elections as a suicide trap.  Moderates on both sides would
have something to argue for - access to the news media for the left, acceptance
of a political solution for the Government - instead of the interminable
arguments about who is to blame.

It isn't up to the U.S. to propose, but it can and should quietly urge Mr.
Duarte to offer a cease-fire as a sign of will for reconciliation. That would be
a first step.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HEALTH CENTERS START STUDY TO DETERMINE BIRTH DEFECTS' CAUSE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 405 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Oct. 4


Federal health officials have begun a $1.5 million study, involving 10,000
infants and their parents, to determine the cause of birth defects.

The study, which the officials say is the largest medical investigation in its
field ever attempted, is being conducted in the five-county Atlanta area, where
the national Centers for Disease Control have been compiling a register of
deformed infants for more than a decade.

When the extensive interviews are completed in about 18 months, and after the
data are analyzed, the health officials hope to know some of the factors that
cause the birth of deformed babies.

The study is financed by the centers, the Defense Department and the Veterans
Administration. The two agencies are involved because part of the study will
seek to determine if the defoliant Agent Orange, used during the Vietnam War,
may have caused some veterans to sire malformed babies.

Fathers' Contributions

''The big new thing we're getting is talking to fathers. said Dr.  David
Erickson, the study's chief. ''This is one of the first studies that has ever
looked at the contribution of fathers'' to birth defects.

The study will also include questions about major illnesses in the parents,
brothers and sisters, such as diabetes, epilepsy, heart disease and cancer.

The parents will also be asked about their occupations to determine ''what sort
of chemic als they may have been exposed to, and the kindsof medicine a nd drugs
they may have taken during pregnancy,'' Dr.  Erickson said .

Dr. Erickson estimated that 3 percent of the infants born annually in the United
States, or 100,000 each year, have major birth defects.

Investigators Traci ng Par ents

To trace the parents of 7,000 infants born since 1968 with major birth defects,
a team of 30 investigators is using telephone and city directories, voting
lists, post office forwarding addresses and personal interviews with neighbors.

The parents of 3,000 normal children will participate as controls.  ''We've been
doing a study like this for 10 years on a very small scale,'' Dr. Erickson said.
''In a sense, it's an expansion of what we've been doing all along. But of
course, we're adding questions about Agent Orange.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 7, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ANWAR EL-SADAT, THE DARING ARAB PIONEER OF PEACE WITH ISRAEL SADAT'S INNOVATIONS
SPRANG FROM HIS COURAGE AND FLEXIBILITY

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 5648 words


''Sadat! Sadat!'' tens of thousands of Cairenes chanted at the grinning figure
in the open limousine. ''Sadat! The man of peace!'' It was the night of Nov. 21,
1977. President Anwar el-Sadat had just returned from his epochal journey to
Jerusalem. Egypt's people were giving their frenzied approval to what his trip
had achieved - an Egyptian-Israeli thaw that set the stage for the peace treaty
of 1979.

What made Mr. Sadat into such a catalytic force in Middle Eastern history was a
display of courage and flexibility that transformed what had seemed to be an
average Arab officer-turned-potentate.

Unlike so many of his brother Arab leaders, he was willing to ignore past
Arab-Israeli hatreds. Unlike them all, he was daring enough to do what had been
unthinkable in the anguished world of Arab politics - to extend the hand of
peace to the Israeli foe. Reversing Egypt's longstanding policy, he proclaimed
his willingness to accept Israel's existence as a sovereign state.

Admiration and Hatred

Then, where so many Middle East negotiators had failed, he succeeded, along with
Presidents Carter and Reagan and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel, in
keeping the improbable rapprochement alive.

In the process he earned himself, in addition to the Nobel Peace Prize, the
admiration of Americans, Israelis and other supporters of a Middle East
settlement. But he also drew ou tpourings of hatred fromPalestinians and other
Arabs who felt he was a traitor to their struggles against Israel. And he was
unable t o quash dissidence in his impoverished, seething homeland.

He often said he wanted to bequeath democratic institutions to his people, but
in recent weeks he staged a dictatorial crackdown on militant Moslems and Coptic
Christians as well as secular political opponents. And he claimed imperially -
but hollowly, as it turned out - to have put an end to ''lack of discipline in
any way or form.''
The Treaty

Eleven days before Mr. Sadat made his trip to Jerusalem, he said in Cairo that
he was willing to go to ''the ends of the earth,'' and even to the Israeli
Parliament, in the cause of peace. The Israeli Government made known that he was
welcome in Jerusalem, and after complex negotiations he flew there, although a
state of war still existed between the two nations.

His eyes were moist and his lips taut with suppressed emotion as he arrived, but
his Arabic was firm and resonant when, hours later, he told the hushed Israeli
Parliament, ''If you want to live with us in this part of the world, in
sincerity I tell you that we welcome you among us with all security and
safety.''

Praising Mr. Sadat's initiative, Prime Minister Begin said, ''We, the Jews, know
how to appreciate such courage.'' Mr. Sadat's flexibility, he said later,
stemmed from his solitary confinement as a political prisoner in cell 54 of
Cairo Central Prison in 1947 and 1948. ''My contemplation of life and human
nature in that secluded place taught me that he who cannot change the very
fabric of his thought will never be able to change reality and will never,
therefore, make any progress,'' he wrote in his memoirs, ''In Search of
Identity,'' which appeared in 1978, eight years after he assumed the Presidency.


Pact Signed at White House

His willingness to make such a change led to the treaty that, after many snags,
he and Prime Minister Begin signed at the White House on March 26, 1979. Before
reaching agreement Mr. Sadat and Mr. Begin had drawn-out and sometimes
acrimonious negotiations, for which they were the joint winners of the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1978.

The treaty provided that Israel return to Egypt in phases the entire Sinai
Peninsula, which the Israelis seized in the 1967 war. It also envisioned
internal autonomy for the Palestinian Arabs of the West Bank of the Jordan River
under continued Israeli control.

The Egyptia n and Israeli Governments were helped and prodded by theNixon and
Car ter Administrations, and Henry A. Kissinger, after many meetings with Mr.
Sadat, wrote that the Egyptian leader ''possessed that combinat ion of insight
and courage which marks a great statesman.'' The former Secretary of State
continued in his book, ''White House Years'': ''He had the boldness to go to a
war no one thought he co uld sustain; the moderation to move to peace
immediatelyafterward; an d the wisdom to reverse attitudes hardened by
decades.''

Used Harmony as a Technique

In dealings with Israel and the United States, Mr. Sadat strove to create a
harmonious mood that would make it difficult for others to disagree with him.
His most audacious use of that technique was the Jerusalem visit.

That gesture and the treaty with Israel brought him hatred and vituperation from
many Arab leaders. There was particular outrage because the treaty did not
provide a timetable for full selfdetermination for the West Bank Palestinians
that would lead eventually to an independent Palestinian state.

Self-determination was originally Mr. Sadat's minimum demand; when he settled
for less, he found himself virtually isolated in the Arab world. Saudi Arabia's
leaders, with whom he had achieved warm relations, cut back their aid to the
Egyptian armed forces and the economy, which Mr. Sadat had tried to strengthen
by encouraging business.

The Saudi action made Egypt more dependent than ever on support from the United
States, with which Mr. Sadat had also been careful to cultivate bonds of
friendship. Under his predecessor, Gamal Abdel Nasser, Cairo's relations with
the Americans, as with the Saudis, were hostile much of the time. Mr. Sadat won
moral and political support from Washington as well as large-scale economic and
military aid, and in 1975 he became the first Egyptian President to make a state
visit to the United States. He returned again during the treaty negotiations,
and President Carter went to Egypt, where throngs hailed him and his host.

Treaty Welcomed by Egyptians

Many of the 40 million Egyptians, having gone through four painful and expensive
wars with Israel, were enthusiastic about the peace treaty. Throngs of
well-wishers danced, waved signs and threw ros e petals in celebration.

Under the treaty Israel's withdrawal of its civilian and military forces from
Sinai was to be carried out in stages over three years.  Two-thirds of the area
was to be handed back within nine months after the exchange of formal
ratification documents. In return for the Israeli pullback, Mr. Sadat agreed to
establish peace. After the nine-month withdrawal was finished, the two
Governments were to take up ''normal and friendly relations'' in the diplomatic,
economic and cultural spheres, among others. The early withdrawals were
completed, and the final phase is scheduled for next April.

''This is certainly one of the happiest moments of my life,'' Mr.  Sadat, deeply
moved, said at the signing ceremony. ''In all the steps I took I was merely
expressing the will of a nation. I am proud of my people and of belonging to
them.''
Expels Soviet Advisers

Another of Mr. Sadat's major shifts in policy was his departure from Nasser's
longstanding pro-Soviet stance. In July 1972 he abruptly ordered the withdrawal
of the 25,000 Soviet military specialists and advisers in Egypt. By so doing, he
later wrote, ''I wanted to tell the whole world that we are always our own
masters.''

The changes in the relationship with Washington and Moscow were made after Mr.
Sadat had concluded that the Arabs could not achieve a satisfactory end to their
confrontation with Israel as long as they were allied closely with the Soviet
Union while Israel had the allout support of the United States.

He was able to make such sharp policy shifts in part because for much of his
later tenure as President, his power did not seem to be seriously challenged at
home. A career officer and longtime confidant of Nasser, he was named Vice
President in 1969, came out ahead in a brief power struggle after Nasser's death
in 1970 and was formally made President by a rubber-stamp vote of members of the
Arab Socialist Union, the only legal political organization. He consolidated and
enlarged his power in the spring of 1971 when, with the aid of the army, he
forestalled what he said was a coup and arrested his opponents.

Called Himself a Peasant

Mr. Sadat was widely though not universally popular with the Egyptian people,
with whom, in his highly emotional way, he felt a warm and almost mystic bond.
In ''In Search of Identity,'' he proudly called himself ''a peasant born and
brought up on the banks of the Nile.''

Early in his presidency, Mr. Sadat enhanced his popula rity by eliminating m any
of the police-state controls that Nasser had relied on to keep hi mself in power
in the years after the officers' revolt that brought down the monarchy in 1952.

In 1973 Mr. Sadat did much to build national self-respect when he ordered
Egyptian troops to cross the Suez Canal; they managed to overrun the heavily
fortified Israeli positions on the east bank within a few hours. That confidence
lingered although the Israelis counterattacked, putting a large tank force on
the west bank.

As an administrator, he concerned himself with broad lines of policy and for the
most part left it to his subordinates to carry it out. Though an emotional man,
he could conceal his feelings and be devious. He repeatedly lied his way out of
trouble when he was a young officer plotting a military revolt, and as President
he pulled off a master stroke of deception when he concealed his preparations
for the 1973 war, which began with a surprise attack on Israel.

Mr. Sadat had many quirks. He disliked offices and rarely appeared at Abdin
Palace, Cairo's equivalent of the White House, preferring to work in his modest
villa and in Government-owned rest houses around the country. He wore elegantly
cut British-style suits, though even as President he liked to stroll around his
native village in a long Arab shirt. He never learned to dance. He could be the
high-toned statesman one minute, relishing his associations with other world
leaders, and the humdrum homebody the next, always beginning the day with a dose
of Eno's Fruit Salts, a British-made aid to digestion.
First Steps

Mohammed Anwar el-Sadat was born Dec. 25, 1918, in Mit Abul Kom, a cluster of
mud-brick buildings in Minufiya Province between Cairo and Alexandria. He was
one of the 13 children of Mohammed el-Sadat, a Government clerk, and his
part-Sudanese wife, a heritage manifest in the boy's skin, darker than the
average Egyptian's.

Minufiya lies in the fertile Nile Delta, its irrigated fields producing rich
crops of flax and cotton. In those lush surroundings young Anwar's early years
passed happily. He wrote later that he had especially relished the sunrise hour
''when I went out with scores of boys and men, young and old, taking our cattle
and beasts of burden to the fields.''

His first schooling was at the hands of a kindly Islamic cleric, Sheik
Abdul-Hamid, who insti lled in him a dee p and lasting faith in Islam; as an
adult Mr. Sadat bore a dark mark on his forehead, the result of repeatedly
touching his head to the floor in prayer.

Too Poor to Buy Store Bread

In 1925 the father was transferred to Cairo, and the family moved into a small
house on the outskirts of the capital, not far from Kubba Palace, one of the
residences of Egyptian kings. Anwar gave early evidence of the audacity he
repeatedly showed in later life, stealing apricots from the royal orchard.

Though the elder Mr. Sadat rose to be a senior clerk, the family was poor, so
poor that it could not afford to buy bakery bread. In his memoirs President
Sadat said that his early experience of village life, with its ''fraternity,
cooperation and love,'' gave him the self-confidence to make his way in the big
city, ''It deepened my feeling of inner superiority, a feeling which has never
left me and which, I came to realize, is an inner power independent of all
material resources.''

In time the proud schoolboy, like other idealistic Egyptians of his generation,
came to have a burning political desire: he wanted his country freed of the
control of Britain, which had maintained troops there and exercised sway in
other ways since the decline of Ottoman Turkish power late in the 19th century.

Wanting to play a role in Egypt's future, Mr. Sadat decided to become an
officer. Despite his family's lack of influence, he managed to gain admission to
the Royal Military Academy, which was once a preserve of the aristocracy but had
begun taking cadets from the middle and lower classes. Graduating in 1938, he
was assigned to a signal corps installation near the capital. From that central
location, as he later told it, he became active in the formation of an
organization of officers who wanted to mount an armed revolt against the British
presence.
Britain as the Main Foe

When World War II broke out, Captain Sadat continued to regard Britain as the
main enemy and took part in a clandestine attempt to fly a former Chief of
Staff, Gen. Aziz el-Masri, out of the country after the Germans had sent a
message asking him to proceed to Iraq to work against British interests there.
The plane crashed, the attempt failed and Captain Sadat was arrested and
interrogated but later was released for lack of evidence.

Undeterred, Captain Sadat made contact with two Nazi agents who passed the
evenings watching the dancers at the Kit Kat, a leading Cairo nightclub. Their
heavy spending brought them under surveillance, they were arrested and
interrogat ed, and they implicated th eir contact. As a result a swarm of
British and Egyptian dete ctives and intelligence officers searched Captain
Sadat's home.  His hidden cache of homemade explosives went undetected, b ut he
was arrested and sent to a succession of jails.  While in jail , he profited
from the time by polishing his English andlearning Germ an.

In 1944 Captain Sadat went on a hunger strike and was transferred to a prison
hospital, where he dodged his guard, jumped into a friend's car and escaped. He
then grew a beard and lived as a fugitive for a year, helping for a time with
work on a resthouse being built for King Farouk, who later was to be ousted by
the junta of which Captain Sadat was a part.

Free to Plot Once Again

With the end of the war came the lifting of the martial-law regulations under
which Captain Sadat had been detained, enabling him to resume his real identity
in freedom. He also resumed plotting against the British and their Egyptian
supporters. After a fellow conspirator assassinated Amin Osman Pasha, an
aristocrat who favored the British presence, Captain Sadat was tried as a
conspirator and acquitted in 1948.

PICK UP FIRST AND LAST ADD OBIT

He worked for a while in a Cairo publishing house and in 1950 got himself
reinstated in the army. He was soon promoted, thanks to help from the dissident
officers' clandestine network, the Free Officers Organization, which had been
growing in size and power under the leadership of an old friend, Lieutenant
Colonel Nasser. The colonel summoned Major Sadat to a rendezvous in Cairo on
July 22, 1952, saying the long-awaited uprising, now focused on King Farouk, was
to take place soon. When Nasser did not appear, the major took his wife to the
movies. Arriving home late in the evening, they found a note from Nasser saying
operations were beginning that night and directing Major Sadat to join the
revolutionaries.

''My heart leapt,'' Mr. Sadat recalled in one of his books, ''Revolt on the
Nile.'' ''I tore off my civilian clothes and threw on my uniform. In five
minutes I was at the wheel of my car.''

At army headquarters, where the rebels had taken control, Nasser told him to
take over the Cairo radio at dawn and to broadcast a proclamation announcing the
coup. Major Sadat carried out that historic ta sk after waiting for the daily
rea ding from the Koran to be completed.

The revolution led to the exile of Farouk, the withdrawal of British troops from
Egypt and, before long, the emergence of Nasser as strongman and President.
Was Underestimated

Although Mr. Sadat filled high posts during the Nasser era, his abilities were
underestimated by many influential men in the Nasser entourage. For more than a
decade he was given a succession of jobs that were highly visible but of
secondary importance. He served as a member of the Revolutionary Command
Council, secretary general of an Islamic congress, editor of two newspapers,
minister of state in the Cabinet; deputy chairman, chairman and speaker of the
National Assembly and chairman of the Afro-Asian Solidarity Council.

When Nasser named Mr. Sadat Vice President, it was widely thought that he got
the job because it was largely ceremonial and had no real power, but supporters
of Mr. Sadat have contended that Nasser chose him to be his successor. Nasser,
at odds with many other longtime associates, retained warm relations with Mr.
Sadat.

Upon Nasser's death of a heart attack, Mr. Sadat, as the only Vice President,
automatically became Acting President under the Constitution. In that office and
in his first months as President he had to share power in a collective
leadership with others; some colleagues supported him for the presidency because
they thought he could be manipulated.

In those first weeks many Egyptians, especially students and young
intellectuals, found it difficult to take him seriously. With his grin, his
fancy suits and his frequent hollow-sounding vows to wage war on Israel, he did
not seem to be a strong and purposeful leader.
Power

He showed his strength of will when, after a few months, he moved to consolidate
his power by dismissing and imprisoning two of the most powerful figures in the
regime, Vice President Ali Sabry, who had close ties with Soviet officials, and
Sharawy Gomaa, the Interior Minister, who controlled the secret police.

Mr. Sadat enhanced his popularity by displaying an intuitive sense of what the
people wanted. He was doing what they wanted when he cut back the powers of the
hated secret police, when he ousted the Soviet military experts and when he
prepared for war with Israel.  Nevertheless, Golda Meir, Israel's Prime Minister
when he took office, correctly appraised him, she later wrote, as a ''reasonable
man who might soberly consider the benefits'' of ending the confronta tion with
Israel.

Early in 1973 Mr. Sadat decided to go to war against Israel. He was being
criticized by students and others as an ineffective leader, and he concluded
that it was necessary to break the Egyptian-Israeli deadlock. ''If we don't take
our case into our own hands, there will be no movement,'' he said in an
interview. ''The time has come for a shock. The resumption of the battle is now
inevitable.''

'Landmark' for Egyptians

After Moscow approved a limited Egyptian invasion of Sinai and after more Soviet
arms arrived, Mr. Sadat ordered the attack on Oct.  6. Egyptian troops surged
across the canal and Syrian troops struck Israel from their side. In the
fighting that followed, the Syrians were thrown back and the Israelis
counterattacked fiercely, encircling Suez and carving out a broad bridgehead
west of the canal. Despite Israel's strong showing, Mr. Sadat, in his memoirs,
maintained that ''the Egyptian military performance was a landmark in world
military history'' and that ''if the United States hadn't intervened in the war
and fully supported Israel, the situation could have been far different.''

The war spurred Washington to work to ease tensions in the Middle East; Mr.
Sadat was soon visited by Mr. Kissinger. The two hit it off from the first and,
Mr. Sadat wrote, began ''a relationship of mutual understanding culminating and
crystallizing in what we came to describe as a 'peace process.' '' Before long
Mr. Kissinger was able to work out a disengagement agreement between Egypt and
Israel that allowed the Egyptians to take back a strip of Sinai. Mr. Sadat
welcomed American participation and said later, ''No one else except the United
States can play this role of mediator between two sides that harbor intense hate
for one another - a gulf of bad blood, violence and massacres.''

The agreement, signed in January 1974, was followed by months of ''shuttle
diplomacy'' by Mr. Kissinger and by a second limited Egyptian-Israeli accord in
September 1975. Efforts toward a more comprehensive peace agreement bore no
fruit in the next months, however, although the United States and the Soviet
Union agreed on Oct. 1, 1977, on principles to govern a Geneva conference on the
Middle East. Syria continued to resist such a conference.

Need for a New Approach

At t hat point Mr. Sadat, not wanting to let Moscow and Damascus determine the
pace of events, decided that a new approach was needed. Disregarding objections
from his advi sers, he made the trip to Jerusalem. He told the Israeli Parliment
t hat Egypt's willingness to ''welcome you among us'' amounted to ''a d ecisive
historical change,'' but he continued to insist that the Israelis withdraw from
occupied Arab land and recognize what he call ed the rights of the Palestinians.
He claimed a new-found friendsh ip with Mr. Begin and set in motion the first
high-level Egyptian-I sraeli peace talks.

When Mr. Sadat returned to Cairo, he told his people that ''all barriers of
doubt, mistrust and fear were shattered.'' But the negotiations bogged down over
differences on the Palestinians and other issues; by January 1978 they were
deadlocked, with Mr. Sadat denouncing the Israelis as stiff-necked. That
deadlock prevailed until Mr. Sadat met with Mr. Begin and President Carter in
September 1978 at the Camp David conference called by Mr. Carter. Two weeks of
talks produced signed agreements on what was called ''a framework for peace.''

After further efforts Mr. Carter flew to Jerusalem and then to Cairo on March
13, 1979, with compromise proposals to break yet another deadlock, and Mr. Sadat
approved them quickly in a meeting at a Cairo airport. Later that month Mr.
Sadat and Mr. Begin signed the treaty, ending 30 years of Egyptian-Israeli
confrontation. ''Let us work together,'' Mr. Sadat said, paraphrasing the
Prophet Isaiah, ''until the day comes when they beat their swords into
plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks.''

In the hard-line Arab protest against the treaty, 17 Arab nations adopted
political and economic sanctions against his Government. Yet his isolation in
the Arab world did not undercut his domestic support; he deftly reaped political
profit from the isolation by underscoring the idea, widespread in Egypt, that
other Arabs had grown wealthy while the Egyptians had borne the burden of the
four wars.

Economy Displayed Strength

His popularity benefited also from the fairly strong condition of the economy,
which had seemed on the brink of disaster after Egypt's catastrophic defeat in
the 1967 war. By late 1979 the economic growth rate had reached 9 percent a year
and was one of the highest in the developing world, thanks largely to more than
$1 billion a year in American aid.

President Sadat's relations with the Americans and the Israelis, despite some
intense friction, remained relatively harmonious in the months after the signing
of the treaty. That good will paid off when, as a gesture of friendship, Mr.
Begin fulfilled one provision of the treaty ahead of time, returning a
580-square-mile tract of Sinai to Egypt on Nov.  15, 1979, instead of on Jan.
25, as scheduled. Yet no real progress was made in months of Egyptian-Israeli
negotiations on home rule for the Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip.

Early in 1980 Mr. Sadat held inconclusive talks with Mr. Begin at Aswan, in
upper Egypt. Israeli forces withdrew from more of Sinai, leaving two-thirds of
the area evacuated. The Israeli-Egyptian border was declared open, and the two
countries exchanged ambassadors. In March 1980 Mr. Sadat drew new criticism at
home and in unfriendly Arab capitals when the deposed Shah of Iran, who was ill,
moved to Cairo, accepting a longstanding invitation.

As the new decade got under way, President Sadat seemed confident of his
policies, but events seemed to have taken a somewhat unfavorable turn. Cairo's
isolation in the Arab world and elsewhere in the third world was galling, and
the almost total reliance on Washington for food, aid and weapons was a source
of concern.Inflation was running at a rate of 30 percent a year, there were
signs of increasing repression, and Israel's policy of multiplying settlements
on the occupied West Bank intensified pessimism.

In April 1980 President Sadat visited Washington to discuss the Israeli
settlements with President Carter. From there he denounced the Israeli policy as
''unfounded, ill-conceived and illegal.''
Dissent

In the final months of Mr. Sadat's life, as his intricate and sometimes stormy
dialogue with Israel continued, there were repeated expressions of internal
opposition to his rule. They continued, and mounted, despite his general
popularity and his continued use of such means as government food-subsidies to
dampen disconent.

Early this year Egypt's leftist National Unionist Progressive Party publicly
denounced Mr. Sadat's policies toward Israel. ''This so-called normalization
with the Israeli enemy was done at the expense of the Arabs and was opposed by a
growing number of Egyptians,'' a party statement said.

In June a Government prosecutor said a former Egyptian Chief of Staff, Lieut.
Gen. Saad Eddin el-Shazli, and 18 other Egyptian dissidents living abroad had
plotted to overthrow Mr. Sadat. They were said to have been given $2.8 million
by Libya at Syria's urging. And the head of the Egyptian Bar Association
complained that Mr.  Sadat's regime was trying to dismember the as sociation's
leadership because it had opposed the peace treaty with Israel.

Yet Mr. Sadat continued to give much of his attention to foreign affairs. In
June he met inconclusively with Mr. Begin, for the first time in 17 months. In
the meeting in an abandoned restaurant at Sharm el Sheik in Sinai, the Israeli
leader rejected Mr. Sadat's appeal to halt Israeli attacks on Palestinian
guerrilla bases in Lebanon.

Denounced Bombing of Iraq

A few days later Mr. Sadat was denouncing Israel for its bombing of an Iraqi
nuclear reactor, which he called an ''unlawful, provocative'' act. It was
embarrassing to him because Mr. Begin had told him nothing about it.

On Aug. 3 Egypt and Israel signed an agremeent establishing a 2,500-member
international peacekeeping force in Sinai to police their peace treaty. On Aug.
5 and 6 Mr. Sadat held friendly but inconclusive talks with President Reagan in
Washington. And on Aug.  25 and 26 he and Mr. Begin met yet again, this time in
the Egyptian port of Alexandria, to try to resolve problems that had delayed
normalization of relations.

But then Mr. Sadat turned his full attention to internal affairs, evidently
acting in response to information about the extent of dissidence in his
perennially unstable land. Citing Moslem and other opposition to his regime, he
departed markedly from the largely velvet-glove treatment of opponents that had
characterized his 11 years of rule.

He cracked down hard, detaining 1,600 opponents, mostly Moslem militants, partly
in response to bloody rioting in June between Moslems and members of Egypt's
Coptic Christian minority.  After a hastily called referendum, his Government
reported that 99.45 percent of the voters endorsed its measures to curb secular
as well as religious dissidence. Moslem dissidents resented the rapprochement
with Israel and wanted a more Islamic cast to Egypt's government.
'Suffering' From Democracy

At a news conference Sept. 9, Mr. Sadat made a wry reference to his country's
heritage of violence and to the opposition to his rule. To a foreign reporter
who asked an impertinent question, he said, ''In other times I would have shot
you, but it is democracy I am really suffering from as much as I am suffering
from the opposition.''

Also last month Mr. Sadat accused a dozen former Egyptian officials of
''conniving'' with t he Soviet Union to destabilize his Government. H e ordered
the expulsion of more than 1,000 Soviet citizens, inc luding the Soviet
Ambassador, Vladimir P. Polyakov.

The Government-supervised Egyptian press reported that Egyptian intelligence had
uncovered anti-Government plotting by Soviet agents in league with Egyptian
religious extremists, leftists, Nasserites, educators, journalists and others.

Later in the month - even as officials of Egypt, Israel and the United States
held talks in Cairo seeking a plan for self-rule for Palestinians - Mr. Sadat's
Government took further action to quell dissidence. Among other measures,
uniformed guards in university campuses were reinforced. A sweeping
investigation of the bureaucracy was decreed.

Said Indiscipline Had Ended

In a widely quoted speech, Mr. Sadat asserted, in what proved to be a display of
overconfidence, that all of Egypt's internal indiscipline had come to a halt.

''Lack of discipline in any way or form,'' he said, in a two-hour televised
address, ''in the streets, in the Government, in the university, in the
secondary schools, in the factory, in the public sector, in the private sector,
this all has ended, it has ended.''

In Israel, however, a long-time observer of Mr. Sadat was already speaking of
the possibility that his work might be snuffed out. The Israeli Chief of Staff,
Lieut. Gen. Raphael Eitan, said bleakly, ''There are troubles in Egypt, and it
is possible that President Sadat will go and everything will come to an end.''

Mr. Sadat was divorced from his first wife, who was from his native village;
they had three daughters. His second wife, Jihan, has played a strong role in
public affairs, particularly concerning the condition of women and children. The
four children of his second marriage are a son, Gamal, named for Nasser, and
three daughters, Lubna, Noha and Jihan.

''In Egypt, personalities have always been more important than political
programs.'' - ''Revolt on the Nile,'' 1957.

''Don't ask me to make diplomatic relations with them. Never.  Never. Leave it
to the coming generations to decide that, not me.'' - On Israel in 1970, a few
months before he became President.

''T he situation here - mark my words - will be worse than Vietnam.'' - In a
magazine interview, July 19 73.

''We have always felt the sympathy of the world, but we would prefer the respect
of the world to sympathy without respect.'' - In a speech to the People's
Assembly after the first attack of the Yom Kippur war, Oct. 6, 1973.

''Let every girl, let every woman, let every mother here - and there in my
country - know we shall solve all our problems through negotiations around the
table rather than starting war.'' - During his visit to Israel, November 1977.

''I have a great ally in Israel that I depend upon. Do you know who? The Israeli
mother.'' - Commenting on the vote of approval by Israel's Parliament of the
peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, March 22, 1979.

''In all the steps I took I was not performing a personal mission.  I was merely
expressing the will of a nation. I am proud of my people and of belonging to
them.

''Today a new dawn is emerging out of the darkness of the past.  ''Let us work
together until the day comes when they beat their swords into plowshares and
their spears into pruning hooks.'' - At the peace treaty signing between Egypt
and Israel at the White House, March 26, 1979.

''There will be no barriers between our peoples, no more anxiety or insecurity,
not more suffering or suspicion.'' - Meeting with Menachem Begin at Beersheba,
May 27, 1979.

''It is democracy I am really suffering from as much as I am suffering from the
opposition.'' -Speaking to foreign journalists of unrest in Egypt, Sept. 9,
1981.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Anwar el-Sadat photo of Sadat as Cadet in 1938
photo of Sadat with Gamal Abdel Nasser in 1952 photo of Sadat with Muammar
el-Qaddafi in 1971 photo of Sadat with Leonid I. Brezhnev in 1971 photo of Sadat
at Al Aksa Mosque in 1977 photo of Sadat with his grandson Sherif photo of Sadat
with President Reagan photo of Sadat on trial in 1948

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 7, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 947 words


T HERE is an agency besides the Defense Department where the budget is actually
being increased.  And there is joy at the Patent Office at the modest 4.8
percent gain, for the money will eventually help to cut into a backlog of
applications from inventors who now wait for two years for their Federal
patents.

''This isn't luck, this is common sense,'' said Isaac Fleischman, director of
information for the Patent Office, delighted at the Reagan Administration's
decision to spare the agency the general 12 percent cut and turn around past
policies of attrition that had severely shrunk the staff of electrical,
mechanical and chemical engineers. Resulting delays left not only inventors but
also American business executives waiting for the latest discoveries.

The danger of delay is redundancy, said Mr. Fleischman, who has something of Ben
Franklin's talent for aphorism. ''Progress is based on knowledge, '' he
declared, noting that past policies had led to a backlog of mo re than 200,000
patent applications. ''The inventor is free to explo it his discovery, but the
real value of inventions is what they tea ch to the people waiting out there.''

The plan is to use the increase (in a total budget of $124 million) to hire and
train 180 additional engineers for the 850-member staff and slowly cut the
patent wait to a more reasonable 18 months. That may not be the bureaucratic
equivalent of the wheel, but it would be progress. ''You can't have people out
there spending time and money only to discover America all over again,'' Mr.
Fleischman declared.

A FTER 24 years in Congress and millions of dollars in campaign fund raising,
Representative Dan Rostenkowski is finally holding his first fund-raising event
in the District of Columbia, an inbred locale usually favored by politicians
since it is where the lobbyists and the money are. The Illinois Democrat is
treating the occasion as a pol-bites-donkey news event, sending out invitations
to come and contribute to the politician who held out longer ''than any other
U.S. Congressman in history.'' His office does not describe the event as a loss
of innocence. Rather, it says that Mr.  Rostenkowski's prominent position as
chairman of the Ways and Means Committee is keeping him busier with outside
speaking invitations, cutting his opportunity for fund raising back home in
Illinois.  ''Help break the record,'' the invitation exults, at $500 a head.

A MONG those not called to power are a dozen or so people of disparate gripes
and grievances who have been spending the warm fall days protesting, staring,
slouching and variously yearning outside the north fence of the White House.
Signs and photographs have been set up on the fence by a reclusive woman who
keeps her face hidden by a large rag bag and who says the Government is
torturing her with ''chemical radiation.''

Near her is a man who says he does not know what she is about but who is intent
on showing gunshot scars on his arm and head and insisting that he and other
Vietnam veterans so wounded have been neglected by the Government they served.
Next comes a variety of signs of mockery leaning against the iron picket fence.
(''If Reagan is the actor, who is the director and producer? How do you rate the
show?'' ''Peace is coming and there's no defense.'')

More willing than others to talk with watchful pedestrians is a hard-staring
young man with a bushy beard reading a red-covered pamphlet entitled ''As a Man
Thinketh.'' He gets passersby into arguments that easily turn angry.

''My anger at this Government is justified,'' he tells a man pausing with a
bicycle.  ''Your anger is not a general f act; it's on ly your experience,'' the
biker responds.  Nearby, limousines keep gliding past the gu ard post onto the
White House grounds, carrying people called to powe r for meetings an Awacs,the
budget, nuclear missiles and other unsett led questions.

''This is a blight, a blight,'' a tourist with a camera declares of the motley
warren of First Amendment life as the people squat campground style in the
photographer's line of sight to the White House.

Around the south side of the fence, the view is serene as a postcard. ''These
grounds have been the scene of fashionable, sedate receptions,'' announces a
taped message piped from lawn loudspeakers at tourists. The endless tape plays
music, a brassy rendition of ''This Is My Country.''

I N caucus there is candor. Senate Democrats recently met privately and wrestled
with the problem of how to pick someone as the party's chief spokesman without
immediately turning the chosen politician into a Presidential aspirant.

''Use Dale Bumpers,'' one Senator prescribed, speaking of the senior Senator
from Arkansas who was in the room. ''He's a terrific speaker and he's never
going to be President.'' Francis X. Clines Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 7, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
ON THE FRONT LINES

BYLINE: By Albin Krebs and Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 279 words


For some lawyers, it seems, litigation is not enough.  Jack Smith, for example,
a 36-year-old Pittsburgh lawyer, is giving up his practice to join the Venice
(Fla.) Police Department. Mr.  Smith, who was decorated for his service in
Vietnam, said he had decided on the step only after he found there were no
immediate openings on the Pittsburgh force. He said that the move would mean a
drastic cut in his $26,000 annual income but that it would be well worth it.

''I've always wanted to become a police officer,'' he said. ''I don't like to
see criminals go unpunished.'' Neither, it seems, does Randy Ludacer, a Florida
lawyer, who has a more daring plan to combat criminals, especially the drug
smugglers who operate off the Florida Keys.

Mr. Ludacer has asked Congress to grant him letters of marque and reprisal,
documents that would authorize him to operate as a licensed privateer against
the drug fleets in return for a share of the booty.

So far, Congress has not acted on his request, but after word got around that he
had made his application, the lawyer said, 50 volunteer pirates sought to sign
up for his venture, including professional soldiers of fortune, an electronics
expert and a Coast Guard officer who wants to continue to chase drug smugglers
after he retires.

Mr. Ludacer is now having second thoughts about his proposal.  Some of the
volunteers, he said, come from the ''lunatic fringe.'' Albin Krebs

Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 8, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

POLISH UNION ADOPTS ECONOMIC PROGRAM

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 515 words

DATELINE: GDANSK, Poland, Oct. 7


Solidarity union delegates approved a two-year national program today to solve
Poland's economic ills, issued a call for a cut in military spending and
threatened a national strike over price incre ases.

The delegates unanimously adopted a resolution threatening a warning strike
within two weeks over the Government's consumer price policy. It demanded
immediate talks on the issue, including the doubling of cigarette prices.

Sources at the union convention said details of the strike would be worked out
by the newly elected executive commission.  The economic program rejected the
Government's proposals and urged adoption of a union package aimed at
stabilizing the economy by gradually introducing a new retail price system,
cutting military spending, freezing savings and revamping the currency to halt
inflation. The union called for a national referendum on the economic package.

Union Wants Ex-Officials Tried

The union also dealt with foreign policy, education, health protection and
environmental protection.  ''It is like a new constitution approved by the
genuine representatives of the 10-million member union,'' a delegate said.  The
program called for a national tribunal to punish members of the previous
Communist regime of Edward Gierek, which was accused of having caused the
economic crisis. It said the union would form such a tribunal if the authorities
did not prosecute state and party officials by the end of this year.

The program said Poland was a ''country of self-management,'' suggesting that
the union might push for changes in other fields to establish a distinctive
system of government not modeled on Soviet Communism.

The Polish Government had warned that future relations with the union would
depend on the shape of the program adopted. The Moscow radio said today that the
convention was a ''political gathering'' designed to wreck Communism.

In a sixth round of voting, the delegates finally filled all seats on the new
executive commission. Bogdan Lis, a member of the outgoing body, was re-elected
after having failed to win a seat in the five previous rounds.

----

Potential Defendants Lis ted

GDANSK, Oct. 7 (AP) - Solidarity union officials said the proposed tribunal
could possibly involve Edward Gierek, the former party leader, and Piotr
Jaroszewicz, former Prime Minister. They were stripped of their party
membership, awards and other honors at party congress in July in an attempt to
appease public anger.

Although the union's tribunal could not ''sentence'' defendants, it seems to go
beyond the role of Poland's courts, and represents a new challenge to the
Government from the independent union.

Bronislaw Geremek, a union adviser, said the tribunal would resemble public
hearings held in the past decade to condemn the United States for reported
atrocities during the Vietnam War.

''Unless the investigation on these cases is begun by the end of the year, the
national commission will set up a public tribunal which, following a public
investigation, will judge and censure the guilty,'' Mr. Geremek said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 8, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Arms Impact On Inflation

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 13, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 242 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7


The Reagan Administration's military buildup could contribute to inflation ''in
the very short run,'' but it was not expected to have a major effect on consumer
prices, Murray L. Weidenbaum, the chairman of the President's Council of
Economic Advisers, said today.

Defense spending can contribute to inflationary pressures ''when prices in the
economy are slow to adjust to a relative shift in the economy's pattern of
demand away from civilian products and toward defense production,'' Mr.
Weidenbaum told a Congressional joint economic subcommittee.

That happens primarily when ''overly rapid and unforeseen growth in defense
requirements creates bottlenecks in the supplying industries,'' he said.

But while the Administration's military program is a major one, Mr. Weidenbaum
added, ''it is a long-term expansion and can be foreseen and planned for in the
private sector.'' He said, ''Thus, I believe the dangers on this score have been
overstated.''

Mr. Weidenbaum said that despite the military buildup, outlays by the Defense
Department were projected to rise only from 5.5 percent of the gross national
product in the fiscal year 1981, to 7 percent in the fiscal year 1986.

By contrast, he said, military spending accounted for 8.6 percent of the G.N.P.
in 1962 and 9 percent in 1968, the peak year of American involvement in the
Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WEAPONRY WINDFALL? MAYBE

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1981 words


On paper, President Reagan's proposal to spend $180 billion to revitalize the
nation's strategic nuclear deterrent should provide a torrent of profits for
thousands of military contractors and subcontractors over the next six years.

That's on paper. In the topsy-turvy reality of military contracting, a slightly
different picture emerges. Although the potential for a big windfall is present,
arms industry officials and analysts caution that investors should not expect
any real impact on the bottom line to result from the President's program until
the mid-1980's - at the earliest.

Even then, company earnings will be at the mercy of a host of imponderables that
have traditionally stalked the armaments trade: cost overruns, sudden shifts in
the weapons mix, international agreements limiting nuclear arms and fears that
excessive military spending is throwing the budget and the economy out of
kilter.
Psychological Effect Noted

''The immediate impact on the defense industry of the President's strategic
program will be more psychological than anything else,'' said Alan Benasuli,
aerospace expert for Drexel Burnham Lambert.''Research and development programs
will not be completed until 1984, with the bulk of the profitable production not
due to take place until the period of 1985-88. That's moons away. A lot can
happen in between.''

The President's proposals now being debated by Congress call for an estimated
$180.3 billion in spending on a six-year strategic military buildup, which
analysts say could eventually rain down orders on as many as 100,000 companies -
from aerospace giants like Rockwell International, Boeing, Lockheed, Northrop,
Eaton, Martin Marietta and General Electric to local suppliers of bearings and
bolts.

The key programs sought by Mr. Reagan are the manufacture of 100 B-1 long-range
bombers, more powerful and more accurate missiles for the Trident submarine and
the deployment of 100 MX intercontinental ballistic mis siles in hardened silos
and possibly other launching sites.

He also expressed his intention to improve the survivability and effectiveness
of radar warning systems, air surveillance, communications links and command
centers.

Profit Forec asts Are Sca rce

Although a specific weapons mix has been determined, few companies are ready to
predict what effect the Reagan program might have on their own earnings.

''Sure we're pleased, but we still don't even know yet how much of the
President's program Congress will approve, which makes it impossible to predict
profits,'' said Michael Arndt, vice president for financial controls of TRW
Inc.'s defense sector. ''Also, there is always the uncertainty about how long
any strategic program will be maintained.''

There are more than a few other reasons for pause. A senior civilian Defense
Department analyst, who declined to be identified, said that one of the primary
concerns of the military contractors is that the Defense Department may have
grossly underestimated the rate of inflation from 1983 to 1986.

The annual rate for many weapons has been running at 12 percent, with some
aircraft and ship programs topping 20 percent, he said.  Nevertheless, the
Administration is working on the assumption that inflation will fall from 8.7
percent in the fiscal year 1982 to 5.5 percent in the fiscal years 1985 and
1986.

Pentagon Reaction to Overruns

When cost overruns mount, the analyst noted, the traditional Pentagon approach
is either to slow production rates or to cut spending for nonnuclear
conventional weapons systems or to do both.  Thus, companies that may be
benefiting from the Reagan strategic military program could lose business in
nonnuclear conventional weaponry such as tanks, artillery or fighter aircraft.

There is also the possibility, he added, that at least part of the President's
program could be curtailed as a result of strategic arms limitation talks with
the Soviet Union, although Mr. Reagan insists it will not be.

''Another factor pushing up prices and restraining output,'' said Morton Langer,
military specialist with Bear, Stearns, ''is the shortage of capacity. Some
100,000 companies perform subcontract work. When defense production fell after
the Vietnam War, many companies reduced their dependence on military business,
which led to a deterioration of the underlying industrial base. With the
prospect of boom conditions returning, available capacity is low, costs are
rising and lead times on key components are likely to stretch from months to
years.''

Arms spending over the next few years could also be slowed by the growing
concern about the deficit and the President's expressed desire to balance the
budget by 1984. Although Mr. Reagan chose a cheaper method for deployment of the
MX missile and described his overall strategy as ''a strategic program America
can afford,'' the debate over the impact of the military budget on the deficit
and ultimately on interest rates continues.

Fuel for Further Debate Seen

''The Administration chose the less expensive alternative for the MX,'' said
James Fallows, author of ''The National Defense,'' a recently published study of
America's military industry, ''and that was a wise decision. But the rest of the
defense budget remains untouched by this choice. To sustain the kind of buildup
he is proposing will require additional deep cuts in domestic spending over the
next few years, which will mean, if anything, that the debate over defense
spending should heat up.''

This is particularly true, Mr. Fallows added, since many members of Congress
remain skeptical about the need for the low-flying B-1 bomber, which the Soviet
Union may be able to detect through the development of new technology by the
time the plane is off the assembly line. That is why former President Carter
killed the program.

Whatever the potential drawbacks, said Mr. Arndt of TRW, ''we've learned to roll
with the punches.'' Following is a survey of the leading companies expected to
benefit if Congress approves all of the President's strategic military program:

ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL: The Rockwell International Corporation is the prime
contractor for the B-1 and would be responsible for the body and overall plane
assembly. A Rockwell spokesman, James Vallela, said the company's role in the
B-1 assembly could mean $10 billion to $11 billion in sales. Analysts estimate
that the earnings could amount to as much as $1.50 a share by 1985-86.

The company expects to increase the work force on the B-1 to 22,000 by 1985 from
the current 2,000. About 11,0 00 would be new employees, with the rest
consisting of workers transferred from other divisions and rehired e mployees
who had been laid off.

Rockwell is also producing the fourth-stage rocket engine and the onboard
computer guidance system for the prototype MX missile.  Rockwell officials, like
all the other military contractors, said they could not predict what impact the
MX would have on sales until Congress determines how many missiles will be
produced. Companies working on the MX have limited contracts for research and
developmentand the construction of 20 prototypes. All of them expect to receive
production contracts upon completion of a suc cessful flight test program in
1983.

BOEING: The Boeing Company has a variety of projects that could benefit from the
Reagan program. It manufactures the offensive avionics for the B-1, which
instructs the plane on how to penetrate enemy defenses and launch its missiles.
If Congress approves the project, Boeing would realize contracts worth $2.2
billion in total sales and 2,500 new jobs at Wichita, Kan., and Seattle.

Boeing built all of the silos for the Minuteman missile program, and it hopes to
obtain the contract for the hardened-silo MX program. The addition of six new
Airborne Warning and Control System planes would not mean new jobs, the company
said, but would extend those for 1,000 people. Boeing added that modernization
of the B-52 bomber and the KC-135 transport should mean close to $1 billion in
revenue and 3,500 jobs.

The company will also be manufacturing the cruise missile under a contract
awarded during the Carter Administration. Despite all the potential defense
profits, Boeing executives note that the slumping commercial aircraft business
accounts for 80 percent of the company's sales.

GENERAL ELECTRIC: The General Electric Company makes the four F-101 engines for
each B-1 bomber and the re-entry vehicle for the MX missile. It hopes to get
production contracts for both when spending is approved.

A G.E. spokesman said, however, that the contracts would only ''stabilize
employment for those currently working'' and would not create new jobs since the
company is laying off personnel in its depressed commercial aircraft engine
plants.

G.E. also manufactures sophisticated long-range radar as well as the guidance
system for the Trident missile, and it would benefit if either program is
accepted.

MARTIN MARIETTA: The Martin Marietta Corporation's Denver Aerospace division has
the contract for the overall assembly and flight testing of the MX missile
prototype, and it expects to get the production contract.

About 2,500 of Denver Aerospace's 15,000 employees work on the MX.  The company
said it could not predict revenues or future employment until Congress decided
how many of the missiles would be built.

EATON: The Eaton Corporation developed the B-1's electronic countermeasures
system, which confounds enemy radar. The diversified electronics manufacturer,
based in Cleveland, expects to hire 500 workers, mostly at its Deer Park, L.I.,
plant, to produce the equipment.

Revenues from this project are expected to total $1 billion over seven years.
Eaton has a total of 50,000 employees, so the new programs would represent only
a fraction of its total business.

TRW: Cleveland-based TRW Inc. is the systems engineer for the overall technical
direction of the MX program.  Officials of TRW said that no large-scale hiring
was expected if the company received a production contract and that it was far
too early to project earnings because the profitable production would not
materialize until the mid-1980's.

NORTHROP: The Northrop Corporation is a subcontractor for Eaton on the
electronic countermeasures for the B-1, a relatively small project. It is also
building the key element of the guidance system and targeting processor for the
MX missile, which has a potential of $1 billion in revenues.

Some additional employees will be required at the production stage, a Northrop
spokesman said, but it is too early to predict the specific figure.

LOCKHEED: The Lockheed Corporation has manufactured all of the Navy's
submarine-launched ballistic missiles. Now that President Reagan has reconfirmed
the Government's intention to build an advanced Trident 2 ballistic missile,
Lockheed says it hopes to be selected again as the prime contractor.

The project could be worth well over $2 billion in sales, but the company said
that firm estimates on the size and timing of revenues could not be made at this
time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Table of B-1 bomber Table of MX missile

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Mrs. Gandhi Urges Talks On Conflict in Cambodia

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 141 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Oct. 9


Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, whose Government has recognized the
Vietnamese-backed regime in Cambodia, said here today that India would welcome
any conference that would seek a resolution of the conflict there.

The United Nations voted last month to recognize the Pol Pot forces as the
legitimate Government of Cambodia, even though it has been accused of genocide.
The Pol Pot forces also enjoy the support of China and of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, which is made up of Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
Thailand and Singapore.

Mrs. Gandhi took pains, during the press conference, to explain her Government's
recognition of the Heng Samrin regime. ''It was our assessment that Heng Samrin
had control of the territory and enjoyed popular support,'' she said.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HEAT'S OFF,' A MOSCOW WATCHER SAYS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1162 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 9


There is a small fraternity of military intellectuals in this town who operate
out of the public eye but who exert considerable influence on national policy
through their writing, speaking and consulting. Generally described as
''strategic thinkers,'' they become especially active in a national debate on
strategy such as the one that was activated by the Reagan Administration with
its announcement last week of plans to build the B-1 bomber and deploy the MX
missile.

One such strategic thinker is John M. Collins, who is considered by fellow
students of military strategy to be a certified hawk. But, contrary to the
gloomy view that currently prevails in his circle about Soviet intentions, Mr.
Collins vigorously asserts that the Russians aren't coming after all.

Likelihood of Attack Minimized

''I believe the likelihood that the Soviet Union will attack Western Europe or
attempt to seize Persian Gulf petroleum or engage in large-scale military
operations in the Far East in the short-term or even the mid-term future is
extremely remote,'' he said in an interview.

Mr. Collins, the senior specialist in nation al security affairs at the
Congressional Research Service here, furt her insisted that the dangers of a
Soviet nuclear attack on the Uni ted States were equally remote because the
Russians ''have no ability to defend themselves against ballistic missile
retaliation by the United States.''

Mr. Collins, who holds the second highest rank in the civil service, provides
information and analysis to Congressmen on all aspects of defense. Other
professional strategists have bases in universities, research organizations and
military schools. Mr.  Collins, a retired colonel of paratroops who wears a
miniature paratrooper's badge in his lapel, is the author of several works on
strategy and on the military balance between the United States and the Soviet
Union.

His view, which Mr. Collins said ''combines optimism with apprehension,'' runs
directly counter to that expressed by most conservatives, notably President
Reagan and Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger. Both have asserted that
the United States will soon be threatened with a ''window of vulnerability,'' a
period in which the Soviet Union could successfully attack the United States
without fear of effective retaliation.

The President and the Secretary pointed to the ''window of vulnerability'' last
week when Mr. Reagan announced his $180 billion, five-part plan to revitalize
the nation's strategic deterrent. Most conservatives agreed with them,
disagreeing only on whether the plan would close that window.

Calling himself a ''conservative critic of defense'' rather than a hawk, Mr.
Collins brushed aside such contentions and argued rather that there was a
''wide-open window of opportunity.''

''Because of Soviet preoccupation with Eastern Europe, Poland in particular,''
he said, ''they are buying time for us to put our house in order; they are
buying time for our allies to put their houses in order if the United States and
its associates care to take the time.''
Need for Bigger Military Budget

He agreed with his conservative colleagues that there was ''a genuine
requirement for a substantial increase in the defense budget'' to permit the
armed forces to recover from the drain of the war in Vietnam and subsequent
declining military budgets.

Mr. Collins, a lean, wiry man who talks in short spurts like a machine gun, was
pointed in his criticism of the Defense Department's study on ''Soviet Military
Power,'' which was issued with a personal sendoff by Defense Secretary
Weinberger last week.

''It is not an assessment of the Soviet threat,'' he said. ''It is not even an
assessment of Soviet capabilities. It is not a review of trends in Soviet force
posture. What it really is is a snapshot of Soviet military power at this
particular point in time, and that's all.''

''A threat assessment has to appraise what capabilities pose the greatest dang
er in what priority,'' he continued. ''That means you'vegot to have s ome feel
for intention as well as capabilities. People in the defens e community don't
want to discuss intentions because intentions ar e transitory states of mind
where capabilities are factsthat you can measure.''

If United States military leaders don't assess Soviet intentions, he contended,
''you can spend the Treasury dry'' trying to build forces to meet every
contingency. The absence of that sort of analysis in the study on military
power, he said, was ''one of the reasons why the Administration is having such a
terrible time trying to decide what element of the defense budget to cut.''

''I want to make very clear,'' Mr. Collins said, ''that I am not even intimating
that this military power being displayed by the Soviet Union should be
disregarded by the United States.'' But, he said, Americans should not ''gaze at
this mass of Soviet power indiscriminately but try to put it into some kind of
perspective.''
Poland and Afghanistan

Mr. Collins asserted that the turmoil in Poland, far more than the drain on
Soviet military power in Afghanistan, was giving Soviet leaders pause in any
thought of attacking the West.

''This is not a rebellion by the leadership in Poland,'' he said, ''it is a
rebellion by the people. It is a rebellion by the people who are drafted into
the armed forces. So the armed forces, which have been purged of unreliable
elements at the top, are shot full of unreliable conscripts.''

The Russians, he argued, ''have not used any military force up to this time
because they recognize that should be the court of last resort; they know the
political, economic, and military costs would be horrendous.'' Particularly, he
said, they know that ''the military cost is likely to be several orders of
magnitude greater than anything they've experienced in Afghanistan.''

''The Soviet Union faces the first real big no-win situation that it has looked
at since World War II,'' Mr. Co llins asserted. ''No matter what they do, they
lose. For a long ti me, no matter how they solve the problems of Poland, the
leadership in the Politburo is going to have a very queasy feeling in the pi t
of its stomach about Eastern Europe.''

Therefore, he said, ''as far as NATO is concerned, and the Persian Gulf, and the
Far East, it doesn't really make much difference whether the Russians use
military force to put down the Polish rebellion or whether they are able to
solve the problem by political means.''

''The heat's off,'' he said. ''The heat's off Western Europe, the heat's off the
Persian Gulf, the heat's off the Far East.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of John M. Collins

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THANKS, MR. NIXON

BYLINE: By Andrew D. Gilman

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 825 words


Richard M. Nixon bought me a couch, so to speak.  And through me, he also, you
might say, contributed money to the American Civil Liberties Union and to other
organizations that are staunch supporters of the First Amendment.

Mr. Nixon didn't really send me his personal check drawn on his New Jersey bank.
Nor did he designate a former member of the Oval Office palace guard or some
other messenger to deliver the funds.  The $1,100 check actually came from the
government of the District of Columbia.

But I know it was from the former President. It was my part of the settlement
from lawsuits filed against the Government following the sweep of arrests on May
3, 1971, during the May week protests against the Vietnam War. Other lawsuits
filed in connection with events that week also were recently settled. However,
court rulings prevented the more than 8,000 people arrested from being included
in a class action.

The actual names of the lawsuits involving me were McCarthy et al v.
Kleindienst, and Adelman et al v. Kleindienst. And even though Mr. Nixon's name
was not on the release form I signed, I don't think the others whom I am now
pledged not to sue, including the former Attorneys General John Mitchell and
Richard Kleindienst, and Jerry Wilson of the District of Columbia police, were
acting other than under orders from the commander in chief.

Like the many tens of thousands who traveled to Washington during the first week
in May 1971, I shared with my friends and colleagues from Philadelphia the same
goal - to end the Vietnam War.  Demonstrations in Washington and in other cities
had done little to change policy, and plans now turned toward civil
disobedience.

It was conceived that if protesters blocked roads leading into Washington on May
3, Government employees wou ld not be able to get totheir jobs and the war
machine would stop for a day. We had nothing against the workers - it was the
Government t hat was the target. So several of us wanted to bridge the gap
betwee n protesters and the citizenry, and decided to pass out doughnuts and
leaflets to motorists stalled in traffic.

We never got to participate in the protest. The D.C. and other capital police
forces rounded up people before they could act - not just demonstrators, mind
you, but college professors, secretaries on their way to work, tourists.

My group was dispersed by motor-scooter policemen, and about an hour later I was
arrested with several other persons as we walked on the sidewalk behind the
White House. We were not jaywalking, disturbing the peace, or shouting toward
the Oval Office. We were merely walking along the street when we were herded
into a police van and taken to the D.C. jail.

I can still recall the scene at a local precinct late that night as we were
processed for release. We had been transported in a converted moving van to the
station house, and walked across the street, under an archway formed by the
rifles and unsheathed bayonets of two rows of National Guardsmen. I also
remember the police guard in the station house who smiled so sweetly, the gold
inlaid star in his front tooth flashing in the night light.

I was released that evening. Others taken to Robert F. Kennedy Stadium spent up
to three days in jail. Then over the next several years, the arrests were thrown
out by the courts, and records were expunged. Unfortunately, only a few hundred
of the thousands who were swept off the streets filed claims for false arrest.

By now, the cases have demonstrated that the arrest of citizens on the mere
suspicion that they are up to no good is a violation of the Bill of Rights. And
I applaud the A.C.L.U. and other organizations that have established the
principle that the Government can be held acountable - for dollar damages, not
just with injunctions and legal opinions - for illegal actions that deny the
guaranteed right of freedom of speech.

But at this point, I'd rather thank Richard M. Nixon for the foolishness of his
own Government. Fortunately, I was not physically harmed by anybody, but I did
see men and women run over by police scooters and others beaten for no apparent
reason.

I guess if I were fully adapted to the realities of the 1980's, I would follow
the advice of our current President and save this money. But I'd rather
contribute to groups that are fighting many of this President's policies. And
I'd prefer to spend, to consume, so when my old protester friends come to visit,
they can have a place to sleep -on the Richard M. Nixon memorial sofa-bed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Andrew D. Gilman is a journalist and an attorney.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
Union Congress Speaks Its Minds

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim and Barbara Slavin

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


Solidarity ended the second stage of its first convention last week with some
fancy parliamentary footwork.  Rank-and-file delegates to the Polish union
congress, after reelecting Lech Walesa to a two-year term, showed their
dissatisfaction with his leadership by electing many radicals to a new
107-member, policymaking National Commission. The anti-authority mood was such
that it took three ballots and several days of wrangling before the commission
was in place. As its first act, however, the new body approved all but one of
Mr. Walesa's nominees for a 12-member presidium that recalled the Communist
Party model.  The 10 men and one woman chosen were given portfolio-like
responsibilities for such areas as the food supply and education.

The 12-day convention in Gdansk also approved a bold economic and political pro
gram that called for a multiparty system in Poland, freeelections to Parliament
and unrestricted emigration. Reacting iratelyto Government -imposed price
increases, the congress threatened a token strike.

The union also said that if the Government did not put members of the ousted
regime of Edward Gierek on trial, Solidarity would set up its own national
tribunal to censure them, much as the United States was condemned for reported
crimes during the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN DISSIPATES HEAT BY DELEGATING AUTHORITY

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


President Reagan looked decidedly uncomfortable the other day when a reporter
asked him why he thought the proposed B-1 bomber could penetrate Soviet air
defenses. ''I think my few minutes are up, and I am going to turn that question
over to Cap,'' Mr.  Reagan said w ith an apologetic grin, as he beckoned Defense
SecretaryCaspar W. Wei nberger to his side.

Suddenly the President seemed to realize he was leaving the wrong impression.
''I know the answer,'' he added emphatically, and as if to show he did he talked
briefly about the need to replace the aging B-52 bomber and about the B-1's
ability to carry cruise missiles.

The episode offered a fascinating glimpse into Mr. Reagan's style of leadership
and decision-making. His aides say the President is unafraid to tangle with the
details of complex issues when he is alone with his inner circle; these aides
maintain that in private, Mr. Reagan is effective at framing issues and asking
questions .

But in public, they agree, he takes great care to avoid identifying himself with
such details. ''The President feels that he ought not to be answering questions
about the B-1 bomber or anything else that specific,'' said a White House
official. ''His job is to announce broad policy. Let Cap Weinberger take the
heat on the B-1, or let (Education Secretary) Ted Bell take the heat for cuts in
school aid.  We believe in the delegation of authority.''

As Mr. Reagan's reaction on the B-1 implied, however, the White House is mindful
that the President's visible aloofness raises questions about the level at which
Mr. Reagan has been engaged in the making of policy in his own Administration.
In the first round of meetings to push for approval of the sale of radar planes
to Saudi Arabia, Mr. Reagan puzzled some Senators by declining to answer
specific questions about whether the planes might jeopardize American or Israeli
security if they fell into enemy hands. According to Senator Charles H. Percy,
chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, Mr. Reagan did not begin vigorously
arguing for the merits of his position until last week, after the assassination
of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt.

The question of Mr. Reagan's personal involvement in running the Government came
to a head in August, when Edwin Meese 3d, the White House counselor, neglected
to awaken the President after the dogfight between American and Libyan jets. A
key reason why it is still an issue is that Mr. Reagan likes to discuss matters
and make decisions on them in private, so that the process is invisible even to
lowerlevel participants.

Campaign Clues

The President's decision 10 days ago to proceed with a $180 billion nuclear arms
program is a case in point. He addressed many aspects of the package during his
Presidential campaign. It was then that he endorsed the B-1 bomber, which
President Carter had canceled, and expressed skepticism about the Carter plan to
shuttle 200 new MX missiles among 4,600 shelters in the American West. In the
end, Mr.  Reagan did just what he said he'd do: Push the B-1 and cancel the
shuttle system.

Critics of the decision found ammunition in the claim by Gen. David C. Jones,
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that he and his colleagues ''did not have
an opportunity to go over the package in detail before it was announced.'' White
House officials dismissed the notion that Mr. Reagan failed to consult such
experts as General Jones. Similarly, they brushed aside a statement by Senator
John G.  Tower, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, that he too
had not been consulted.

What happened, the officials said, was that all of them had many opportunities
to make their presentations to Mr. Reagan. Air Force officials especially were
given one long session themselves to make the case for the missile shuttle
system. But when it came time to debate the pros and cons, Mr. Reagan did his
thrashing with only a few people: Vice President Bush; Defense Secretary
Weinberger; Richard V. Allen, the national security adviser, and the three top
Presidential aides: Mr. Meese, James A. Baker 3d and Michael K.  Deaver. Except
for Mr. Bush, who was away at the time, these were the men in the room when the
President ''signed off'' on the decision on the strategic package Sept. 28.

''The President feels that only in small meetings are people totally free to
speak their views,'' said an aide. He and others also rejected the suggestion
that no real experts on strategic matters were present. ''The President made his
decision, not on the basis of us just sitting around, but after hearing from all
the experts - General Jones, the Air Force, the Defense Department,'' said Mr.
Meese. ''Because this is an area in which I am not an expert, I viewed my role
as a coordinator rather than as an adviser throughout the process.''

The President's predilection does not mean that he ignores larger groups. He
still has a Cabinet meeting every week. But according to one aide, he has
increasingly used the Cabinet as ''a forum for building a consensus,'' to give
the Cabinet members and others ''a sense that they belong.''

The fact that Mr. Reagan calls on only a few advisers serves another p urpo se,
strengthening the hand of those few when they negotiate wit h others. David A.
Stockman, director of the Office of Management an d Budget and Treasury
Secretary Donald T. Regan hammeredout the packa ge of budget and tax reductions
with key members of Congress. Bef ore those meetings, Mr. Reagan approved the
broad outlines, but left the details to them.

The potential problems in such a system derive from the risk that Mr. Reagan
might become too shut off from political or practical realities. The Vietnam war
and the Watergate crisis may have been exacerbated because Presidents Lyndon B.
Johnson and Richard M.  Nixon became too isolated to see the ground shifting
underneath them.

Reagan partisans have an answer to those who raise this possibility: The
President, they say, is a good listener, does not feel threatened by those who
dispute him, and therefore has his own early-warning system built in: ''He's
also no t uncomfortable with thefact that he's not the brightest man in the w
orld,'' one aide said.  ''And he has evolved a system that works best for him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Pres. Reagan and James Baker, Michael Deaver
and Ed Meese In Oval Office

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON BUDGETS, PRESIDENT'S WORD MAY BE THE LAW

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1139 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In his heyday, the late John J. Rooney, the Democrat from Brooklyn, was one of
the most feared men in Washington.  Embassies were cowed by his visits,
Attorneys General danced attendance and the director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation provided confidential data on campaign opponents.

The Representative's power base was the House Appropriations Committee. There,
as a subcommittee chairman, he controlled the purse strings for the Departments
of State, Justice and Commerce. But those were the committee's glory days, when
Congressmen waited decades for one of the 13 subcommittee chairmanships in a
group that called itself the College of Cardinals.

Last week, most of the committee's Republicans joined with its Democrats to defy
both the budget-cutting Reagan Administration and the House Republican
leadership. Though the luster of the victory was dimmed by the likelihood of a
Reagan veto which the panel appeared to lacked enough support on the floor to
override, for one brief moment the committee gave a hint of its former power. An
$87.3 billion funding bill for social programs that the White House opposed as
''budget busting'' was shepherded through the House.

Committee members told the House that their work was the result of nine weeks of
hearings, that they were familiar with every ''nerve ending'' of every
appropriation and that there were no further savings in the ''safety net'' that
was ''America's investment in humanity.'' It was their colleagues, however, who
had curtailed their powers to make such conclusions stick. In 1974, Congress
passed the Budget and Impoundment Act, creating budget committees and a budget
process, in part because it perceived the appropriations committees as
profligate groups that found it too easy to appease special interest groups with
ever increasing funds without regard to the budget as a whole. The new budget
panels were charged with examining the entire budget, making economic forecasts
and setting spending ceilings from agriculture to national defense. The
appropriations committees were to act within these constraints.

As one veteran member of the House put it, ''If the appropriations committees
had done their job, we wouldn't need the budget committees.'' Some of the
difficulties, however, were not of the appropriations committee's making.
Representative Richard Bolling, the Missouri Democrat who is chairman of the
Rules Committee, contends that ''it was a series of events transpiring outside
Congress which in the end forced Congress to finally reform its internal budget
procedure.''

Shirking Responsibility According to Mr. Bolling, the first event was the
Vietnam war, and President Lyndon Johnson's belated request for a tax increase
to pay for it. In the end, in re turn for its approval of a surtax, Congress
forced the Pr esident and the appropriations committee to agree to an
expenditure l imit. The President was charged with responsibility for its
enforceme nt and authorized to impound funds previously appropriated.

At that time, Representative George Mahon, Texas Democrat and chairman of the
appropriations committee, warned Congress about the weapon it was placing in the
President's hands. He argued that cutting spending was Congress's responsiblity,
and in delegating it to the President the Congress was shirking its
Constitutional responsibilities. He prophesied that future Presidents would
misuse the weapon of impoundment.

From Congress's point of view, that was precisely what happened during the Nixon
Presidency. Increasingly, Mr. Nixon claimed and exercised the right to impound
funds appropriated by Congress. On Oct. 17, 1972, he flatly stated that if
Congress overrode his veto of a clean water bill, he would refuse to spend the
money. After his landslide victory, he announced that he inten ded to use
impoundment authority on an ever greater scale.

Congress rebelled. The budget act took impoundment from the President and
restored to Congress the authority - and obligation - to manage fiscal affairs.
''The objective of the legislation was not the implementation of a particular
fiscal policy, such as a balanced budget,'' Mr. Bolling said. ''This point
cannot be over emphasized.  Rather, it was to force Congress to be
responsible.''

This year, the appropriations committees saw their powers further eroded, when
the Administration turned to the budget process to implement changes in more
than 250 laws to meet its budget-cutting targets. The spotlight was on the
budget committees; the appropriations committees were all but forgotten. The
vehicle for those law changes was a process called ''reconciliation,'' a single
bill that wrapped up totals, rather than the 13 specific appropriations.

Now the the Administration, which succeeded in packaging its budget and tax
bills, appears to be looking for ways to package its new round of $13 billion in
budget cuts. What has been discussed only further dilutes the powers of the
appropriations committees. An omnibus, stopgap funding resolution appears a
likely candidate; both Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Oregon Republican and chairman
of the Senate Appropriations Committee, and Jamie L. Whitten, Mississippi
Democrat and chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, feel that would
circumvent the normal appropriations process. Yesterday, another threat was
disclosed. The White House is planning immediate reductions on its own, through
administrative deferrals, or postponements of spending. Each deferral can be
blocked by a House or Senate vote. But hundreds of individual resolutions would
be required, and that is an unlikely prospect.

The Second Budget Resolution, which the budget act provides to adjust spending
levels, was also proposed. Mr. Bolling fears that, too, could spell ''the
beginning of the end'' of the budget process.  ''This year, the budget process
is unfortunately becoming ever more closely identified with the immediate
legislative objective of political conservatism,'' he said. ''Inevitably, I
fear, should there be a change in the nation's political climate dictating a
change in policy, the budget process will suffer. A budget process which has
become identified as inimical to progressive objectives and a part of the
conservative credo will suffer from the political rejection of conservatism.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AT 'A MINIMUM $200 MILLION A BIRD,' B-1 BOMBER DEBATE BEGINS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2277 words


THE Administration's plan for upgrading the United States's nuclear arsenal came
under heavy attack last week. Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger
testified that the $180.3 billion program would create a ''stable and secure''
deterrent, but Capitol Hill wasn't so sure. Some members of Congress set their
sights on the proposal to install new MX missiles in superhardened Titan siloes.
Others claimed that a resurrected B-1 would be a bomber without a future.

A leadi ng p roponent of the B-1 is William L. Dickinson of Alabama, senior
Republ ican on the House Armed Services Committee. An influential o pponent is
Gary Hart, Democrat of Colorado and a member of the Senate Armed Services
Committee. They were interviewed separately by Richard Halloran, The New York
Times's Pentagon correspondent . Mr. Halloran first asked each why he approved
or disapproved o f the President's proposal.
William L. Dickinson

Mr. Dickinson. What has to be weighed in the balance is this: Do we go forward
with the B-1 or with the advanced technology bomber, socalled Stealth, or with
both. We need both, it seems to me.

The earliest delivery date of the Stealth would be 1988, 1989, 1990. Something
in that time frame - if all goes well. It might in fact be 1991, 1992, 1993 - we
don't know for sure. It is, after all, still in the research and development
stage. So, and this is what I urged on the President, just don't drop the bird
in the hand for two in the bush. Particularly when they say you c an't see the
two in the bush.

What the President has proposed is a sensible approach. We have a known
technology. We have built four B-1 bombers; we have flown four. We know the
state of the art, and the technology is at hand - the tools, dies, rigs,
whatever - so we know what we could do with that.  We've also flown it against
radar and we have a very high degree of confidence in its ability to penetrate.

If I had any heartburn at all, it has to do with the cost of the program. The
projected cost of the original plane started off at something like $50 million a
plane, went to $60 million and then to $70 million. When the project was
cancelled by President Carter, we were looking at real cost of somewhere around
$90 million a plane.  Now they've thrown a $20 billion to $30 billion program at
us. You divide that out it comes out to a minimum of $200 million a bird.

But that's not the fault of the weapons system itself. If Carter hadn't canceled
it, we would have the B-1 in production already or be very close to it. It would
have a substantial capability but at about half of what we're proposing to spend
now.

Question. In his testimony before your committee and before the Senate committee
as well, Defense Secretary Weinberger talked about the need to fill the gap
between the retirement of the B-52 and the addition of the Stealth to the Air
Force arsenal, in maybe another seven or eight years. Why do you think we need
to cover that period with the B-1. Why can't we just extend the life of the B-52
a few more years?

A. In the final analysis, it comes back to credibility and what is sufficient
for deterrence. And now even if you enhance the capability of the B-52
sufficiently to have a penetration capability, the cost is tremendous. And you
still have a 30-year-old bird. So this is part of the equation; I don't think
it's ever discussed: if you don't build a B-1, what are you going to do?

So you can't ignore that fact, the cost of making do with the B-52, when you're
considering the need for the B-1. You have to consider the window of
vulnerability - are you closing the window or just pulling a shade down on it?

Q. Mr. Weinberger says that we're going to have the first B-1's in 1986. Given
the track record of defense contractors, do you think they can deliver on time?

A. Well, I'm shaking my head in befuddlement. That's a negative reply, the
reason being that when we were discussing, initially, about two years ago, with
the president of Rockwell, how soon could he rev up and go forward if this
decision to cancel were changed - and he said it would take less than four
years. About four years to rev up from where they were then.

But there's been a lot of water over the dam since then. Certainly the cost has
escalated. Even with a scaled-down capability - that is, not sweeping the wings
as far, or taking all that mechanism out of the center of the thing and
generally lightening the plane. Two years ago, we were told that if you reduced
the air intakes, if you do away with some other things that were required for
supersonic flight, then Rockwell could build the new version cheaper than the
proposed cost of the original version. But the cost hasn't been scaled down.
It's escalated, for whatever reason, dramatically.

Q. Let me just ask a somewhat philosophical question. Why do we need any new
manned strategic bomber, the B-1 or the Stealth? Can't missiles do the job?

A. If you're thinking only in the strategic mode, you might be right. But you
can't drop a nuke on everybody that you're going to fight. You've got to have
some in-hand capability in conventional weaponry.

The B-52's been a very formidable weapon. President Johnson was very
short-sighted and wrong in first committing them in Southeast Asia, knowing they
were out of production, and putting them at risk, which they were, of being shot
down. And then on such a lim ited basisthat they cou ldn't even hit the most
valuable targets. We were putting them in a very high-risk situation and risking
them on low-value tar gets. And that was dumb. Of course, the whole damn
thingwas dumb. He should never have got us in there if we weren't planningto
win.

Anyway, the B-52 has been a very good bird and very dependable and now that
they're 30 years old, they're a bit decrepit and their value is becoming
increasingly limited as the accuracy of surface-to-air missiles gets better and
better.

So, whether it be this year or five years from now, we've got to have some
follow-on to the B-52. Five more years is about all we can get out of the
B-52's.

Also, if we give our enemies a new weapons system to worry about - a B-1 bomber
- then this complicates their problems. They want to protect Moscow and their
other cities. They believe in having a redundancy of defenses that won't wait.
We force them to spend that much more on defense with a new weapon. Then if you
come on later with the Stealth, you've given them still more to worry about.
They'll be outspending us 5 to 1 just to coun ter what we're doing.  And
whatever they spend on defense takes away from what they can spend on offensive
weapons. Gary Hart

Mr. Hart. I'm opposed to (the proposal), as I was when the issue arose four
years ago, for primarily the same reasons. There are not enough defense dollars
to buy both the B-1 and the Stealth, and the air-launched cruise missile
program. The cruise missile program, moreover, offers a more than sufficient
bridge between the availability of the current manned bomber force - the B-52's
- and what I think ought to be the next manned bomber, the Stealth.  Finally,
the cost of the B-1 program will drain necessary funds away from both our
strategic forces and from conventional force modernization.

Question. Defense officials insist that we need a new bomber sandwiched in
between the retirement of the B-52 and the introduction of the Stealth. What do
you think?

A. I think that particular window of vulnerability is a narrow one. First of all
there's been a dispute over the useful life of the B-52. If given a cruise
missile carrier role, it certainly has a longer useful life than if it were
merely a manned penetrating bomber. And we are in the process of converting the
B-52H to that role and we will have those available starting next year.

If we put a lot of the money that the Administration proposes for the B-1
program into the Stealth program, accelerated it, we would shrink the window
from the other side. And the cruise missile program could extend the life and
effective use of the B-52 from this end.

Q. Estimates of the cost of the B-1 program range between $20 billion and $30
billion. Do those figures seem reasonable to you?

A. I've seen estimates ranging anywhere from $15 billion to $50 billion. I think
$20 billion to $30 billion is on the low side. The problem in this whole arena
is how much of the support equipment gets loaded into the total program cost.

People who want to project the lowest possible cost for a system don't put those
things in; they just give you the figure for that system itself in its total
buy, but none of the tankers, none of the operations and maintenance or support
facilities. If you add all it would take to get this airplane in the air and
keep it running, then you're reaching to a much higher level.

Q. If we build the advanced version of the B-1, do we really need Stealth? Why
can't we load the B-1 with some of the Stealth technology and delay introduction
of Stealth itself until, say, the mid or the late '90s?

A. You can't. We don't have the Stealth technology yet so you can't build it
into the B-1 bomber. That's the Achilles heel of the B-1 bomber. It is an
obsolete technology, given both existing and projected Soviet defensive
capabilities. It will be obsolete by the time it's deployed.

Stealth is a breakthrough. It would leapfrog technology instead of challenging
technology. What the B-1 bomber does is accept a certain given of Soviet
technology and say, 'We're going to go right at it and try to defeat it.' And
that's its fatal flaw. Stealth says, 'We know what that technology is going to
be and we're going to leapfrog it by sophisticated counter-technology.'

B-1 would offer no particular threat or challenge to the Soviets; Stealth makes
obsolete what they have and what they will have, and forces them into a
defensive mode which requires an enormous capital investment.

Q. But supposing the United States does leapfrog over B-1 and proceed directly
with development of Stealth. Won't the Russians have time to catch up with the
defensive technology?

A. Well, that might be the case if technology can be forced; that is to say,
they know a bomber is coming whic h is going to have an almost nonexi stent
radar profile, and therefore all they've got to dois invent a w ay to find it.
We have found out that's not as easy as it may sound.  Laymen, such as myself,
tend to think that scientists can do anythi ng. Quite often they can't.

You could have argued 10 or 15 or 20 years ago, 'Let's not build the Trident
because by the time it's built there will be strategic antisubmarine warfare
capability.' Well, there isn't. Some things you just can't force. I don't think
by the late '80s, even if the Soviets know we're coming with a bomber that's
different and hard to find, that they'll find out a way to find it.

Q. In the longterm, are we really going to need a manned bomber at all? Why not
build a cheap air-launched cruise missile carrier and let it go at that?

A. We probably will need a manned bomber for two reasons: One, it's recallable.
If bombers are sent out, and you later discover that mistakes were made or your
radar turned out to be wrong, you've got time to call them back. It's the only
human system of all the strategic systems.

The second p oint is that part of strategic survivability and deterrence is
creating a situation where your opponent cannot target only one or two systems.
That's the value of the so-called triad. It is not merely a strategic concept
created to satisfy the many armed services we have. Rather, it creates a kind o
f jujitsu puzzle for theSoviets. They don't have to throw just the su bmarine or
just a landbased system; they've got to figure out a way to throw three of them.

And when they figure one system out, then you're ahead of them on the other.
Then they've got to race over there and try to figure out how to defeat that
one. And while they're focused on that, then you can do the other system. To the
layman, I think it sounds a little more esoteric than it really is. It's just a
practical application of not concentrating your defenses in one arena.

Q. Does the manned strategic bomber have a role in conventional war?

A. Yes, in perhaps a war in Europe or in the Persian Gulf region, where the
super powers are in confrontation. There are all kinds of instant histories of
the role of the bomber in Vietnam, for example, a third world scenario as to
whether it did any good or not. If you believe the war was ended by the bombings
of North Vietnam, then the answer to your question is 'yes.' If you believe
that, by and large, the Vietnamese figured out a way to survive in spite of the
carpet bombings, then your answer is 'no.'

I would put it this way: I don't think the manned bomber is the most effective
weapon in small third world wars. And those are the ones I think we'll face in
the '80s and '90s.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Representative Williiam L. Dickinson photo of
Senator Gary Hart photo of B-1 airplane photo of B-52 airplane table on B-1
airplane statistics table on B-52 airplane statistics

TYPE: interview

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HANNAH ARENDT - INSPIRATION, PROVOCATEUR, RESPECTED FOE

BYLINE: By Leon Weiseltier

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 3852 words


HANNAH Arendt, the German-born political philosopher, writer and teacher, died
in New York in 1975, but her thinking on such subjects as totalitarianism,
democracy, modern revolutions, the ''banality'' of evil and even the nature of
thinking continue to stimulate serious and feisty debate. A week ago, a
conference based on her work, sponsored by several universities and other
institutions, attracted several hundred people to Schimmel Auditorium of New
York University. During three days of sessions, scholars from France, Britain,
Israel and the United States gave their responses to Hannah Arendt's ideas on
philosophy, politics, history and ethics. Excerpts from some of the
presentations follow.
On Living in America

One of her great fears and detestations was bureaucracy, which she called the
''rule of nobody,'' as contrasted with the rule of the few represented by
oligarchy or the rule of one represented by autocracy. She considered
bureaucracy a more dangerous phenomenon, because (it is) creeping and impossible
to fix responsibility on, and perhaps because it is less well diagnosed, being
omnipresent.

... she was somewhat inactive politically, above all when her physical
participation is compared to the hyperactive state of her mind. For her, the
reading of a newspaper was a political experience of a galvanic kind, calling
for the violent reactions of eye, hand, entire body, nods of confirmation,
sudden chuckles, gasps. To her, a newspaper was a political document, to be
interpreted, read between the lines, thrown aside as devoid of interest once the
meat had been swiftly extracted. She never let old newspapers pile up as I do.

Certainly she had a deep vocation for teaching, which, like the call heard by
Socrates, was in essence political. She was an educator. But it may also be that
teaching was, to some slight degree, a diversionary channel for her political
energies, which otherwise might have overflowed the banks she quite strictly set
for them and poured into the public arena. The truth is that after the first
years - the Aufbau years - she became wary. With her, as with her whole
generation of refugees, one must remember that she was gun-shy. Having
experienced the malignant transformation of a republic (Weimar) into the Natio
nal Socialist monstrosity, they sensed the Na zi potential everywhere and lived
in half- or fully conscious hor ror of a repetition, as though Nazism, once
invented, were subject to eternal recurrence.

I used to tell Hannah Arendt that McCarthy could not last on the American
political scene, but she did not believe me. Her expressed fear, then and later,
was for our State Department, which she expected to be emasculated by the
McCarthy campaign. She was right about that, positively prescient, but in
reality that was only the visible, admissible part of her fear for our country;
at the same time, quietly, she was looking for signs that concentration camps
were opening.

Once again, under Nixon, in the last years of the Vietnamese war, she became
apprehensive. She actually talked about emigrating back to Europe fast, while
there was still time. That she was willing to accept the prospect of being a
refugee twice, two times over, made me understand finally the absence of
assurance she had been living in for roughly thirty years without my taking note
of it.  Mary McCarthy Author and Critic
On Totalitarianism

As is well known, Miss Arendt regarded the camps as the central institution of
totalitarian regimes. The camps were small societies of total domination that
prefigured the transformation of the nation as a whole into a society of total
domination. The totalitarian program aimed at establishing a society consisting
of wholly superfluous human beings totally subservient to an elite that was in
turn obedient to the point of achieving the ideal of rendering a corpse-like
obedience to one's superiors. Beyond the imperative of complying with superior
orders, there would be absolutely no moral, religious or political constraint on
the behavior of the masters.

Having studied the traditions of Western th ought with some of the best
philosophical minds of this century, and having even witnessed the turning to
totalitarianism of some of her most celebrated teachers, it was almost
inevitable that the p resence of a successful totalitarian movement in her
native land woul d elicit from her the question of what kind of basic experience
cou ld make possible ''a form of government whose essence is terror.'' Her
answer was that ''terror can rule absolutely only over men an d women who are
isolatedagainst each other.'' The isolation to which Miss Arendt refers is
different from the self-imposed isolation of the craftsman or the artist, which
ultimately contributes to the c reation of the common world. The isolation that
is the precondition of totalitarian terror is the loneliness and uprootedness of
superfl uous men and women in the modern period.

Hannah Arendt has taught me to see racism as a thoroughly modern response to the
phenomenon of superfluity and the fragmented affiliations of our era. Where
every person has a role and a place, the question of whom to include and whom to
exclude is not likely to arise. Even pariahs can have a tolerated existence.
But, as we know, in the modern period millions have lost their place and even
more millions have been in fear of losing the place they had. Racism sought to
establish an ideological basis for affiliation and community after all the
lesser units of community, such as the village, the church and even the nation,
had proven unable to fulfill the task. Its message was simple and brutal: Only
those who share our roots can hunt with our pack. All others are prey, first
those within our borders and later on the others, for the earth is not big
enough or rich enough for all of us. Such a program requires a totalitarian
regime that will not be impeded by legal abstractions from uprooting the alien
enemy in our midst.

Let us, however, remember that the totalitarians did not initiate the process of
making people worldless nor were they the ones who destroyed the credibility of
the inherited moral universe of Western man. They came along in the aftermath of
the universal dissolution of values into calculations of price by Western
bourgeois society. The world did not become the site of the predatory war of all
against all with the rise of the totalitarians. Social Darwinism was the
legitimating ideology of free enterprise capitalism before it became the
legitimating ideology of totalitarian racism.  Richard Rubinstein Robert O.
Lawton Distinguished Professor of Religion, State University of Florida
On Representative Democracy

The gist of the matter is that Arendt conceives of representative democracy as a
system that works by means of an essential passivity, the passivity of the large
mass of individuals who live under it.  That they live under it is only another
way of saying that they do not live in the system: their continuous and direct
relations do not constitute the system. She relegates representative democracy
to a status radically severed from direct democracy, and nearly assimilates it
to all non-tyrannical systems, even if they are nondemocratic systems;
especially to limited monarchy. The irony is that she sees passivity not in
spite of, but because of, the obsession wit h economic affairs. The energies of
selfishness and selfregarding ness derive from political passivity or inertness.
All that furious activity comes from a dead core. Representative democracy thu s
contributes to that unmaking of man which Tom Paine condemned the ancien regime
for, and which he thought that representativ e democracy would remedy much more
suitably than ''simple'' de mocracy. Arendt in effect rejects Paine's judgment.
Representativ e democracy allows people to unmake themselves, even while they th
ink themselves whole and free. Whenever the pursuit of happiness is the declared
principle and happiness is understood as private rathe r than public, and
understood as ''getting and spending'' ra ther than as achieving a public
identity through action,the reign of passivity is established, and with it and
as part of it,the confirmat ion of human isolation.

One might say that for Arendt selfishness and self-regardingness are deplorable
not so much because they are immoral or indifferent to others, but because they
condemn people to an existential lack, the inability to live intensely, to
acquire individuation. She believes that only political action grants access to
this possibility. Yet, representative democracy is as it were the voluntary
renunciation of such a possibility.

(Yet), if one large part of Arendt's life's work is to disclose the nature of
political atrocity and to praise whatever it is that offers discouragement to
its emergence or resistance to its unfolding, then we have a right to expect
that she regard representative democracy with a kinder eye... if no society is
incapable of atrocity, only a few are capable of mounting steady resistance. And
only in representative democracy is such resistance a mode of allegiance to the
spirit of the government.  George Kateb Joseph B. Eastman Professor of Political
Science, Amherst College

On Politics

Arendt's indifference, to put it blandly, to the culture of ordinary and poor
citizens produced a severely impoverished notion of the historical meaning of
the political. Here I have in mind what has been one of the most important,
perhaps the most important, sources of the popular understanding of a wide range
of political notions, such as equality, justice, community, authority and power.
The historical contribution of Western religions to the political education of
ordinary and poor people is almost impossible to exaggerate. Religion supplied a
first hand experience in what it meant to be a member of a community, to
sacrifice and share, to be an object of power, to make not just promises but
commitments of long duration, to refuse to conform for conscience's sake, and,
not least, to found new communities.

At the end of ''On Revolution'' there was an element of pathos to Arendt's
project. Beyond extolling the value of new forms of elitism, nothing is said
about how they might be maintained because institutionalizing them would destroy
the spontaneity which was an essential element of their political authenticity.
Their appearance, therefore, is accepted as one would accept the inexplicable
workings of Divine Grace. These elites are ''chosen by no one''; they constitute
themselves. ''Politically they are the best and it is the task of good
government and the sign of a well-ordered republic to assure them of their
rightful place in the public realm.'' ''To be sure,'' she added, the recognition
of these elites ''would spell the end of general suffrage,'' for recognition
would mean that the elite had won ''the right to be heard in the conduct of the
business of the republic,'' and that they cared ''for more than their private
happiness.'' As for those who would be excluded, they had not only chosen their
fate by remaining passive, but they had, unconsciously, affirmed ''one of the
most important negative liberties we have enjoyed since the end of the ancient
world, freedom from politics.''

This last remark illustrates Arendt's profound equivocality about politics, an
equivocality that led her to welcome spontaneous political action, but to
distrust action when the stakes became so large as to threaten to incorporate
the concerns that are located closer to or within ''private'' life. She wanted a
pure form of politics, one that was consistent with the claim that ''power is to
an astonishing degree independent of material factors.'' Political institutions,
she declared flatly, should be made independent of economic forces. It was her
vision of pure politics that led her during the late 1960's to oppose the
Vietnam War, to defend civil disobedience, to criticize the involvement of
universities in the war business, and, within limits, to welcome some aspects of
the student protest movements. In all of these commitments one can see a common
element: a support of actions that were primarily political, or at least could
be seen that way, and without economic motives or broad social aims.  Sheldon
Wolin Professor of Politics, Princeton University
On Judgment

Much of mo d ern thought has sought to escape from the responsibilit y,
uncertainty and variability of judgment. There has been a desper ate search for
some certainty, some authority, some universal sta ndards, some method or
decision procedures that one can substitute fo r the precariousness of judgment.
In our daily life where the pow er of judgment should flourish, there are overt
and covert attemp ts to replace it with something else - manipulation,
conditioning, hidden persuaders, a calculus of competing interests - all of
which aim at destruction of what is genuinely political, judgmental, a nd
communal.

The only self-description that Arendt ever accepted to characterize what she was
doing was that of an independent thinker.  She did not think of herself as an
''activist,'' or as a ''theorist'' laying down prescriptions for what is to be
done. To many, it seemed perplexing that she who spoke so eloquently and
incisively about the meaning and dignity of politics resisted the temptation to
indoctrinate others or to try to bridge the gap between thinking and acting. She
told us while ''there are other people who are primarily interested in doing
something I am not. I can very well live without doing anything. But I cannot
live without trying to understand whatever happens.'' What was at the very
center of her being was the need to think but not necessarily to think in the
way in which ''professional thinkers'' think. Throughout her writings she took
herself to be a spectator of human affairs - seeking to understand them in their
particularity and their ''exemplary validity.'' Throughout her writings she
constantly returns to the theme of the primacy of the spectator. She loved to
cite the parable ascribed to Pythagoras and repeated by Diogenes Laertius:
''Life ...is like a festival: just as some come to the festival to compete, some
to ply their trade, but the best people come as spectators so in life the
slavish men go hunting for fame or gain, the philosophers for truth.''

But as she interpreted this parable, it was not the quest for truth that she
emphasized; it was the quest for meaning and understanding which is manifested
in judgment. Her quarrel with the philosophic tradition, the two-world theory,
and the resu lting ''metaphysical fallacies'' was that there was an ineluctable
tendency in this tradition to turn away from particularity tow ard the sky of
ideas or some transcendent reality, or to some univers als by which we could
subsume particularity. Whether the context wa s political philosophy, or moral
philosophy, or the search for some s ort of metaphysical truth, she felt that it
tended to miss what w as most distinctive about our humanity - the capacity to
judge.  Richard Bernstein T . Wistar Brown Professor of Philo sophy, Haverford
College

On Zionism

Hannah Arendt developed her own, almost unique, kind of Zionism. To be more
accurate, her brand of Zionism was not much different from the one adopted by a
number (of) Israeli intellectuals. But they were involved in the political life
and activity of Israel - and in its wars too - and therefore were compelled to
recognize the necessity, if not the inevitability, of what happened in the
state.  Hannah Arendt, on the other hand, could allow herself the privilege of
being an observer, endowed ... with clear insight, yet avoiding the mines of the
term ''realistic'' or ''real-politik.'' For instance, she definitely preferred
the idea of ''a Jewish homeland'' to that of a Jewish state. Now, I for one, if
I'm allowed to speak for myself, shared, still share her preference for similar
reasons.  For me too the idea of a state was and is alien, superfluous. The main
goal of Zionism was and is for me not the state but the fabrication of a
specifically Jewish world, a framework of a people wherein the Jew can live as a
man among men, create his own culture, gain his dignity.

The trouble was that we were not allowed to have a homeland. The political
situation and animosity, later on the armed attack, of the Arabs, forced the
Jews in Palestine - including those who did not want it - to choose the only
solution available, namely, a state.

Certainly, there were the others too, those who claimed the right of the Jews to
have their own state. But they too became state oriented mainly after and
because of the Holocaust, a fact that no ideology, no philosophy, could dismiss
in its tragic, horrible consequences.

According to Hannah Arendt - and one cannot but agree with her - the greatness
of the Yishuv (the Jewish community in Palestine before the state) was that it
was the conscious product of the concerted wish of the Jewish people and not the
predestined product of any natural forces to which the Jewish people were
subject. Praising thus the Yishuv, Hannah Arendt was faithful to her basic
philosophical idea about the responsibility of man for his fate. But the tragic
truth was that the Jewish people, both in Europe and in Palestine, were subject
to ''natural forces'' and were compelled to find an answer in these facts. The
answer was, unfortunately, not philosophical but rather a practical one, as
unsavoury as it happened to be.  Matti Megged Fellow of Bard Center and Visiting
Professor, Gra duate Faculty, New School for Social Research
On Anti-Semitism

The persistence of anti-Semitism, and its unlikely but essential place among the
critical motives of modern politics, vexed Hannah Arendt deeply. Her many
writings on the Jews begin with this fact.  It was Arendt who summoned
intellectuals to the modern story of the Jews, who began by announcing the
strange truth that ''of all the great unsolved political questions of our
century, it should have been this seemingly small and unimportant Jewish problem
that had the dubious honor of setting the whole infernal machine in motion.''
She liked to quote David Rousset's terrifying remark that ''normal men do not
know that everything is possible.'' Arendt's own Jewishness, her bitter quarrel
with Zionism, her startling misrepresentation of Jewish conduct under the Nazis
were all generated by a method of making sense out of anti-Semitism, a method
which marked her as perhaps the last great Jewish believer in Europe.

The Judenrate, (in her view) did what the Rothschilds had done.  They played the
same historical role in the undoing of their people.  They, the bankers at the
courts and the bureaucrats in the ghettos, deluded the herd and made profit from
the government, and so were the real agents of anti-Semitism, the callow
instruments of the war against the Jews. The emancipation of the Jews in modern
Europe, Arendt concluded, was defeated by the internecine rivalries of Jewish
society. The opportunity of the new Europe, politically and philosophically
reconstructed, was squandered. Arendt never doubted that such an opportunity
existed; but what is most objectionable about her account of anti-Semitism is
not its sunny faith that the malice might have been rolled back; it is her
method. Arendt blames the victim. ''Jews ... do not wish under any circumstances
to discuss their share of responsibility,'' whereas ''the sources of modern
anti-Semitism must be found in certain aspects of Jewish history and
specifically Jewish functions during the last centuries.''

No. It is to be found in certain aspects of German history, and French history,
and Russian history. Not in J ewish money, but in German industry; not in Rahel
Varhagen's atti c, but in the drawing rooms of the Faubourg-St. Germain; not in
the stratification of the Jewish community, but in all the unlucky clas ses
beneath the kaisers and the czars; not in Jewish achievement, but in the pitiful
inability of certain political cultures to to lerate it; not in the Jewish
insistence upon difference, but in the non-Jewish insistence upon sameness.
Study the goyim, in short, not the Jews - and the whites, not the blacks. And
the secret police , not the informer.  There is something morally quite simple
about totalitarianism, and about the hatred for whole peoples and races, that
corresponds to thehistorical fact that the victims were, in the se systems of
slavery and murder, simply powerless.

Anti-Semitism was an intervention in Jewish life; it came unbidden from the
outside. It discriminated against Jews and tortured them and killed them, all
without their consent. When the victim is innocent, evil is radical. When the
victim is an accomplice, evil is - banal.  Leon Wieseltier Member, Society of
Fellows, Harvard University

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Hannah Arendt photo of audience at conference
photo of Adolf Hitler addressing storm trooper rally in 1934

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Who Owns Sadat?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 564 words


No less than when he was alive, the world struggles to possess Anwar Sadat. Wise
Egyptians want to preserve his rough passage from hostility to peace with
Israel. Wise Israelis seek to enshrine the legitimacy he finally conferred upon
their state. Arabs in many places interpret his murder as divine retribution for
betrayal. The Soviet Union cites his fate as the destiny of those who would
oppose it. And Americans, though they admired him more than any foreign figure
of the last decade, now quarrel about how to read his life and death.

The Reagan Administration, for instance, demeans its tribute by making the
contest over Awacs a posthumous referendum on Mr. Sadat - a frantic effort to
court the Saudis, who disowned him and denounced his noblest act. Other
Americans have run past the bier with equal haste to exploit the murder for
their denunciations of Israeli intransigence or Soviet-sponsored terrorism.

The death of large men should have meaning. But it will not be found in the
familiar political preoccupations of the day. This slain Egyptian leader defied
the conventions of his time. He merits a higher place in memory.

Anwar Sadat was extraordinary because he invested his hard-won, despotic power
in one fateful mission, an enterprise of humanity and national interest,
brilliantly combined. Unlike even more powerful contemporaries, he came to
recognize the advantage of abandoning enmity, of declaring a whole generation's
costly yet useless conflict ''won'' and forever ended. And to this stroke, he
brought a flair for gesture that pierced long-sterile diplomacies and touched
people around the world.

There is no way to know whether his peace with Israel will last.  It can last,
if he was right in calculating the deepest interests and character of his
people, and Israel's. It can last if his gestures and policies are reciprocated,
as they were by Prime Minister Begin's unflinching appearance at his funeral. It
can last if sponsors of a wider peace will recognize the paradoxical role of
force - Egypt's, Israel's and America's - in evoking his vision.

But the inspiration to be drawn from Anwar Sadat's performance should not depend
only on his achievements. Like General de Gaulle in Algeria (though not in
Europe), and like President Nixon in China (though not in Vietnam), Mr. Sadat
seized an opportunity for historic reconciliation - a chance that others could
not even contemplate.  Such opportunities do not come to every leader, nor does
the strength to pursue them. Most cannot leap into history by defying the
gravity of conventional wisdom. But leaders should dream of it.

Do the conflicts of interest between the United States and Soviet Union put a
compact of coexistence and arms reduction beyond reach?  Are the Western
democracies helpless to liberate their diplomacies from the craven politics of
oil? Are Americans so poor or greedy that they cannot devise an economic revival
without depriving the needy and neglecting the communal amenities of life?
Circumstance shapes the great questions in every place and time.  Bu t the
questions do not exist until someone appears to ask, and th en strives to answer
them. Anwar Sadat was one who dared.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Sunday Observen By Russel Baker Getting There First
Patrick McDonnell

SECTION: Section 6; Page 29, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 798 words


Have you ever thought how weird it must have been to be standing on the beach
when Columbus discovered America? Fellow rows ashore while you're standing there
gaping - he's going to be dressed very oddly, isn't he? - and says, ''Is this
old Cathay, Japan, India, Vietnam or Indonesia?''

If you don't think this is some kind of new confidence game, you're not equipped
to survive long in America, but since he has you outnumbered, what with all
those oarsmen, it doesn't hurt to be polite, so you say something like, ''It's
America, sport.''

''How about that!'' Columbus cries to his crew. ''I have discovered America,
men. Hoist the Spanish flag and break out the good sherry.'' Naturally you would
figure you were dealing with a bit of a nit. If you had a long memory,
Columbus's behavior might contrast unfavorably with Julius Caesar's behavior
when he landed in England 1,550 years earlier.

Remember how it was that day. You were standing on the beach when a group of men
rowed out of the mists there on the English Channel and one of them - a man
wearing a sheet - said, ''We're Romans over from Gaul to look around for a few
days. Caesar's the name and conquest's the game. And speaking of names, what do
you call this place?''

''England.'' Remember what Caesar said then? Sure you do. He didn't say, ''I
have discovered England, fellows.'' All he said was, ''Let's march inland and
enjoy a few conquests.''

This illuminates the big difference between Caesar and Columbus.  Both were
Italian traveling men with plenty of cheek, but Caesar had a logical mind while
Columbus was a sloppy thinker.

Consider: Caesar is coming into shore by boat and sees a stranger standing on
the beach. Maybe he has always wanted to discover a country. Maybe he has said
to Brutus, ''One of these days I want to sail the ocean blue and come to a land
hitherto unknown to man and be its discoverer so that in ages to come my name
will be perpetuated in such institutions as Caesarea University; Julius, Ohio,
and the Julian Conference of the National Football League.''

Much as he wanted to discover a new land, however, Caesar's logical mind did not
allow him to pass himself off as the discoverer of England. The moment he saw an
Englishman staring at him from the beach, he realized someone had got there
before him.

If Columbus's mind had been as sharp as Caesar's, the nonsense about his
discovering America would not have gotten off the ground.  If I had been there,
I would have been insulted about a wandering sailor's claim that he had
discovered my country and would have tried to straighten him out.

Diplomatically, of course.  ''Much as I hate to disappoint you, Senor,'' I would
have said, ''my folks have lived in this country for generations and have
created a variety of agricultural and hunting societal forms, which would
indicate that this place must have been discovered many, many years ago. Perhaps
centuries ago. May I offer you a martini to dull the pain of your
disappointment?''

Of course, dealing with someone as obtuse as Columbus, who can say what this
might have led to ? Columbus might have sailed back to Europe to ann ounce he
had discovered the martini.

Taking the practical view for a moment, I concede it would have been hard to
talk much sense to Columbus. At the time, as a native American with a long
American pedigree, I wou ld have spoken in an American language incomprehensible
to him and Columbus would have spoken in Italian or Spanish, both languages in
which I am very weak.

An astute mind like Julius Caesar's, however, would never have concluded that a
man's ignorance of the Romance languages proves he doesn't exist. Columbus, with
his more impulsive mind, leaped foolishly to the conclusion that a country that
knew neither Italian or Spanish was fair game to be discovered.

I have heard it said in defense of Columbus that he did not claim the discovery
of America because he didn't know it was America at which he docked, but refuse
to accept this tale. It asks us to believe not simply that Columbus's mind was a
bit illogical, but that he was too dumb to recognize America when he bumped into
it. It is plainly a calumny circulated by Columbus's enemies to ruin his
reputation.

Though not a cool, precise thinker, he was a man whose lively spirit appeals
greatly to me. It would have been wonderful to see his eyes flash when, having
rejected my explanation that America had been discovered eons before his birth,
he insisted that I take him to our leader.

I can see him now as I telephone the White House and say, ''There is a fellow
named Columbus here who says he has just discovered America,'' and then hang up
and break the news to him.

''Ed Meese says he's not going to wake up the President for something like
that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of Columbus on the beach

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THROUGH RED-COLORED GLASSES

BYLINE: By PAUL SCHLESINGER Jr.; Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s most recent book is
''Robert Kennedy and His Times.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1645 words


POLITICAL PILGRIMS Travels of Western Intellectuals to the Soviet Union, China
and Cuba 1928-1978.  By Paul Hollander.  524 pp. New York: Oxford University
Press. $25.

THE annals of human gullibility are endless and banal. Still, there is something
at once comic and alarming when some of the more spectacular suckers turn out to
be people who pride themselves on the critical use of reason - i.e.,
intellectuals. This is the paradox addressed by Paul Hollander, a professor of
sociology at the University of Massachusetts and an associate of the Russian
Research Center at Harvard, in his survey of Western intellectuals who traveled
to Communist societies over the past half-century.

Professor Hollander feels more alarm than amusement in this situation; there is
little irony in his manner, so the book is not so much fun as it could be. Like
too many other sociologists, he is a ponderous writer, and much of his
unrelenting annotation of political and intellectual folly is familiar. Half a
century ago, Malcolm Muggeridge (in ''Winter in Moscow'') and Eugene Lyons (in
''The Red Decade'') began to expose the sentimental idiocies of Western tourists
in Soviet Russia.

On the other hand, although the latter-day delusions of visitors to Cuba,
Vietnam, China and other Communist utopias have not precisely escaped notice,
they have not before received such comprehensive treatment. And there is great
value in bringing all this material together. Professor Hollander quotes
lavishly and well; ''Political Pilgrims'' is a splendid anthology of human cred
ulity.  Here is Anna Louise Strong, the ever hopeful American apologist for
Communism, on Stalin: His ''method of running a committee reminded mesomewhat of
J ane Addams ... or of Lillian D. Wald. ... They had the same kind of
democratically efficient technique, but they used more high pressure than Stalin
did.'' Or the political scientist Edward Friedman on t he Chairman: ''Mao was
almost invariably responding in auniquely crea tive and profoundly ethical way
to deep political crises.''

In his account of the mechanisms of self-deception, Professor Hollander makes
effective use of the concept of ''contextual redefinition.'' By this he means
the way that activities are transformed by their context, so that what is
detestable in one society becomes uplifting in another. Thus the left-wing
intellectual feels that any society based on state ownership, whatever its
superficial flaws, is essentially good; any society based on private ownership,
whatever its superficial attractions, is essentially corrupt. Poverty represents
a shameful failure in capitalism; but when associated with egalitarianism and
the subordination of material to spiritual needs, it expresses a simple,
uncorrupted way of life. Manual labor is demeaning under capitalism, ennobling
under Communism. Child labor is abominable in the United States, but in Cuba the
sight of children working 15 hours a week in the fields is symbolic of high and
unified purpose. As Angela Davis once said, ''The job of cutting cane had become
qualitatively different since the revolution.'' Contextual redefinition,
Professor Hollander writes, also produces ''euphoric response to objects,
sights, or institutions in themselves unremarkable and also to be found in the
visitors' own societies.'' ''There is something about a Russian train standing
at a station that thrills,'' wrote Waldo Frank. ''The little locomotive is
human.  ... The dingy cars are human.''

One would like to think that such quotations might have an admonitory effect on
political pilgrims of the future. But given the craving for absolutes in so many
minds, one fears that they won't.  Readers also may be distracted by Professor
Hollander's effort to turn his historical material to polemical ends. For he has
bigger fish to fry - most particularly, Western intellectuals as a class.

Modern intellectuals, according to Professor Hollander, are to be defined by
their antagonism toward the societies in which they live.  His historical
perspective on alienation seems at times a trifle shaky. ''It is interesting to
reflec t,'' he w rites, ''why the estrangement of American intellectuals ... wa
s not more strongly developed before the 1930's and why World War I did not
leave more ofa residue of bitterness and cynicism.'' Has e veryone forgotten the
Lost Generation? And the estrangement of the 1930's, in his view, wasnothing
compared with the estrangement of the 1960's, when ''perhaps for the first time
in history ... the lone vo ices of beleaguered intellectuals forming a small,
isolated, crit ical vanguard were replaced ... by a vast, well-orchestrated cho
rus of standardized nay-saying.'' Has everyone forgotten the Grea t Depression?
But, then,sociologists are rarely much good at history.

In any event, this characteristic condition of alienation, Professor Hollander
continues, sets intellectuals on a quest for alternative societies, which they
keep hoping - despite disillusionment after disillusionment - will provide what
their own societies deny them: in the Depression-ridden 1930's, full employment;
in the emptily affluent 1960's, spiritual exaltation; at all times, status and
recognition joined with submergence in a larger community and nobler purpose.

Above all, intellectuals seek cosmic meaning in existence. They take, Professor
Hollander assures us, ''an 'organic' view of life (which implies that things
hang together, add up to something) ...  Such inclinations reflect revulsion
from disorder, fragmentation, and what they imply: meaninglessness. ... The
overintegrated and 'organic' perception of the world expresses the
intellectuals' striving not only for meaning but also harmony,'' etc. Deprived
of transcendent religious faith by the advance of secularization, intellectuals
search endlessly for its equivalent in social terms. So while their opposition
to their own society gives them a superficial reputation for skepticism and
critical detachment, their central attribute in fact is an insatiable credulity.

Having defined intellectuals in this considerably tendentious way, Professor
Hollander confronts the task, as he describes it, ''of deciding who the
important and influential Western intellectuals are. By what criteria should one
choose? ... Obviously the choices were to be made among those who were at some
stage in their life strongly critical of their own society and favorably
disposed'' toward one or another communist society. By this triumphant
circularity of argument, Professor Hollander's chosen intellectuals turn out to
illustrate hi s argument with happy exactitude.

One hardly need dwell on the gaps in Professor Hollander's logic.  Intellectuals
do not in fact form a cohesive organization that passes resolutions, adopts
platforms and enforces discipline. The essence of intellectual activity is
disagreement. Professor Hollander has fallen into the trap of synecdoche -
taking a part for the whole. Some Western intellectuals are alienated from their
societies, but most intellectuals, it must be said, are not. Some are even given
to rhapsodic celebration of their societies. Would not Professor Hollander
regard the ''neo-conservatives'' of the 1980's as intellectuals? Is he not an
intellectual himself? Also, quite a number of semi-alienated intellectuals
visited the Soviet Union and detested what they saw: Bertrand Russell, Andre
Gide, George Kennan, Muggeridge. To force all intellectuals into the model of
gullible left-wingers is procrusteanism a outrance.

Even more reckless is Professor Hollander's thesis that all intellectuals are
lusting after a secular equivalent of religion. A formidable intellectual
tradition, of which, say, William James and Isaiah Berlin are representative
figures, vigorously rejects the holistic illusion that Professor Hollander
imposes on all intellectuals. Against the notion that things hang together and
add up to something, they deny that there is any predestined harmony of moral
and social ends. Alas, they have no existence in Professor Hollander's
constricted lexicon.

But his purpose, it would appear, is not to inquire into the varieties of
intellectual experience but to defame intellectuals as a class. ''For many
years,'' he confesses on his first page, ''I harbored misgivings about their
ability to make what I considered sound political judgments.'' His premises are
those of neo-conservatism. He feels in particular that there is too much
criticism of authority in modern life. Like many conservatives, he suffers, even
in the age of Reagan, from delusions of persecution.  ''The mass media,'' he
writes, ''have a vested (commercial) interest in focusing on and colorfully
ventilating the defects of society. ... Social conditions in American society
(and in other Western societies too) favor the public expressions of discontent
and social criticism whatever their sources may be.'' The ''cumulative effect of
this steady debunking and preoccupation with the ills of society'' is to make
political elites lose their morale and nerve. What we need is bolder assertion
of authority; if only the American Government had pursued the Vietnam War
''effectively, with determination and sense of purpose''! But those terrible
intellectuals are going around sowing discontent, weakening everyone's will and
discrediting the institutions of authority.

Well, it's a point of view. Other s may thin k that our society needs better,
not less, criticism; that the p eople who defend injustice do our society more
damage than tho se who simply object to what is going on; and that institutions
of au thority deserve only therespect they earn. ''There is no worse heresy ,''
as Lord Acton said, ''than that the office sanctifies the holder of it.'' It is
too bad that Professor Hollander decided to bury a us eful book in a dubious
tirade.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REALITY ANEMIA

BYLINE: By EVA HOFFMAN; Eva Hoffman is an editor of The New York Times Week in
Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1865 words


WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF NO CONTEXT By George W.S. Trow.  230 pp. Boston: Little,
Brown & Co. $12.95.

WHITE middle-class Americans growing up during the postwar decades were
strangely dissatisfied. Vietnam didn't quite account for all of it, nor did
other political disaffections. What was wrong? The youthful malcontents talked
about how things didn't seem quite ''real,'' and how people didn't express their
true feelings. It all seemed quite banal, jejune and annoyingly self-indulgent.
And yet - and yet, the talk, for all its awkwardness, wasn't about nothing.
They were bothered by something, these well-educated and apparently pampered
young, even if that something was very tenuous and very difficult to name.

It is George Trow's most interesting achievement in the first, and more
important, of this book's two companion essays that he has found a mode for
describing this elusive middle-class malaise without being reductively
analytical or vapidly sentimental. His method couldbe called lyrical sociology,
and his diagnosis of his generation's complaint is that they have suffered from
reality anemia.

In fact, the form Mr. Trow, a 38-year-old New Yorker writer of short stories and
dry satires of WASPish and corporate follies, has invented for this essay is so
original and unabashedly idiosyncratic that on entering it one experiences a
kind of reading vertigo. The immediate subject of the piece is contemporary
media culture and the sensibility it fosters; but this is hardly a sociological
tract or a mundane history of the period as seen through the mindless eye of the
tube. Mr. Trow makes his observations on the ''context of no context'' - a thin
cultural landscape with television much too prominently at its center -through a
collage of aphorisms, personal meditations and a species of structuralist
dissection. Nowhere in the essay are there diatribes on the dullness of
suburbia, case histories of fed-up TV watchers turned rebels, Marxist analyses
of advertising economics or thematic critiques of specific programs.  Instead,
there are short riffs on such subjects as the decline of adulthood (''In the New
History, the preferences of a child carried as much weight as the preferences of
an adult.''), the shift from history to demographics (''Groups of more than one
were now united not by a common history but by common characteristics.''), the
supplanting of authority by experts, the ascendancy of the ''problem'' as a form
of discourse, the scale of experience created by television (''The trivial is
raised up to power in it. The powerful is lowered toward the trivial.''), the
distortions of psychic distance created by too many people (''The middle
distance fell away. ... Two grids remained. The grid of two hundred million and
the grid of intimacy.''), the special reality status of celebrities
(''Celebrities have an intimate life and a life in the grid of two hundred
million. ... Of all Americans, only they are complete.''), and the meretricious,
make-believe power of Robert Moses's World's Fair.

What sort of way is this to slice up a subject? Where do these categories come
from and what do they add up to? In some cases, their choice seems entirely
subjective. Mr. Trow feels free to swoop down on whatever bits of his own
experience strike him as revealing, to pick out snippets of information just
because they have made a vivid impression, and in doing so he sometimes risks
glibness. But eventually his selection of terms begins to t ake on an internal
logic. For all the occasional cuteness, the deadpan naivete, Mr. Trowis after
fundamental matters. What he wants to catch, through his abstractions and his
cerebral metaphors, are the underlying messages,meanings, energies behind
pervasive cultural phenomena; his observations on people in masses, on the
psychic distance between individuals and the crowd, and on our relationship to
advertisements and products are an attempt to grasp basic conditions of the
modern American environment and describe the way they affect our consciousness
and organize our experience.

The most basic condition, in his view, is a kind of experiential and moral
bloodlessness. Within the heart of the heart of the country, he perceives a gap,
an absence, a deprivation. For some reason, in his parents' generation, he
suggests, the sense of authority, of self-confidence, of adulthood felt by
middle-class Americans diffused itself and evaporated. The amount of personal
power inhering within any one individual diminished as it got distributed into
aggregates of people -demographic units. This left his own generation - ''the
babies'' - without frames of reference, models of certainty, a context. It left
them also without comfort, without ''a sense of home.'' ''So one or two of the
babies began to experience a problem,'' he writes. ''Loneliness rose to the
surface.  It was a problem. No exit for the babies. Dead end for the babies.''

Television is the force that has come to fill the empty, cold spaces; but the
substitutes it offers for personal experience are themselves a chilling con.
''What is it? It's television,'' Mr. Trow writes in one of his more direct
pronouncements on the subject.  ''It's a program on television. A little span of
time. How does it work? It's a little span of time made friendly by repetition.
In a way, it doesn't exist at all. Just what does, then? A certain ability to
transmit and receive and then to apply layers of affection and longing and
doubt. Two abilities: to do a very complex kind of work, involving electrons,
and then to cover the coldness of that with a hateful familiarity. Why hateful?
Because it hasn't anything to do with a human being as a human being is strong.
It has to do with a human being as a human being is weak and willing to be
fooled.''

Television offers family hours and intimate glimpses of celebrities to give a
simulacrum of warmth, discussions of problems and shells ofidentities (lawyer,
cop, lawyer who is a cop) to give the momentary illusion of context; it even
treats viewers to game shows based on the participants' discomfort to get at
what feels like reality. But it cannot mask the fact that it is not real, and
the pretense creates an unease of its own.

It is this weakening of experience, this failure of individual power, Mr. Trow
suggests, that caused his generational cohorts their embarrassments in the face
of false authority, provoked their ironies toward their own middle-class
identities, even their rebellions.  Speaking of the fedora hat that his father,
hoping to initiate him into ''the traditional manners of the high bourgeoisie,''
expected him to wear, he writes, ''It turns out that while I am at home in many
strange places, I am not free even to visit the territory I was expected to
inhabit effortlessly. To wear a fedora, I must first torture it out of shape so
that it can be cleaned of the embarrassment in it.''

The diagnosis seems to me penetrating. It's diametrically opposed to the myth -
which continues to have some potency - of America the raw, America the
energetic. But then, from Alexis de Tocqueville to Paul Goodman, there have
always been observers of America who, beneath the currents of collective, mass
energies, have noticed a strange lack of individual self-assurance, a languid,
demoralizing anxiety. In any case, if ''Within the Context of No Context'' is
convincing, it's not by virtue of a systematic analysis, but in the thrust of
Mr. Trow's vision, the angle of his attack.

Aphorism is the mode of concentrated insight. Mr. Trow's aphorisms work because
his relationship to the culture is intense. Unlike Marshall McLuhan, to whose
later writings this essay could, in some respects, be compared, Mr. Trow does
not offer a philosophy of popular culture; but his antennae are alert to its
thickness and weight, the way its contents feel on the skin and mind. We live
perpetually suspended between subjectivity and data; Mr. Trow locates that
intersection with oblique, subjective precision. For all the urbane
understatement of his tone, this is hardly a detached exercise in cultural
criticism. Reality anemia - the dissociations it causes, even the ironies it
requires - upsets him, and the distress makes his writing passionate as well as
cool.

In his second essay, titled ''Within That Context, One Style,'' it's mostly
cool. Like the first essay, this piece - a profile of Ahmet Ertegun, president
of Atlantic Records and probably rock music's most prominent entrepreneur - was
initially published in The New Yorker. Putting them together is strained. There
are some thematic links. The later stages of rock, over whose development and
marketing Ahmet Ertegun to some extent presided, take place against the
background of a cultural free-for-all, in which no rules matter and therefore no
violations are possible. There's the same attention, although on a more trivial
scale, to the messages conveyed by style, to essential energies - in this case
of rock - and to the twists of ironic commentary on those energies. But for the
purposes of personifying his version of contemporary sens ibility, Mr. Trow did
not choose the most illustrative figure. For one thing, Ahmet Ertegun, the son
of a Turkish diplomat who be came infatuated with American pop culture and was
instrumental in bringing black rhythmand-blues music to wide audiences, is s
uccessful partly becausehe represents an older mode. As Mr. Trow hims elf
describes it, Ahmet Ertegun has ''authority in the style of the o ld movie
industry, the style of ingenious contrivance, of theatrical impersonation; the
style of costume, of luxury, of cafe society.In (his Atlantic Records) offices,
where everyone else has bee n reduced to a less potent style - Relentless
Neutrality, Adolesc ence, One Step Beyond Hip - Ahmet acts like a magnate and
dresses l ike David Windsor.'' Fora portrait of somebody firmly embedded ''with
in the context of no context,'' Mr. Trow might have done better wi th one of
those baby moguls who have risen in various media indust ries with meteoric
speedand apparently no managerial method, or with a contemporary rock starwhose
music reflects the sense that it's all up for grabs in its veryrhythms.

Mr. Trow is too acute an observer, though, not to give us engaging moments. He
can see self-conscious commentary in the decor of a restaurant or the way a man
dresses (''People in disheveled velvet - fallen hippie aristocrats.'') and
register shifts of power in the most understated inflections of address. There
are amusing glimpses of Mick Jagger and good descriptions of celebrity-filled,
strangely funless parties.

But the subject, in this second essay, is simply too ephemeral to carry the
weight of larger analysis, and Mr. Trow's tone, with its relentless low-key
irony, becomes quickly annoying. As a piece of catching-the-moment, on-the-scene
journalism, the profile has enough perceptive nuggets to make good reading; but
its life should not have been prolonged beyond its occasion. Its companion piece
was startling to come upon the first time; the surprise is how well, in spite of
its stylish simplicities, it sustains itself between the covers of a book.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TWO POETS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1910 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------

Paul Zweig is the chairman of the Comparative Literature Departmentat Queens
College. He is the author of ''The Heresy of Self-Love'' and several volumes of
poetry.
TWO-HEADED POEMS By Margaret Atwood.  115 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Cloth, $10.95. Paper, $4.95.
HADES IN MANGANESE By Clayton Eshleman.  114 pp. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Black
Sparrow Press.  Cloth, $20. Paper, $5.
By PAUL ZWEIG

I have often felt intimidated by the terrible certainty of Margaret Atwood's
poems, their lines ranging on ahead like skirmishers in a battle. Their
declarative growl lets us know how dangerous the world is, and how vigilant one
must be. Watch out for history, watch out for politics. And that's not all.
Sitting with her young daughter, the poet meditates on the peril of ''bladed
stones posing innocuous as daisies.'' ''The lawn holds my daughter like a
hostage.'' Over there is a du ck pond:
The lure of eleven birds on water, the glitter and true shine, how can I tell
her that white, that bluegreen gold is treachery?

Miss Atwood ''crouches'' in her garden and pulls out weeds with ugly names,
''ragweed, pigweed,'' while, out there, everything is falling ''into the dark
pit left by Cincinnati/ after it crumbled.'' As for politics:
All politicians are amateurs: wars bloom in their heads like flowers on
wallpaper, pins strut on their maps...
The fighting will be local, they know, and lethal.  Their eyes flick from target
to target: window, belly, child.  The goal is not to get killed.
To reach that goal Miss Atwood attacks; her lines bark monosyllabled
perceptions. Even her tender moments creak with menace:
My daughter crackles paper, blows
on the tree to make it live, fes- toons
herself with silver...
The verbs jump like gunshots, as if Miss Atwood were trying to ward off the
vulnerability, the unguardedness of mere child's play. ''Be ruthless when you
have to,'' she wants to warn her little daughter, but apparently restrains
herself.

Why is Margaret Atwood's world such an unfriendly place? Why can't she imagine
any ''way of being human/ that won't destroy her?'' Because history is a chain
letter of disasters; because men are ''hangsmen'' whom women marry to keep from
being executed for the crime of saying ''water, night, willow, rope hair, earth
belly, cave, meat,/ shroud, open, blood,'' while men say ''foot, boot, order,
city, fist, roads, time,/ knife.''

That there might be some other view of politics and history seems not to occur
to her. She is a master of exclusions, a rhetorician of bad news. Yet the
reasons she gives for her ill humor never seem quite enough. They resemble
tirades we have heard before, slogans that simplify without being memorable.
Surely somewhere, sometime, there have been women who said, ''foot, boot'' etc.,
and a duck pond that was not treacherous.

There are several fine poems in this volume - ''The Right Hand,'' ''The Woman
Makes Peace With Her Faulty Heart,'' the first of the ''Four Small Elegies'' -
but Miss Atwood's stridency becomes monochord in the end, a wearying,
all-too-predictable assault. It diminishes her book.
*

In a forceful preface, Clayton Eshleman explains the significance of his title,
''Hades in Manganese.'' Man's first art was painted on cave walls in the
Dordogne area of France, using manganese oxide and various shades of ocher. The
figures are of bisons, stags, bears, elephants, horses, often wounded by arrows.
Having penetrated into the ''underworld'' of the caves, man depicted a psychic
realm in which human and animal had not yet been segregated by conscious
thought, not yet simplified by the arrogant humanness of Greek statuary. In the
Dordogne caves, Mr. Eshleman writes, ''I felt I was witnessing the result of the
crisis of paleolithic people separatin g the animal out of their thus-to-be
human head s, and that what we call'the underworld' has, as its impulse, such a
catastrophe behind it.''

The poems are a meditation on this catastrophe, or ''fall,'' which, Mr. Eshleman
believes, still shadows man by suppressing his kinship with the nonhuman world.
This world has become his enemy, and he has become his own enemy. Mr. Eshleman's
preface accounts for the pulsing recurrence of cave and animal imagery from poem
to poem and for sudden plunges into vast perspectives of time and myth. If a
''Hades'' of nonhuman impulse lurks in the psychic dark, then the urgent duty of
the artist is to shatter the barriers and release from within the lost brothers,
with all their animal power.

I dwell on what I take to be the poet's program, because the reader of these
poems is likely to need a lot of help. What matter if we have seen the ideas
before in various guises - Sigmund Freud, Andre Breton, Georges Bataille, C.G.
Jung?

In the poems, the ideas become flesh.  Here we find something quite different
from the lucid preface. We find images unraveling in hurried skeins, bewildering
shifts in tone, leaps and gaps, puns, willful incoherences. Assertions are made
in which often t here seems less than meets the eye: ''Memory is acquaintance.
Memory is not a friend.'' What can this mean? Mr.  Eshleman seem s intent on
including in these poems every thought that passes throug h his mind, every
remark, however cliched:
Somehow it seems wrong, a minute on Vietnam refugees at sea, starving, not
allowed to dock, followed by a minute on a new world's record in cherry pit
spitting, wrong because the pit record trivializes a human plight ...

The poems are filled with such platitudes. Mr. Eshleman lets go of nothing. He
will not cooperate with taste, judgment, esthetic standards, for they are,
presumably the enemy, the suppressors. The unleashing must be complete if
paleolithic ''Hades'' is to be uncaged.

These poems rarely linger for long in subject matter, which he considers ''a
totalitarianism of imagination ....'' Instead, we find wild dives into a magma
of words that defy anything as repressive as analysis or understanding:
O dead living depths!  One face cooing to another plungers that went off,
torpedos, in dream, to spin through a pasture at noon, sphincter-milled,
sheep-impact- ed, the lower body attached to separation, pulling the seam of it
along cold cave stone, the head as a pollen-loaded feeler tunneling to ooze a
string of eggs where the rock, strengthening its yes, returned the crawler to
vivid green sunlight that was profundity now invested with linkage, the whole
sky, a tainted link, man, a maggot on stilts, capable of leaving elevation at
the mouth to seam unyield to his face.

I am reminded of Rimbaud's ''reasoned unreasoning of thesenses,'' or the
surrealists' technique of ''automatic writing.'' Unfortunately, Mr. Eshleman's
method exposes not only the ''depths'' of his psyche, but plenty of surface
debris as well.

But this is intentional. The skidding pace of these poems, their opacity and
awesome self-indulgence, are part of his program. And some of the poems are
haunting. ''From St. Cirque to Caravaggio'' superimposes the wall painting in a
Dordogne cave on Caravaggio's painting ''St. John in the Wilderness'' in a
double exposure that Mr. Eshleman makes mysterious and convincing. Elsewhere, in
the midst of a ticker tape of a poem called ''Nameitsense,'' this astonishing
passage occurs:
The turnstile of the Fall began to creak. Lance-marked again and again,
immortality

tested, a few pulled the frag- ments of their sex-steered, sex-dented dreams out
of the icy wound
the pleistocene sky had become and stared into their dish of brains.

Considered as an experiment, does this book succeed? It is for the reader
finally to decide how much gross ore he cares to mine for - here and there - a
gleam of gold. Personally, I found ''Hades in Manganese'' platitudinous,
mystifying, and yet, now and then, when I was on the verge of giving up,
surprisingly good.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Margaret Atwood photo of Clayton Eshleman

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Reading and Writing;
THE RIGHT VOICE CAN'T LIE

BYLINE: By Anatole Broyard

SECTION: Section 7; Page 51, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 941 words


''His voice is his own,'' the critics say, or, plumping for the tautology,
''uniquely his own.'' We talk about voice more than we talk about style or
structure. We tend to think of literature as one person speaking to another, an
intimate transaction.

What is voice exactly? In Philip Roth's ''The Ghost Writer,'' a character says
that voice is ''something that begins at around the back of the knees and
reaches well above the head.'' While this is forceful, it gives us a sense only
of the scope of voice.

Pressed for a definition, I would say that voice is the sound of conviction, of
the writer finding the truth of his experience. It is not eloquence, but the
best personal tone the writer can produce, a tone very close to the one he uses
when he is alone and talking to himself.

Finding his voice, the music of his history, the sound that only he has, like an
illustration of the principle of identity, is the first step in the development
of a novelist or short story writer. Once he has this, we can hardly refuse to
hear him. It is the call of our kind, our species. When Dostoyevsky's
Underground Man says, ''I'm a sick man. I'm a spiteful man, an unattractive
man,'' he may not be charming, but we already care about him because we
recognize him as one of us.

We might say that voice is the ultimately human, appealing sound we retain when
all the impurities or interferences are filtered out, when contrivance,
pretension, defensiveness and lying are eliminated. (In a sense, a writer cannot
lie if his voice is right.) Roland Barthes was referring to this process of
purification or distillation when he said of Flaubert that ''he had an infinite
correction to perform.''

Ellen Schwamm, Harold Brodkey's wife, told me that he had forbidden her to make
small talk at breakfast. I thought this was rather precious, until I realized
that Brodkey wanted to go from unconscious to unconscious, from the voice of his
dreams to the voice of his novel. When on another occasion I complained to
Brodkey that I sometimes found him rude or hostile, he said, ''Only when you
approach me in the wrong voice.''

The typical voice of major American fiction seems to be one of rueful, ironic
self-examination, as in Saul Bellow's ''Herzog'' or John Updike's ''Too Far to
Go.'' At its purest, in spite of its irony, this voice reminds me of those
heartbreaking tenors in Bach cantatas who represe nt the soul explaining it self
to God. Franz Kafka's voice sometimes sounded like that of a man appealing to
God, but it was a bureaucratic God, a final, indef inable tribunal.  Geoffrey
Hartman, in his ''Criticism in the W ilderness,'' speaks of the ''pentecostal
voice,'' the voice that tes tifies, and we recognizethat one as peculiarly
American. In

''Bad Mouth,'' Robert Adams observes that when a man is deprived of all other
stimuli, as in solitary confinement, his voice alone bears him company.  Jay
Gatsby thought that Daisy's voice was ''full of money,'' and at various ti mes
the voice of American fiction has been full of rhetoric, of politics, of anger,
all sorts of things. Now it seems tobe full of it self. We hear ourselves on
tape. We like the sound of our own voice .

In American films, women have been taught to speak in hoarse, breathy voices,
and I think of Joan Didion's voice as being like that, a cool, classy, unhappy
murmuring. At her best, in stories like ''Debriefing'' and ''Unguided Tour,''
Susan Sontag is the voice of contemporaneity. Vladimir Nabokov wanted to be all
voice, an absolute with nothing so ordinary as a person behind it, and the same
might be said of James Joyce in ''Finnegans Wake.'' In ''Why Are We in Vietnam?
'' Norman Mailer's hero is a disk jockey, and that is Mailer's voice too, disk
jockey to the world, talking against a background of Wagner-ian punk rock. In
his better short stories, John Updike's is the voice of analysis deliquescing
into emotion.

These are exceptions, for the proliferating voice of our fiction is
conversational. As Denis Donoghue points out in ''Ferocious Alphabets,'' which
is reviewed in this issue, conversation simply ''enacts desire,'' ''the desire
of communion.'' It is never definitive, never insistent on beginning, middle and
end. He agrees with Roland Barthes that the ideal conversational companion is
the one who constructs around you the greatest possible resonance. I would
suggest that the compliant modern reader is such a companion, never pressing for
definition, obediently sharing in the enactment of the author's desire while
conferring on him the greatest possible resonance.

Mr. Donoghue discovers a wonderful remark by Walter Benjamin, to the effect that
the spoken word ''is only afflicted by meaning as if by an inescapable disease:
it breaks off in the middle of the process of resounding, and the damming up of
the feeling which was ready to pour forth provokes mourning.'' This is a
brilliant description of a certain kind of American short story in which the
author mourns the curtailing of his voice, his resounding, and treats meaning as
a disease or affliction.

The voice of the author often becomes the fiction. As Freud observed, ''writing
was in its origin the voice of an absent person.'' Our fiction wants to be that
person.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BRADLEY AIR MUSEUM REOPENS

BYLINE: By LAURIE A. O'NEILL

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 2, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk u

LENGTH: 1451 words


WINDSOR LOCKS TWO years ago at the Bradley Air Museum, one of the largest
collections of vintage aircraft in the country was turned into a mass of twisted
wreckage in less than five minutes. ''There was a lot of weeping,'' recalled
Robert F. Pope, a member of the museum's volunteer service crew, who viewed the
havoc caused by a tornado that hit the area on Oct. 3, 1979.

Last weekend, on the second anniversary of the storm, the museum reopened.  The
tornado caused more than $200 million in property damage, left three dead and
injured 500 persons in Windsor, Windsor Locks and Suffield. Winds seemed to
center on the 14-year-old air museum, situated on the west side of Bradley
International Airport.

Twenty-three of the museum's 60 aircraft on display were destroyed and 30 were
damaged, a ticket booth that, minutes before, had been occupied by an employee
was leveled and the roof of the World War II hangar that had served as the
exhibit hall was ripped off. Rain had driven away most visitors by the time the
twister struck and museum employees had time to take cover. There were no
injuries in the immediate vicinity of the museum.

When Charles M. Horner, the museum's operations manager who was out of town that
day, arrived at the scene, he was incredulous. ''The place was unrecognizable.
There was no more landscape. Just piles of debris.'' As Mr. Horner and Philip
O'Keefe, the museum's director, began to assess the damage, their mood turned
from disbelief to despair.

Among the demolished aircraft were a Lockheed Constellation airliner once owned
b y Howard Hughes, a 55-to n Douglas C-133, the largest plane in the museum's
collection, and a rare Douglas F4D Skyray, a Navy fighter plane that rolled over
and over in the fury of the storm until all that remained was a ba ll of blue
fuselage. Allof the large transport planes lay in ruins an d helicopters and
amphibious patrol craft were reduced to rubbl e. All told, damage was estimated
at $10 million.

The reopened museum is housed in a new, blue-and-white steel exhibit hall four
miles west of the old facility. Some of the 25 planes on view are survivors of
the tornado, others represent painstaking restorations and two are new
acquisitions. Their $750,000, 35,000-square-foot home was designed by Russell
Gibson von Dohlen Inc., a Farmington architectural firm. The structure, on a
50-acre tract leased from the state, is part of a long-range, $40 million plan
to make the air museum a major state attraction.

Eight weeks after the tornado, officials of the museum, which is owned and
operated by the Connecticut Aeronautical Historical Association, opened the
ravaged outdoor site to the public, charging a small admission fee to help
finance the massive cleaning and restoration project that lay ahead. In June
1980, 27 surviving aircraft were towed to an interim exhibit site within the
airport and the planes considered too damaged to be restored were removed, some
to scrap yards and others to a small lot along the road that leads to the new
facility.

The search for parts - from canopies to propellers to landing gear -and for new
aircraft acquisitions for the depleted exhibit began with calls to the United
States Air Force Museum in Dayton, Ohio, and to the curators' offices of the
Army, Marine Corps and Navy in Washington, D.C. Most of the aircraft in the
museum's exhibit had been on permanent loan from the military or had been
donated by private owners.

Tips on the whereabouts of abandoned aircraft came into the museum from aviation
buffs around the country. ''We'd get these calls that someone had spotted an old
fighter or transport plane sitting in a field somewhere and we'd send someone
out to look at it,'' said Mr.  Horner. Then museum officials checked with the
appropriate branch of the military to see whether th e airplane could be
acquired.

The search has turned up 11 aircraft to date, including a Vought F-8 Navy
carrier-based fighter plane of the Vietnam War era and an A-4 carrier-based
bomber built in the mid-1950's. Both are in the new exhibit hall and replace
similiar planes lost in the tornado. Four planes are either undergoing
restoration or are in storage and three others, including a McDonnell Douglas
F-4 Phantom, a Navy fighter plane believed to be the 11th of its kind to be
built, are ''technically ours,'' said Mr. Horner, ''but we have to raise enough
money to go and get them.''

The museum's volunteer work crew, made up of aircraft enthusiasts whose
occupations range from carpet layer to truck driver, has fetched six of the new
acquisitions in the museum's truck, giving up vacation time to move the planes
on weekdays, Mr. Horner added, when special wide-load permits can be issued.
They have also made several trips to a major source of aircraft parts, the
Aberdeen Proving Ground, a military testing base in Maryland.

Because there is only one paid restorer on the museum's staff, much of the
repair work has been done by volunteers.  The crew members, said Mr. Horner,
were ''severely hampered in what they could do and how they could do it.'' They
had no heavy equipment such as a crane or fork lift, relying on a truck and tow
chains, and had to do much of the work outdoors without water or electricity in
all kinds of weather.

Though the roof of the hangar housing the original exhibit was peeled off ''like
the lid on a sardine can,'' Mr. Horner said, the aircraft in it fared better in
the tornado than those outdoors.

A Bleriot XI monoplane, built in 1909 in America by Ernest Hall and considered
to be one of the few of its type still in existence, sustained the most damage.
It had been suspended from the roof structure and its fragile wood and fabric
wings were crushed in the barrage of flying metal and glass.

The Bleriot, named for its designer, Louis Bleriot of France, was, in 1909, the
first monoplane to fly across the English Channel and is said to symbolize the
beginning of the aircraft manufacturing industry. Restored, though not to its
original condition, and flyable, the plane was privately owned until 1975, when
the United Technologies Corporation purchased it and donated it to the air
museum. After the tornado, a museum member, Malcolm G. Nichols Jr.  of
Southington, mustered some friends and offered to restore the Bleriot in his
basement to its original, although not flyable, condition with parts that the
private owner had included with the sale of the plane. The project took 18
months.

The museum, whose annual budget is about $250,000, Mr. Horner said, depends for
survival on grants, corporate and private donations, dues from its approximately
1,000 members and admission receipts, as well as an extensive volunteer service
program. Last week, officials announced that the museum had received a $150,000
grant from the United Technologies Corporatio n. The money will be put toward
the museum's $750,000 building loa n from the Federal SmallBusiness
Administration.

Long-range development plans for the Bradley Air Museum call for the rebuilding
on the new site of the old exhibit hangar, which will serve as an aircraft
maintenance and restoration facility. On the drawing board are a seaplane base
and amphibious aircraft exhibit, a series of hangars and planeports for larger
aircraft, an exhibit showing the development of the runway from grass to asphalt
and a recreated village depicting the life of pioneer aviators in the early
1900's. ''It could take 20, even 40 years,'' said Mr. Horner. ''It all depends
on money.''

Of more immediate importance, however, is the readying of more planes for
display, the labeling of each with complete background information and the
creating of exhibit themes around the aircraft, Mr. Horner said.

The ''dings and dents'' visible on some of the planes will eventually be
smoothed out, he said, but until then will remind visitors of the calamitous
October storm. ''We've come a long way,'' Mr. Horner observed. ''But all we have
is a bunch of planes in a nice new building. We've got a lot of work ahead of
us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bradley Museum after tornado in 1979 photos of
Museum

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FIRST BLACK TO HEAD V.F.W. SEEKS NEW MEMBERS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL HART

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 6, Column 5; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 916 words


FOR Melvin Garrett of New Rochelle, the first black to be elected Commander of
the 109,500-member New York State contingent of the Veterans of Foreign Wars,
the task facing him is two-fold: to increase the membership rolls of the V.F.W.
and to improve its image.

''We need at least 3,000 new members this year,'' the 53-year-old Commander said
recently, as he sat on the balcony of his New Roch elle apartment. ''We're
losing 5,000 to 6 ,000 members a year through the back door - that is, through
movi ng, failure to renew anddeath.''

His goal during his one-year term of office, he said, is to ''stem the tide.''
Without a strong membership base, he explained, the organization will find it
harder to perform its traditional role, working for benefits for the American
servicemen and -women and their families.

''We're not just a social club with a bunch of guys sitting at a bar swapping
war stories,'' he noted.  Mr. Garrett, a senior technologist for Consumers Union
in Mount Vernon, the publisher of Consumer Reports magazine, has been a V.F.W.
member since 1952. He sees his election this summer as advantageous for the
organization, which he likens to a ''family.''

''The fact that I'm the first black to be elected,'' he said, ''m eans that as I
receive a lot of attention, so does the V.F.W.'' Mr. Garrett wants to ''enlist
every member who is eligible - black,white or Orie ntal,'' but he is
particularly concerned that two groupsof veterans j oin the organization: the
Vietnam veterans and the blackveterans.

Mr. Garrett, who served with the Army occupation forces in Japan from 1946 to
1948, talked first about getting the Vietnam veterans - ''men and women'' - into
the organization.

''We can't kid ourselves,'' he said, ''the V.F.W.'s future is in the hands of
the younger vet, and the Vietnam veteran is the younger vet.''

He said he wanted to also focus on attracting black veterans, because ''their
numbers are so small.'' He noted that in Westchester, for example, ''we have
3,300 members and only 5 to 8 percent of them are blacks.''

Mr. Garrett believes that the black membership is small not because of
discrimination but because ''there aren't posts in their neighborhoods that they
can relate to.'' He said he hoped ''to set up more V.F.W. posts, in areas that
would attract a lot of black veterans.''

Mr. Garrett, whose own post, the Aaron A. Lewis Post, No. 6396, in Mount Vernon,
has 124 black members and one white member, sees it as ''a way of life'' that
people like to be with their own groups.

''I can point out a lot of posts that have mostly Italian, mostly Irish, mostly
Polish, mostly anything because people feel comfortable around their own,'' he
said.

But, he emphasized, ''I was elected by the entire V.F.W., black and white, and I
mean to increase the total membership - both black and white.'' He suggested
that the New York V.F.W. membership could swell to ''about 250,000, if we work
hard.''

Mr. Garrett said he also wants women members, who became eligible to join the
82-year-old ''fraternal, patriotic and historic'' organization several years
ago.

John Voss, a spokesman at the V.F.W. headquarters in Kansas City, Mo., estimated
that ''about 1 percent'' of the organization's 1.95 million members are women.
''We also have a Ladies Auxiliary of 650,000 members,'' he said. ''These are
wives, mothers, sisters and other women relatives of servicemen and -women.''

Mr. Voss said that about 40 percent of the total membership are veterans of
World War II, and that Vietnam and Korean War veterans make up ''about 25
percent'' each. The remaining 10 percent include World War I and Spanish
American War veterans, as well as veterans who served in crisis situations such
as in Lebanon or Berlin.

Mr. Garrett said that the V.F.W. has made an effort to bring the Vietnam
veterans into the fold. ''We went over to Vietnam and signed up soldiers over
there,'' he said, adding that the organization has become involved in issues of
particular concern to the Vietnam veterans.

''We've asked the Federal Government to examine the agent orange problem,'' he
noted, referring to the toxic defoliant that was sprayed on Vietnamese jungles
during the war. ''And we've urged Viet vets to go to Veterans Administration
hospitals for examinations if they felt they may have been infected with the
spray.''

He said that the V.F.W. has requested that the Federal Government extend the
scheduled expiration date of low-cost education loans to Vietnam veterans, from
1983 to 1985, and has asked the state government to give Vietnam and Korean
veterans a ''re-adjustment allowance'' of about $650 each, which would be
comparable to the ''$250 allowances the returning World War II veterans got,''
Mr.  Garrett said.

The second part of Mr. Garrett's program is to improve the image of the V.F.W.
''The V.F.W. does all kinds of things for the community.'' said Mr. Garrett, who
is the father of two children and the stepfather of four. As examples, he cited
the V.F.W. scholarships, its sponsoring of baseball and scouting programs and
its volunteer programs in Veterans Administration and private hospitals.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Melvin Garrett

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MORE JOINING JUNIOR R.O.T.C.

BYLINE: By ROBIN YOUNG ROE

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 12, Column 4; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 852 words


IT is drill time for students enrolled in the Junior Reserve Officers Training
Corps at Riverhead High School, and a soccer field is busy with cadets parading.

More than 10 percent of Riverhead's 1,000 students are enrolled in the program,
an academic elective with one credit a year, according to Comdr. James Roth.
This year, interest in the programs at Riverhead and other schools is keener
than in the past. The interest is linked by observers to economic and
sociological factors, including a resurgence of patriotism and the opportunities
for college scholarships or enlistment in the military.

''I can't quite put my finger on it,'' Commander Roth said, ''on any one thing
that makes this year different from others, but we're bigger and stronger than
ever.''

Commander Roth leads one of seven naval and Air Force Junior R.O.T.C. programs
at public schools in Nassau and Suffolk. The LaSalle Military Academy offers the
only Army Junior R.O.T.C.  curriculum.

Despite lags in draft registration, there is no lack of interest in programs
like the ones at Riverhead, Patchogue-Medford, Glen Cove and other schools,
Junior R.O.T.C. instructors say.

The Air Force program at Glen Cove added 35 cadets this fall, said Col. Claude
M. Dixon. It is ''historically one of our strongest units,'' he said.

Commander Roth tried to explain the phenomenon in which cadets must come to
school one day a week dressed in uniforms, trousers pressed and black issue
shoes polished.

''Students today are different than student s of the 1960's,'' he said.
''There's more flag-waving going on. An d for some of our students, the chance
of a scholarship or an a ppointment to one of theservice academies is a real
attraction. Of co urse, there are those who just like marching and the
uniforms.''

Tim Heinze, a center on the Riverhead football team, wears his red hair cropped
above his ears, a requirement. ''I learned,'' he said, ''to be respo nsible
through J.R.O.T.C. I shine my shoes, iron my uniform. The most important thing
I've learned is discipline.''

He would like to attend the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis. Like many,
he said his parents encouraged his involvement in the program.

There are naval programs at Riverhead, John Glenn and one shared by Southold and
Mattituck High Schools. Air Force programs are at Patchogue-Medford, Glen Cove,
Island Trees and Brentwood.

Hampton Bays is considering adding a program. William Ciraco, assistant
principal, said the curriculum was ''relevant'' to students.

''Kids are more success-oriented,'' he said. ''They see this program as another
option. It could mean a scholarship down the line. And parents like the idea
because they see it as a way to build character and encourage discipline.''

Junior programs were added to public schools in 1974, and most on the Island
were organized shortly after that, according to Comdr.  Daniel Gholson,
coordinator of the naval program for New York, Pennsylvania, Connecticut and New
Jersey.

The interest is partly linked to a fading of Vietnam era antimilitary sentiment.
''Many of the students of this generation,'' Colonel Dixon said, ''have very
little recollection of Vietnam.  They're not afraid of being laughed at for
wearing a uniform.''

Those completing three years of the program can enter the military two steps
higher than an enlistee.  Cadet Maj. James Cavaliero, second in command at
Patchogue-Medford, is a senior and hopes to join the Marines . ''J.R.O.T.C. has
changed my attitude about a lot of things,'' he said. ''I'm not as rowdy as I
used to be, and I have more friends.''

The program has 115 students in a school of 2,300, making it one of the largest
single organizations or clubs at Patchogue-Medford. Women make up half of the
cadets at Riverhead and 20 percent of the Patchogue-Medford corps.

''If it were up to me, I'd wear my uniform every day,'' said Betsy Colon, 17, a
senior at Patchogue-Medford. ''I always thought I'd like to join the service
after college. Now I know.''

Patchogue-Medford's Lieut. Col. Ramon Echevarria said the program could also
serve as a deterrent. ''It's a good chance to see if the military suits you,''
he said. ''We've had some students who have gotten involved in J.R.O.T.C. and
then realized that the military would have been a mistake.''

''There's no doubt about the fact that J.R.O.T.C. can mean a lot in the way of
economic rewards - college scholarships are a key,'' said John Clifton,
assistant principal at Riverhead and president of the Island Council of
J.R.O.T.C. Administrators and Instructors. ''But there are plenty of other
benefits of the program such as discipline, a concern for appearance and
interesting material to study. The benefits have been there all along. But now
J.R.O.T.C. has more appeal.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Soviet Ships Visit Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 54 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 11


A Soviet flotilla arrived at Da Nang in central Vietnam and was greeted by
thousands of Vietnamese, the Hanoi radio said yesterday. The broadcast,
monitored here, said several Vietnamese naval officers and nearly 3,000
civilians welcomed the fleet in driving rain. No other details were provided.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Around the Nation;
Vietnam Veteran Cleared In Murder of an In-Law

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 138 words

DATELINE: SHREVEPORT, La., Oct. 11


A former marine who blamed delayed combat stress for the shooting of his
brother-in-law was found not guilty by reason of insanity last night.

Attorneys for Charles Heads had based their defense on ''Vietnam stress

National news is on pages

A10-21 and B6.
syndrome,'' saying he was reverting to survival tactics and could not have known
right from wrong when he killed Roy Lejay in 1977.

District Judge Gayle Hamilton ordered Mr. Heads held by the Caddo Parish
Sheriff's Department for commitment to a mental institution.  Mr. Lejay was shot
after Mr. Heads's wife and children left him and went to Mr. Lejay's Shreveport
home. Mr. Heads followed them, kicked in the door and fired his gun. Medical
experts said he felt like he was ''cleaning out a hooch'' in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION;
ANOTHER G.I. BILL IS COMING, BUT ITS FORM IS UNCLEAR;
WASHINGTON

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1257 words


AT a largely unnoticed Congressional hearing a month ago, Lawrence J. Korb, the
Assistant Secretary of Defense in charge of manpower, succinctly laid out the
Reagan Administration's position on proposals for a new G.I. Bill.

''The Administration supports educational benefits for military members,'' Mr.
Korb said. ''The President, the Secretary of Defense, and the Deputy Secretary
of Defense all are on record in favor of some type of educational benefits for
service members.''

Then Mr. Korb put his finger on it: ''But we have not supported or endorsed a
particular program.'' He went on to ask Congress to hold off its consideration
of a new G.I. bill until the military manpower study group appointed by
President Reagan has finished its work in December.

That group, headed by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger with Mr. Korb as
chief of staff, is considering the entire range of manpower questions, from
recruiting to retention. Putting together the basic outlines of a new G.I. Bill
is among its priorities.

The Administration thus plans to introduce its own bill early next year to take
its place alongside several already in the hopper from members of Congress. They
will be debated during the winter and spring, according to present indications,
and something should emerge by next summer.

But what that bill will look like, what provisions it will have, what benefits
it will pledge, how much it will cost and even who will be eligible is anybody's
guess right now. For contrary to widespread expectation, the new G.I. Bill will
be unlike any G.I. Bill the nation has had so far. It will be like its father
and grandfather that provided schooling for 18 million veterans of World War II,
the Korean War and the Vietnam War in name only.

For colleges that will be hard-pressed to fill spaces because the college-age
population is about to start shrinking and because the draft is no longer
driving marginal students into schools to escape the Army, the forthcoming G.I.
Bill holds uncertain promise. The colleges and the military services, along with
industry and commerce, will be in competition for the same bright,
well-motivated young people.

A recent report from the General Accounting Office, an analytic arm of the
Congress, showed that the enrollment in high schools peaked at 15.7 million from
1975 to 1977, while the peak of college enrollment at 11.6 million began in 1980
and will run until 1983. From then on, it will decline through the end of this
decade.

While the details of the new G.I. Bill are far from set, an outline of the
differences with its predecessors has started to take shape.

First of all, the earlier G.I. Bills were rewards for service to the country and
were intended to ease the transition from the violence of war to the pursuit of
a peaceful life. The new G.I. Bill will be aimed at inducing young people to
join the Army; it will be an incentive to enlist rather than the gift of a
grateful nation.

A Difference in Aims

Second, the G.I. Bills of earlier days were awarded against a backdrop of a
drafted Army. The draftee did not have a choice. He was called and he went, and
the G.I. Bill later was intended to repay him for some of the pain of his
sacrifice. In contrast, the forthcoming G.I. Bill will be aimed at preserving
the all-volunteer force that the Reagan Administration seems determined to keep.

Among the bigger differences with the earlier bills, the new bill will probably
not spread benefits across the board to all veterans alike but will favor some
over others, notably young men who have served in ground combat units. As an
incentive to enlist, it will probably not promise benefits to Navy electronic
technicians or Air Force air traffic controllers who can leave the service for
good jobs outside.

Mr. Korb said recently, ''Right now our feeling is that we ought to have that
bill help us in areas where we have the most problems and the areas in which we
have the most difficulty recruiting young people is into combat arms,
particularly in the Army and to a lesser extent in the Marine Corps.''

That thought has already drawn criticism from women, who by law or regulation
are excluded from the combat arms; from the Navy and Air Force, which fear being
left out or having reduced benefits; and from officers' groups, which note that
the services have little trouble getting officers today, except for a few
specialties, such as pilots and engineers.

Mr. Korb's argument is that the infantryman does not learn a skill that can be
used in civilian life, while the nuclear technician in the Navy does. ''What
we're talking about is people who do those things in the military for which
there is nothing transferable to the outside,'' he said.

Still another difference between the new and the old G.I. Bills is that the
earlier ones were planned with no thought to retaining skilled and experienced
people in the armed services. After the wars, the military forces were reduced
in strength anyway.

Need to Retain Personnel

Today, however, the services not only want to recruit bright people but also
want to keep them after they have been trained. A G.I. Bill that promises
college is an incentive to leave, not to stay.  Therefore, some provision for
transferring the benefits to wives or children, or getting paid for the benefits
instead of taking them after a number of years in the service are under serious
consideration.

The benefits under a new G.I. Bill are also still being considered. However, Mr.
Korb said, ''What we're talking about is an educational package that would
basically pay the cost of tuition and provide a living allowance for a person
attending a good school.'' He said that would be worth about $20,000 today.

This package would be for a young man who spent four years in Army. Lesser
benefits would be available for young men who spent a shorter time on active
duty but joined the reserves.

The total cost of such benefits are nearly impossible to estimate, since there
are so many undecided issues, so many variables and a total lack of experience
with the G.I. Bill as a recruiting incentive. Mr. Korb's estimate ran from $2
billion to $5 billion.

But that would not take effect for nearly five years, until the first recipients
of benefits finish their tours of duty. Moreover, part of that would be offset
by reduced training costs, since fewer recruits would drop out, as well as by
lower recruiting costs, since the program presumably would attract
college-oriented young men without much selling effort.

Mr. Korb and others have pointed out that the G.I. Bill must also fit in with
other incentives to enlist or to re-enlist, such as bonuses. Particularly, there
must be a balance between the Federal Loan Program for Education, which has only
an obligation for repayment, and the G.I. Bill, which requires the youth to
serve in the military. Educational grants or low-interest loans to college
students without a requirement for military service would only detract from the
G.I. Bill's ability to attract enlistees.

As Prof. Charles C. Moskos, a specialist in military manpower at Northwestern
University, is fond of saying: ''We have the G.I. Bill now, but without the
G.I.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1269 words


AMONG the actions that get college presidents into trouble are: locking horns
with powerful politicians; speaking out on controversial issues; risking
students' wrath by setting limits to campus protests; frequently leaving the
campus on national and international missions; upsetting the traditional
management of the university; serving an unpopular President and then publicly
attacking that President's policies.

In his 29 years as president of the University of Notre Dame in South Bend,
Ind., the Rev. Theodore M. Hesburgh has engaged in all those activities, and
while people occasionally got mad at him, he has earned a measure of respect
that quite possibly no current university president can match.

The 64-year-old educator-priest will leave his post at the end of the academic
year. On Thursday, the American Council on Education, at its annual meeting,
will honor him with its award for academic leadership.

''If a college president means anything, he has to stand up for the integrity of
the institution,'' he said in an interview. ''The university is a kind of sacred
place. Nobody can be allowed to interfere, not the state, not the benefactors,
not the church.''

In the turbulent 1960's, he stood up to disruptive students.  ''At a certain
point we have to draw the line and say, 'This far and no farther. Protest, yes;
but do it with civility, without violence.' '' He ruled that violent protesters
would be given 15 minutes for meditation and, if they then failed to stop their
actions, would be expelled.

Initially angry, many students reconsidered when Father Ted, as he is generally
known, wrote a tough letter to Spiro Agnew, then a Vice President with a
considerable popular following, warning him and the Government to keep hands off
the campuses. Later, the invasion of Cambodia and the tragedy of Kent State,
where four student protesters were killed by National Guardsmen, impelled Father
Hesburgh, who had never favored the Vietnam War, to speak out publicly against
it.

President Nixon, who had been impressed by what he thought was Father Hesburgh's
hard line against students, appointed him chairman of the Civil Rights
Commission, never suspecting that the educator would lead the commission to
issue an uncompromising condemnation of what it called a ''major breakdown'' in
the enforcement of civil rights laws. Later, Father Hesburgh publicly attacked
the President's antibusing policy and eventually Mr. Nixon asked for his
resignation.

Last week, reminiscing late at night in his study, Father Hesburgh looked back
on some of the changes he brought about.  In 1967, Notre Dame was one of the
first Catholic universities to remove itself from church control, to be governed
instead by a lay board which includes non-Catholics. Vatican Council II, he
said, made it clear to him that a great university could not be largely clerical
and that there was ''a need to open up.'' Yet he emphasized that Notre Dame
always remained a Catholic university.

Ten years ago, he added, the campus went coeducational and ''we are a better
university for it.'' Although he stood in the front lines of the battle against
discrimination and for equality, Father Hesburgh does not think students should
be the only judges of their educational requirements. He deplored the decline of
competition for good work. He regrets the able students ''who were lost when
equality slipped into egalitarianism.'' A university without moral and
intellectual values is no university at all, he said.

''The name of the game in the 1980's is quality,'' he added. ''We must get back
out of the wild growth of the curriculum and get back into some core of
knowledge - history, philosophy, theology, language, literature, mathematics,
science, art and music. Otherwise we are just graduating trained seals.''

The international dimension, Father Hesburgh says, is ''shamefully neglected''
by most universities. ''With 80 percent of the world colored, we act as if it
were a white world. We pretend that everything is like Main Street America.
Higher education still largely ignores that dimension.''

Latin America has long been one of the areas of his personal concern. ''I worry
about it,'' he said. ''It has terrible needs that we could respond to. I would
like a common market for the hemisphere, and a common education satellite
program that would wipe out illiteracy, and a common strategy that could deal
with agriculture, housing, good government and human dignity.''

He firmly believes that the United States could help ''put an end to torture''
in Latin America. ''It's an abomination and we ought to get rid of it,'' he
said.

Father Hesburgh deplores the present reluctance among university presidents to
speak out on major national and international issues.  ''If you are a
president,'' he says, ''you are not just responsible to your students and
faculty. Anyone who isn't heard outside the campus isn't worth being heard
inside.''

He said he was glad when A. Bartlett Giamatti, Yale's president, recently spoke
out against Moral Majority. ''I wrote him a letter to tell him,'' he said. ''His
speaking out almost seemed an anomaly.  Look at the attention he got.''

What about the future of higher education? After the explosive growth, Father
Hesburgh says, ''It's not as much fun to preside over shrinkage. If you grow too
fast, you get fat, but there's no easy way to shrink gracefully, and people will
get hurt.''

''Now,'' he continues, ''we must ask: What is the Federal Government's
responsibility? What is it that won't be done if the Federal Government doesn't
do it?''

He rejects the popular notion that today's students are interested only in their
own futures. ''We have over 1,000 kids who give up their Wednesday lunch to help
deal with hunger in the world,'' he says. ''I suspect that a lot of pressure
toward vocationalism comes from the parents, not the students.'' Students will
be running conferences on nuclear armament on some 30 to 40 campuses in
November, he said, and he is helping them.

''But you need leadership,'' he adds. ''Higher education and every other
enterprise moves forward when there is good leadership, otherwise it stagnates.
We need people with vision, elan, geist, people who have standards and a certain
toughness. How to get leadership gets down to every single college president who
is chosen, people who do more than raise money. Of course, you need money, but
if you have money and no vision, you just squander it.''

Some people, he recalls, warned him against getting involved in such
controversies as civil rights, lest he hurt the university. ''I got very little
static,'' he says. ''You have to be yourself and people accept you as you are.
Young people have to see their leaders involved.''

Despite all his activism, Father Hesburgh said: ''I never felt that I wasn't
very much a priest, which means a mediator and a seeker of justice and decency.
Every day of my life I've offered my mass, sometimes in odd places, such as at
the South Pole and in Faculty House at the University of Moscow, in the cause of
peace and decency and a better world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Father Theodore M. Hesburgh

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MRS. KIRKPATRICK ASKS 40 NATIONS TO EXPLAIN THEIR ANTI-U.S. STAND

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 816 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 13


Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the American delegate, has privately asked 40 nations to
explain their support for a document of ''base lies and malicious attacks upon
the good name of the United States.''

The letter, addressed to third-world nations that identify themselves as
nonaligned, was sent on Oct. 6, Mrs. Kirkpatrick said.  It complained of the
''vicious and erroneous language'' in a communique issued after a meeting Sept.
28 of foreign ministers and delegation heads from 93 third-world nations.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick also says that many of those to whom she wrote have responded
favorably. She would not name them, on the ground that it ''would be
inappropriate.''

'What Are We to Think?'

Diplomats here could not recall a letter to match the tone of Mrs.
Kirkpatrick's. ''Your Excellency, I think you no more believe these vicious lies
than I do,'' she wrote, ''and I do not believe they are an accurate reflection
of your Government's outlook. And yet what are we to think when your Government
joins in such charges, for that is what you have done in failing to disassociate
yourself from them.''

Mrs. Kirkpatrick concluded by telling the mission chiefs, ''I would very much
appreciate hearing from you about it.'' Several delegates to the meeting have
commented in private that the communique, a 21-page summary of the state of the
world, was one-sidedly anti-American. Some attributed this to the chairmanship
of Cuba's Foreign Minister,Isidoro Malmierca. Egypt and Pakistan succeeded in
changing language they considered too harsh on the United States.

Other delegates said because of third-world opposition to the Reagan
Administration's growing ties to South Africa and its proposed ''strategic
alliance'' with Israel, there had been no disposition to challenge passages
assailing the United States.

The third-world bloc does not vote on such documents. It approves them by
consensus, which means that any passage can be stricken on the objection of one
member.

Ideologies Vary

Members of the third-world group range from close allies of the Soviet Union,
like Ethiopia, Afghanistan and Vietnam, to staunch friends of the United States,
like Singapore, Somalia and Egypt.  Most of the 93 nations, however, swing
between the United States and the Soviet Union, depending on the issue being
discussed.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick said she chose the 40 recipients of her letter on the basis of
personal contact that she or a senior American official had had with the foreign
missions. In effect, she chose missions regarded as friendly to the United
States.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick said today that she had received 15 replies and all of them
accepted her thesis. Delegates from nine nations, she said, told her, ''We don't
believe it,'' meaning that they do not accept the attacks on the United States.
Three others said they were not present at the meeting, and three showed her
letters they had sent, disassociating themselves from the document. She added
that she expected further favorable replies.

A random check of some missions turned up a cooler response. Yusufu Maitima Sule
of Nigeria said that his Government was studying the letter and that ''there
will be no rush to reply.'' Ghassan Tueni of Lebanon said he had spoken with
Mrs. Kirkpatrick personally and told her he did not agree with her letter.

''I told her,'' he said, ''that if she wanted more than polemics, she should
abandon the epistolary style and meet with some of us.'' This was an allusion to
Mrs. Kirkpatrick's recent absences from the United Nations.  In her letter, Mrs.
Kirkpatrick contended that the communique ''has no more claims to being truly
nonaligned than does the Permament Mission of Cuba, which issued it.''

She singled out two examples of what she called ''absurd and erroneous charges''
and ''fabrications and vile attacks.'' One was the document's assertion that the
United States had committed aggression when the Navy in August shot down over
the Gulf of Sidra off the Libyan coast two Libyan planes that Washington had
said fired first. The other instance was the communique's claim that the United
States was trying to ''destabilize'' Grenada and Nicaragua.

No Criticism of Russians

Mrs. Kirkpatrick was indignant over the absence of criticism of the Soviet Union
in the communique ''in a year which sees a continuing military occupation of
Afghanistan, Cambodia and Chad.''

About 85,000 Soviet troops remain in Afghanistan. Cambodia is governed by a
regime installed by Vietnam, a country closely tied to the Soviet Union. Libya,
also pro-Soviet, has stationed troops in Chad since last December.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ONCE-RADICAL BERKELEY SWINGING TO CONFORMITY;
The Talk of Berkeley

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif., Oct. 11


It was a scene from an earlier age that would warm the heart of a
traditionalist. Two lines of bright-faced freshmen at the University of
California waited to be presented to the chancellor, I. Michael Heyman, and Mrs.
Heyman. Men wearing suits and ties stood in one, and women wearing party dresses
were in the other at the annual reception for new students.

A minor crisis occurred when one student, apparently a homosexual activist,
tried to have his male roommate introduced in the line of young women, which
included wives of students. His attempt was quickly rebuffed and, and unlike the
past, there was no shouting of political slogans as university faculty and staff
members in formal dress escorted the new students across the room to meet
Chancellor and Mrs. Heyman.

A lot of other things have changed here since the 1960's and early 1970's. One
university staff member said he was intrigued by the career plans of the six
young women he led across the foyer for the reception. Two told him they planned
on careers as chemical engineers, one planned to be a mechanical engineer, one
was majoring in business and one in nutritional science. Only one of the six
said she was choosing as her major political science, which she hoped would lead
her to a job with the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Although the changes have been rapid, the past is remembered in Berkeley, where
a student revolt against campus rules broke out in 1964. When classes opened
last week, someone scrawled ''Mario would be sad,'' in black letters on the
front of Sproul Hall, an administration building.

An interviewer for The Daily Californian, the campus newspaper, asked seven
students at random who Mario Savio was. Three had never heard of him, but four
remembered that he had headed the Free Speech Movement, the name of the student
group that led the 1964 revolt.

There are many relics of the years when this campus was a hotbed of disputes
over the draft, the Vietnam War, on-campus recruitment by the Central
Intelligence Agency, ethnic studies programs, and even the rights of street
people to appropriate for their own use a valuable piece of university real
estate, naming ''People's Park.''

On a recent afternoon, a few hard-looking young men lounged around a vacant
tract that campus police describe as a gathering place for drug addicts,
''winos'' and people with no place to go. The university administration appears
to be immobolized by recollection of the May 1969, riot in which street people
and some students fought attempts to evict squatters who stood in the way of
plans to build student housing and a community center.

The area may not remain vacant much longer. Robert F. Kerley, vice chancellor at
Berkeley, said last week that ''Public attitudes toward the area are changing
because of the negative impact of its present use, and there is increasing
interest in more positive use of it.''

Although things are much different than in the years when Mr. Savio strode the
campus in his sheepskin jacket, politics is alive and well. Leaflets espousing
some cause or another are handed out almost every day. One leaflet two weeks ago
was called ''Republicans in Berkeley Fighting the Moral Majority.''

Storm Russell, 23 years old, a history major, said the group wanted to find
fiscal conservatives who were social liberals. He said ''many students don't
realize that just because you are a Republican, you don't have to be a social
conservative.''

He said he recruited 30 people the first week of school, compared with 25 each
for his rivals, the Progressive Student Organization, a leftist group, and
Students for Economic Democracy, an offshoot of the Tom Hayden-Jane Fonda
Campaign for Economic Democracy.

Each year, the university asks students what they plan to study. In 1968, 24.6
percent said they would take such social science courses as anthropology,
economics, geography and political science. In 1980, only 12 percent planned to
major in those areas. In 1968, business courses attracted 3.1 percent of the
freshmen, but now 14.5 percent take business. Engineering and biological
sciences showed similar increases.

Prof. Neil Smelser of the sociology department said students begin to study
harder when economic times get tougher.  ''Politics takes too much time and it
involves risks to their pursuit of a career,'' he said. ''They can't afford, for
example, to get arrested for demonstrating for fear that their potential
employer might not approve.''

But William K. Muir, chairman of the political science department, said, ''If
these kids are confronted by the underdog getting screwed over, they will react
and become highly involved.''

Steve Addison, 21 years old, was elected president of Associated Students of the
University of California last spring, the student government. He has promised to
focus on issues of direct interest to students, such as housing, which dismayed
his liberal opposition.

Two years ago his predecessor, Karen Westmont, flew to Washington to address
President Carter on the draft. Earlier student governments have supported the
liberal-radical city political group that has lately lost control of Berkeley
city government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Berkeley

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Stress Syndrome Held Handicap in Suit on Job

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 158 words

DATELINE: SPOKANE, Wash., Oct. 13


A Federal appeals board has established delayed stress syndrome as a handicap
for which a person may not be dismissed.

The action came in the case of a Vietnam War veteran, Roger Schwab, of Spokane,
whose job with the United States Post Office was restored after he armed and
barricaded himself inside his home for 11 hours last spring.

Mr. Schwab, who finally gave up and was hospitalized, was found to be suffering
from delayed stress syndrome. He said after the incident that he had been
experiencing a flashback to the time he spent fighting in the Vietnam War.

He was treated at the Cincinnati Veteran's Administration Medical Center. In
that time, he was dismissed for being absent without leave.

''The gist of the decision was that Roger had been discriminated against by
reason of his handicap,'' said his attorney, Robert Shively.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SERVING THE U.S.

BYLINE: By Bernard Avishai

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: CAMBRI DGE, Mass.


Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger has often objected to military
conscription on grounds that he declares ''philosophical.'' This is, I suspect,
his way of conceding that his objections are unimportant. But even if his call
to get ''Government off our backs'' were more than a slogan, it is particularly
misplaced here.

The 19th century English philosopher John Stuart Mill, who deplored state
authority more carefully, nevertheless enjoined ''each person's bearing his
share (to be fixed on some equitable principle) of the labours and sacrifices
incurred for defending the society.'' Mill was horrified by Britain's
intervention in the Crimea as much as by state-imposed conformity, yet he
granted that citizens might have to defend the democratic state for the sake of
their peace and privacy. Recognizing that conscription entails the risk of death
and the indignity of obedience, Mill endorsed an equal sharing of military
service on the grounds that any person's life and liberty are worth those of any
other.

By contrast, proponents of the United States all-volunteer forces invite
recruits (and everybody else) to consider military obligation as just another
wage contract. Thus, we are encouraged to see our lives and liberties as market
commodities and not the values in defense of which military forces may be
mustered in the first place.

The volunteer forces are the more reprehensible because recruits ''volunteer''
for them only in the quaint sense that Mr.  Weinberger's philosophic mentors
consider all wage contracts ''voluntary.'' Young Americans volunteer for jobs on
tanks and ships just as they volunteer to work behind fast-food grills and
garbage trucks. Only 39 percent of those recruited for the forces during the
first quarter of 1980 had graduated from high school; in 1980, of the 100,860
men who were serving their first term in the Army's combat arm, only 25 had gone
to college. More than a third of the new recruits were from urban ghettos; most
came from the lowest economic classes.

Military service is thus becoming a special burden for poor, undereducated,
desperate people. Many recruits use drugs and hold to the mercenary cynicism
that inspired them to enlist. The burden is unfair, and its consequences are
dangerous, since they force us to rely on strategic nuclear weapons as a hedge
against military collapse.

How can national service be made fair? First, it must be universal: All
18-year-old men and women should be conscripted, no exemptions. The term of
service should not be so long that it eclipses independence of mind or plans for
advanced study: no more than, say, 14 months - two summers, one academic year.
As in the Israeli Army, units should be carefully drawn from all social classes
and then made to stay together for periodic reserve duty that might continue,
for men and childless women, until age 30. Badly educated conscripts should
receive remedial instruction in reading, writing, and basic math; military
academies should enroll only those who have completed basic service; all young
people should be eligible for grants and loans to pursue higher education after
discharge.

Finally, but crucially, national service must offer alternative service - in
hospitals, public works, social services, the Peace Corps - for young men and
women who oppose peacetime military service or particular military
interventions. The period of alternative service might be made somewhat longer,
perhaps two years, and elementary conditions - discipline, barracks, etc.
-should be comparable to those of the military. But this plan should enable
those who would have resisted service in Vietnam to decline military induction
without having to break the law.

This provision would not only tap for the public good the manpower and idealism
of people who would otherwise grow to disdain public authority - people whose
dissenting views might be right - but it should also discourage politicians and
generals from getting into imbroglios that do not appeal directly to democratic
patriotism, as did, say, the fight against Nazi Germany.

A fair national service would also produce gains for racial integration and
sexual equality, expand the social horizons of young people so many of whom now
grow up in front of television sets. It might well move young people, and their
parents, to clarify the elementary claims of republican ethics, perhaps to vote
in greater numbers. It would bring our shared fate into greater relief.

It might be expensive to mobilize five million young men and women but no more
expensive than the volunteer forces. The salaries and related costs of
general-purpose volunteer forces will amount to $89.5 billion dollars during
fiscal 1982 alone - even before Congress has a chance to refuse the questionable
parts of President Reagan's weapons-procurement program - and will have to rise
much more thereafter to meet the Pentagon's projected need for as many as
200,000 more recruits. Similarly, salaries for technicians, mechanics, and other
skilled workers - many more of whom will be required as the military acquires
more high-technology weapons -will have to outpace civilian pay scales by a wide
margin if the Army continues to bear the stigmas of the underclass.

Little wonder that Mr. Weinberger has put aside philosophy and charged a
Military Manpower Task Force to design a cheaper recruitment plan - even if this
means reviving the old, unjust draft, which was neither universal nor tolerant
of dissent. Liberals had better be ready with alternatives or lose the
initiative again to real politicians who think the hard lessons of the 1960's
mere delusions of a ''Vietnam complex.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Bernard Avishai is assistant professor in the writing program at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he also teaches political theory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing of soilders

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NOBEL PEACE AWARD GOES TO U.N. AGENCY FOR ITS REFUGEE WORK

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: OSLO, Oct. 14


The 1981 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded today to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for aiding the growing numbers of homeless and
displaced people around the world.

The organization was described by the Norwegian Nobel Committee, which chooses
the Peace Prize recipient, as having done major work, in spite of substantial
political difficulties, in dealing with ''a veritable flood of human catastrophe
and suffering, both physical and psychological.'' And in dealing with strained
relations between nations that are affected, the award statement said, the
agency served the interests of peace.

The committee spoke of the ''tremendous and increasing number of refugees'' in
the world, mentioning those who had left their homes in Afghanistan, Ethiopia
and Vietnam but not referring to the causes of their flight. It estimated that
there are between 14 million and 18 million refugees in the world.

The award was the second Peace Prize received by the refugee organization; it
was cited in 1954 for its work in postwar Europe.  Among the other organizations
that have received Peace Prizes are Amnesty International, the International
Labor Organization and the Red Cross, which was twice a recipient.

The committee said it expected the head of the United Nations organization, Poul
Hartling, a Dane, to accept the one million Swedish kronor, the equivalent of
about $180,000, that come with the award in ceremonies here in December.

Jakob Sveredrup, director of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, described the choice
as ''not being very hard to make, and relatively noncontroversial.''

78 Candidates Considered

The refugee organization was selected from 78 candidates, he said, including 18
organizations. Mr. Sveredrup acknowledged that among those who received
particular attention were Lech Walesa, the leader of Poland's Solidarity trade
union, and Alva Myrdal, the Swedish idealist and activist who has worked most
recently in the field of disarmament.

Mr. Walesa was said by a committee source to have received ''considerable
support, much of it sentimental.'' Mrs. Myrdal, however, who is 79 years old and
the wife of a Nobel economics laureate, Gunnar Myrdal, had been described in the
Norwegian and Swedish press as the most likely winner.

Her choice would have been particularly ticklish because her recent writing
contends that European countries have become pawns of the superpowers in the
international arms race. Mrs. Myrdal has been criticized for lumping the United
States and the Soviet Union together without differentiating between the causes
of their strategic positions and the character of their military alliances.

Questions about how close Mrs. Myrdal had come to receiving this year's award
were turned aside by Mr. Sveredrup.  The committee members also declined to
specify the nature of the ''political difficulties'' the refugee organization
had to combat.  Instead, it said it wanted to ''emphasize the assistance given
by organizations and public authorities in those developing countries in Asia
and Africa that have borne the strain of receiving and accommodating huge
streams of refugees.''

Problems in Aiding Refugees

There have been newspaper reports of problems in international assistance to
refugees in some third-world countries, growing out of lost assistance
shipments, graft and a lack of interest.

''Refugees who dare not return to their native land must be given the
opportunity to start a fresh life in their host country,'' the Nobel committee
said in its award statement.

''Still more important in the long run is the work of insuring that people are
not compelled to save their lives by escaping from their native land with no
prospect of ever returning.

''The stream of refugees, moreover, creates serious problems in relations
between states, and for this reason the activities of the Office of the High
Commissioner is serving the interests of humanity and peace.''

According to the will of the founder of the Nobel awards, Alfred Nobel, the
Swedish industrialist, the Peace Prize is given for ''the best work for
fraternity between nations.'' The decision about who the recipient will be is
made by a committee of five appointed by the Norwegian Parliament.

The Physics, Chemistry and Economic Sciences prizes are chosen by the Royal
Swedish Academy of Sciences, and the Medicine Prize by the Karolinska Medical
Institute of Stockholm. The Literature Prize, to be announced tomorrow, is
decided by the Swedish Academy.

----

Hartling Calls Prize a Message

Special to the New York Times

GENEVA, Oct. 14 - Poul Hartling said today that the awarding of the Nobel Peace
Prize to his office was a message to the world that ''refugees must not be
forgotten.''

In a formal statement in which he accepted the prize ''in the name of refugees
everywhere,'' Mr. Hartling said that for himself and his staff the award
signified that the ''voices of millions of refugees in the world have been heard
and acknowledged.''

He added that he hoped that the fact that the committee had chosen the committee
for such an honor ''will encourage all of those in a position to assist
refugees, whether they be organizations, voluntary agencies or individuals, to
redouble their efforts.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WORLDWIDE WORK OF U.N. AGENCY SEEMS ENDLESS

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 14


Each day dozens of weary women, children and men file across the Ethiopian
border, walking 40 miles to a southeast corner of the Sudan in search of food,
water, medicine and tents at a camp run by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugeees.

In northwest Tanzania, 25,000 Hutus, who years ago fled from their Tutsi rivals
in Burundi, have settled down in sturdy, mud-baked homes. They grow enough
tobacco, corn and peas to feed themselves, finance a cooperative bus and
discotheque and enjoy transistor radios. They are on their way to citizenship in
underpopulated Tanzania, thanks to aid they no longer need from the United
Nations agency.

For 30 years the Office of the High Commissioner, which was awarded the 1981
Nobel Peace Prize today, has been providing for the victims of war. The
organization operates from Geneva with a staff of 1,000, which is small by
United Nations standards. About two thirds of them work in the dismal corners of
the globe where refugees huddle.

Unlike most bureacracies, the High Commissioner, which is both the name of the
agency and the title of its chief, tries to shrink its constituence. Success is
measured by the number of those returned home or permanently resettled in a new
land. Its goal is precisely opposite from that of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugeees, the body responsible for Palestinian Arabs
that is directed to keep its camps filled.

Its Most Awesome Task

The High Commissioner's most awesome task was providing for the nine million
Bengalis who in 1971 fled what is now Bangladesh to escape the clash between
Pakistan and India. With India's victory and the independence of Bangladesh, the
Bengalis went back home a year later.

Last year the agency celebrated the arrival of a train carrying 1,200
schoolgirls to Bulwayo, Zimbabwe. They were the last of 250,000 returning
Zimbabweans who had fled to Mozambique, Botswana and Zaire until black
guerrillas could wrest independence from the white minority rulers of what had
been Rhodesia.

But the agency, which first won the Peace Prize in 1954, never runs out of fresh
clients. The turmoil in Africa and Asia in particular has currently created
about 10 million refugees.

The Commissioner is not supposed to look after victims of natural disaster,
flood, earthquake or famine. In fact, the distinction is often difficult to make
and many of the hundreds of thousands of Ethiopian refugees, for example, have
left their country because they cannot find a living. Indeed, the chief
criticism of the agency is that it has been drawn into providing machines,
roads, tools and other items that enable the homeless to settle down into a new
life.

A Shrewd, Paternal Dane

Since 1978 the agency has been run by a shrewd, paternal Danish politician, Poul
Hartling. A former teacher in a Congregational seminary, Mr. Hartling for years
led Denmark's middle-of-the-road Liberal Party. He was Prime Minister from 1973
to 1975.

His political talents are useful. To care for refugees from Cambodia, he must
stay on equable terms with both Thailand and the Communist regime installed in
Phom Penh by Vietnam. Mr. Hartling has been successful enough so that 310,000
Cambodians could return home last year.

The High Commissioner is equally astute at rallying other agencies to share his
burden. The World Food Program is enlisted everywhere, and notably in Somalia,
to supply cereals, dried milk and other necessities to the 1.2 million refugees,
mostly from Ethiopia, who swamp that arid and impoverished nation. The United
Nations Children's Fund insures safe water in Cameroon for those fleeing Chad's
civil war.

No fewer than 200 private agencies also help out, supplying doctors, blankets,
stoves and more. Among the more pervasive are Oxfam, Care, Caritas, Catholic
Relief Services and Medicin Sans Frontieres of France.

1.4 Million Afghans Embroiled

The latest and largest disaster has caught up 1.4 million Afghans escaping
Soviet troops attempting to suppress insurgents fighting a Moscow-backed regime.
The refugees are camped in Pakistan, another poor nation that cannot afford the
burden but nevertheless makes cash grants to each newcomer. The High
Commissioner finds tents and tarpulins, tea and sugar, blankets and clothing to
make life bearable for the refugees.

Like so much at the United Nations, the High Commissioner owes its origins to an
agency created by the League of Nations after World War I. Fridtjof Nansen, the
Norwegian explorer, was in charge, largely caring for 1.5 million Russians
fleeing from the revolution and civil war.

After World War II, international efforts concentrated on settling the millions
driven across Europe's borders. The millions forced out of newly independent
Pakistan and India were largely ignored. But 125,000 European refugeees remained
to attract attention and they were the reason that the United Nations agency was
established.

Europe soon provided a new group of clients, 170,000 Hungarians who fled in 1956
after Soviet tanks crushed an uprising.

Additions to the Caseload

Today, nearly every political disturbance adds to the High Commissioner's
caseload. Violence between left and right in El Salvador has created another
80,000 refugeees in Latin America.

And since the end of the war in Vietnam, hundreds of thousands have been driven
from or have fled Indochina, presenting the agency with a new problem. Thai and
Malay pirates regularly prey on the boatloads of hapless refugees, raping,
robbing and murdering. Last year it was estimated that 2,000 a month were
subjected to the ordeal, sometimes twice on the same trip.

The agency regards itself as responsible for refugees' safety, but neither the
Thai nor Malaysian Governments responded to its appeals for protection.

With considerable delicacy and a touch of irony, the High Commissioner donated a
patrol boat to the Thai Navy, a strong hint that it might do better.

The High Commissioner does not enjoy a large budget. Last year he spent $500
million and expects the total to fall in 1981. The United States made the
biggest contribution, $123.5 million, followed by Japan at $64.5 million, West
Germany at $19.8 million, Sweden at $19.2 million and Britain at $17.8 million.

The Soviet Union contributes nothing, and neither do its East European allies.
Moscow believes that refugeees are a ''colonialist'' legacy and, by definition,
the Soviet Union is not colonialist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Poul Hartling

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ARAFAT ASKS JAPAN'S LEADERS TO BACK STATE FOR PALESTINIANS

BYLINE: By HENRY SCOTT STOKES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Oct. 14


Yasir Arafat met today with Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki and Foreign Minister
Sunao Sonoda to seek Japan's backing for an independent Palestinian state.

''You are an economic superpower,'' Mr. Arafat, who heads the Palestine
Liberation Organization, told Japanese journalists after the meetings. ''You
have a lot to do to implement peace in the Middle East.''

''I am sure that through the support of the Japanese people we'll be able to
advance more and more,'' he said, Mr. Arafat is here on an unofficial four-day
visit at the invitation of the Parliamentary League for Japan-Palestine
Friendship, although the Foreign Ministry had a hand in arranging the trip.

The Palestinian leader, wearing his black and white Arab headdress but without
his pistol - he left it at the airport in deference to strict Japanese
handgun-control laws - did not disclose details of his talks with the Japanese
leaders.

Taizo Watanabe, a Japanese Foreign Ministry official, said that Mr. Arafat asked
at his meeting with Mr. Sonoda for ''more understanding on the part of Japan -
spiritual, or I should say political, support.''

Request for Initiative

Mr. Watanabe said that Mr. Arafat asked Japan to ''take the initiative in talks
with the U.S.'' and that ''Mr. Sonoda emphasized our determination to try to
continue our efforts to have dialogues with all the parties concerned, including
the U.S.''

Japanese diplomats showed concern that Tokyo's stance in the talks might be
misunderstood in Washington. Shohei Naito, a Foreign Ministry official, said,
''We will certainly convey what we get through the dialogue to the U.S.,
emphasizing the necessity to look at the heart of the question, the Palestinian
people's situation.''

Mr. Arafat leaves tomorrow for Vietnam, after which he is to visit the Soviet
Union, with an assurance, to judge by these statements, that Tokyo will try to
act as an intermediary between the P.L.O. and the United States. It seems
unlikely, however, that there will be any great impact on American policy or the
Middle East soon.

Japan's influence in the Middle East is almost negligible, according to Japanese
diplomats. Moreover, Mr. Arafat, in answering journalists' questions, did not
deviate from his previous positions.

'We Are the Victims'

Asked whether he accepted Israel's right to exist, he bridled and said: ''Always
you are looking from an angle, the Israeli angle. We are the victims.''

In response to queries about any message for the United States, Mr. Arafat said:
''Stop sending bombs, cluster bombs, fragmentation shells, napalm, F-4's,
F-14's, F-16's, Phantoms, Lance rockets, laser weapons, rockets to the Israeli
military junta. We are human beings and not an experimental field for the new
weapons, and we have the right to live as human beings, not as rabbits for
hunting.''

Mr. Arafat said the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel was ''a deep
conspiracy against the Palestinian people.'' He said, ''They are offering to us,
to my people, a new slavery.''

Mr. Arafat repeated his charge that Israel seeks to extend its dominion over an
area ''from the Nile River to the River Euphrates.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
POLICY BY GYRATION

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 14


If there is a shrewd professor somewhere writing a book on American foreign
policy, he has the material at hand for a riveting chapter on What Not to Do.
His case study would be the record of Middle East policy in the first nine
months of the Reagan Administration.

In rapid order the Administration has:

* Urged Jordan and Saudi Arabia to join a ''strategic consensus,'' including
Israel, to resist Soviet influence in the area;

* Agreed to sell Awacs radar planes to the Saudis;

* Declared a ''strategic partnership'' with Israel;

* Sharply criticized Israel for objecting to the Awacs deal;

* Casually announced a profound American commitment to the defense of the
present Saudi regime;

* Similarly hinted that the United States would act militarily to preserve its
role in Egypt;

* Announced joint military maneuvers with Egypt and the Sudan, suggesting a new
commitment to the Sudanese Government.  It is a record of gyration, of
inconsistency between one move and the next, of flailing about. The sense of
calm and steady purpose that is essential if other countries are to have
confidence in American policy has been utterly lacking.

The sweeping new military commitments, in areas where the United States has not
had treaty obligations, are startling examples of the executive branch acting
without consulting Congress. What is startling is the seeming rebirth of the
Imperial Presidency that was supposedly cut down by Congress after the
disastrous Presidential commitments in Vietnam.

Even more noteworthy is the absence of any visible muscle to back up the
military commitments. If there were an invasion of Saudi Arabia, say, or the
more likely event of a revolution in one of those countries, what American
forces would deal with the problem, and how? The commitments are reminiscent of
the exchange in Shakespeare's ''Henry IV'': Glendower: I can call spirits from
the vasty deep. Hotspur: Why, so can I, or so can any man; But will they come
when you do call for them? But the most striking characteristic of the various
initiatives is their irrelevance.

The Administration has talked about the Soviet threat and produced fancy ideas
to deal with it, from Awacs to strategic consensus. But not one of the explosive
developments in the Middle East since January has involved direct, or as far as
we know indirect, Soviet action.

The fundamental aim of the United States, under President Reagan as under his
predecessors, is stability in the region. Yet the military actions and
commitments undertaken since January have been mostly irrelevant to the factors
threatening stability; some, indeed, may intensify the threats.

Consider what has happened in Egypt, and what waits in the wings.  President
Sadat did not lack for American weapons; he had received billions in military
aid. But his failure to make any visible progress with Israel on the Palestinian
question left him friendless in the Arab world. His failure to produce tangible
economic benefits hurt him in Egypt. And he was murdered, we are told, by
Islamic fundamentalists who could not imaginably be moved by U.S. military
commitments.

Sadat's successor, Hosni Mubarak, will be struggling in the months ahead to
consolidate his position and achieve a new stability. What does he most urgently
need? Not American B-52's flying by but economic gains at home - and next door
in the Sudan, where food shortages underlie much unrest. Not tough words from
Alexander Haig but enough progress on the Palestinian problem to allow
reconciliation with other moderate Arabs, especially the Saudis.

The United States cannot do much about the currents of fanaticism in the Middle
East. The awful rejoicing at Sadat's death by his critics reminded us that those
elements are realities. What we can do - what we must do -is to work at the
difficult tasks of politics and economics, where American talents can be
effective.

For example, we should be urging Israel now to make a dramatic gesture in the
autonomy talks, such as an offer to freeze all West Bank settlement activity in
order to bring Palestinians into the talks. That would be in keeping with what
Anwar Sadat did: take a great risk to break through hostility -a self-interested
risk for peace.

No one should pretend that persuading Israel to make a meaningful gesture toward
the Palestinians will be easy. The Israelis have real concerns, and all we can
do is persuade. But it is for such a vital political objective that America's
capital with Israel should be spent, not for irrelevant Awacs. The notion that
sudden military commitments here and there can solve the political problems of
the Middle East is fantasy: dangerous fantasy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HONEYMOON NEARS END FOR REAGAN AND CONGRESS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1244 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 14


When President-elect Ronald Reagan paid courtesy calls on Congressional leaders
last November, his aides said that he hoped to avoid the mistakes of his
predecessor, Jimmy Carter, who had had a strained relationship with Capitol
Hill.

The President pledged that Pennsylvania Avenue would be ''a two-way street,''
with ample consultation with the bipartisan leadership.  ''We're not going to
just throw surprises up here at the Hill,'' he added.

But yesterday one of the President's key lieutenants in the Congress,
Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the Republican leader, complained
that it was only by reading the newspapers that he learned of the President's
latest budget initiative, the proposed deferral of spending on social programs.

Earlier, two other Republican leaders, Senator Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon,
chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, and Representative Silvio O.
Conte of Massachusetts, ranking minority member of the House Appropriations
Committee, had bitterly complained not only of the lack of consultation by the
White House but of what they considered an Administration effort to circumvent
their committees and the Congress.

An Open Door Approach

''We'll knock 'em down,'' Representative Conte said of the proposal from
Administration officials. ''Our committee did a heck of a job.  We've gone far
enough. First they come in through the front door, and then they come in through
the back door.''

Representative Conte says that when he sat down with President Reagan last
spring to discuss the first round of budget cuts, he told the President he would
support him if he knew Mr. Reagan would not respond to future crises by urging
further cuts this year. The Congressman said that the President gave him that
assurance, and therefore Mr. Conte was doubly upset with the new cuts.

There are inevitable tensions between a President and a Congress, even when the
President has come from Capitol Hill. Richard M. Nixon, Lyndon B. Johnson, John
F. Kennedy and even Harry S. Truman were accused by former colleagues of running
roughshod over the Congress.  Congressional expectations are lower in the cases
of former governors, such as Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter, who lacked the
experience of dealing with the national legislalture.

A President's national perspective is often at odds with the more parochial
perspectives of members of Congress. There are natural conflicts concerning such
matters as who sets spending priorities, and the extent to which Congress should
oversee the President's conduct of foreign policy.

A Question of Prerogatives

Such conflicts are usually papered over in the euphoria of the honeymoon period
enjoyed by a new Administration. Their emergence now indicates that that period
is nearing an end.

''Institutional prerogatives are ignored when you're riding a winner,'' said an
aide to the House Democratic leadership.  ''Political decisions are primary, and
institutional prerogatives secondary. The question of institutional prerogatives
was never raised in the Vietnam War until the war became unpopular.''

Unlike the tens of thousands of letters and telegrams that deluged Congressional
offices after President Reagan's televised appeal on the budget and tax cuts,
there was a minimal public response to his appeal for a new round of cuts. To
many members of Congress, this confirmed Mr. Reagan's slippage in the popularity
polls, and suggested that they had more leeway in responding to Presidential
initiatives.

''The days of giving the President a blank check are over,'' said Representative
Benjamin S. Rosenthal, a liberal Democrat from Queens.

Request Viewed as Unfeasible

Some Republicans are now complaining about the inflexibility of the Reagan
Administration. They regard as politically unfeasible the President's request
for a new round of budget cuts.

''When we were initially talking about the budget cuts, we thought we would not
be dealing with more cuts until February,'' said Representative Michel.
''There's not enough time for members to catch their breath before the second
round, and the second round is tougher - you're cutting from a smaller piece of
the pie.''

The second round will also be tougher because of the opposition of moderate
Republicans from the Northeast and the Middle West, who don't want new cuts in
social programs until there are bigger cuts in military spending and other
programs including water projects and tobacco subsidies.

The Democrats' initial reaction to the new round of cuts was to let the
Republicans fight it out among themselves. The Democrats feared that if they
fought the cuts, and won, the President would blame them for what they believe
will be the inevitable failure of his economic recovery programs.

The President's Commitments

The Democrats have picked out the moderate Republicans as targets for defeat in
the 1982 elections. Many come from seats that have been customarily Democratic,
and fear that the Administration has taken away their rationale for supporting
the President's budget and tax measures.

Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. initially characterized the President's newest
budget plan as ''a deliberate action by Mr.  Stockman and the O.M.B. to break
the commitments that the President made to the Northeast group.'' He said that
''the obligation was made by the Republicans to the Republican members,''
adding, ''It's kind of an in-house matter of theirs.''

But the Democrats realized that they could not sit out the fight, and the
Speaker called the President's plan to defer spending on social programs a
''kind of backdoor method to frustrate the law,'' as well as ''the will and
desire and intent of the Congress.''

The House Democrats hope to fashion a bipartisan attack on the proposal,
appealing to the institutional pride of Mr. Conte and Mr.  Hatfield, who seek to
re-establish the power of the appropriations committees.

'Do We Want the Status Quo?'

''We're still a bunch of old mossbacks around here,'' said Representative Trent
Lott of Mississippi, the minority whip. ''We want to revert back to our old
stubborn, pouty ways. Every time something new is suggested, we want to do it
the old way.''

''Do we want the status quo?'' he asked. ''Or do we want to do things
differently? We're trying to change the fundamental direction of this country,
and if that's not the way we've always done things, then change it.''

But the Republican leader acknowledged, ''Sure it's going to be tougher from
here on.'' Today, for example, the House trounced the President's proposal to
sell Awacs planes, and Senator Howard H.  Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the Republican
leader, acknowledged that the President still lacked the votes in the Senate.

Time also is beginning to run against the President. Congress hopes to adjourn
by Thanksgiving, and will probably be gone before Christmas. That leaves
relatively little time to enact new Presidential initiatives into law this year.

''Time is our most valuable commodity,'' Representative Michel said, ''and time
is running out.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert Michael photo of Thomas O'Neill photo of
Trent Lott

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Reviving The Emperor

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 867 words


Life is being breathed once again into the Imperial Presidency by a
Nixon-Carter-Kissinger Doctrine that is simple, appealing and wrong.  No matter
how the President decides a foreign policy question, this doctrine holds,
Congress and everyone else must accept it or his authority will be undermined.

Richard Nixon, of course, struggled for six Presidential years to maintain that
kind of authority. So it was fitting that his first major foreign policy
statement since leaving the White House - supporting President Reagan's decision
to sell sensitive Awacs planes to Saudi Arabia - should sound an old familiar
theme:

''Defeat on Awacs,'' Mr. Nixon's statement said, ''would be a serious
embarrassment to Reagan, both at home and abroad ... If he loses ... everyone
loses ... Those who worry about the deal ought to trust the President, the
Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense ....''

Henry Kissinger is equally an old hand at proclaiming the neardivine right of a
President (advised, of course, by his Secretary of State) to dictate foreign
policy. Writing in The Washington Post in support of the Awacs sale, he too
proclaimed the old-time religion:

''For Congress now to overturn a new President's recommendation on a matter of
such magnitude would ... jeopardize the entire design of our foreign policy ...
Congress must not undermine the President's authority in international affairs
by a rejection of the sale ....''

Who would have expected that Jimmy Carter, the least assertive of Presidents,
would join this imperial chorus? But there he was, at a Washington news
conference, saying of the Awacs sale:

''I can make a good case either way, but once a President makes a commitment
it's important that it be fulfilled.'' Of course it is, and no doubt Ronald
Reagan will be embarrassed and even undermined if the Senate follows the House
and rejects his Awacs decision. But Mr. Reagan and Secretary of State Haig
should have thought of that before they picked up an unannounced ''decision in
principle'' by the Carter Administration and proclaimed it as a full-blown
national commitment - without consultation with Congress or the appropriate
committees, without debate in last fall's campaign, without any public
discussion and with no consultation with allies. Obviously, not even an adequate
Congressional head count was taken.

Similarly, at his last news conference Mr. Reagan announced a breathtaking
national commitment to defend the Saudi Arabian regime against external or
internal aggression; again, no consultation, no debate, no discussion outside
the Administration - a Presidential fiat, for which public and Congressional
support may well be doubted.

Commitments of almost equal import are apparently now being made to Egypt and
perhaps to the Sudan - all, of course, coming on top of Mr. Carter's most
sweeping act of foreign policy, his pledge to defend the entire Persian Gulf
region against any and all aggressors. From the Nile to the Euphrates, the cops
on the beat are once again Americans.

The wisdom of these commitments is not alone at issue. Almost equally important
is the question: Should the mere fact that such promises have been made by a
President, acting alone and without prior discussion, bind Congress and the
American people to keep them, regardless of their wisdom?

Mr. Kissinger and the ex-Presidents' club would say yes; Congress is too
unwieldy and too political and the public is too ignorant of foreign affairs, so
only the President can conduct foreign policy.  But the problem is that no
President can do it effectively without public and Congressional support.
Witness Vietnam. Witness, so far, the Awacs sale.

A President's task, therefore, is not to issue imperial writs but to build
support, or at least understanding, for the foreign policy steps he wants to
take. He doesn't necessarily have to have a public consensus or a Congressional
majority before he can act; but in a system of divided powers, in which the
people will make themselves heard later if not sooner, a President will be most
seriously embarrassed and undermined if he gets too far out front of those whom
he needs to follow him.

Mr. Reagan has not even bothered to make a foreign policy address, or to outline
a general context into which the Awacs decision clearly fits. The fact is that
the Administration so far has failed to make a convincing case for the sale on
its own merit; and to say that the President and the Saudis will be embarrassed
if it doesn't go through is a poor substitute. Surely Congress is entitled to
ask if the commitment to sell was sound in the first place.

As for the trust of which Mr. Nixon spoke, nothing is more crucial to any
President's ability to carry out a successful foreign policy.  But Congress and
the American people know they have cause to be wary of those who seek trust by
decree; and they're not likely to give theirs to Ronald Reagan until they think
he's earned it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 32, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words


By John Leonard
A FLAG FOR SUNRISE. By Robert Stone.  439 pages. Knopf. $13.95

HOLD on to your tricorn hat, or your cruciform, or your Uzi. In his third novel,
after ''A Hall of Mirrors'' and ''Dog Soldiers,'' Robert Stone decides to be
Dostoyevsky. Perhaps, on conceiving ''A Flag for Sunrise,'' he was more modest.
He would be Graham Greene, sending various quiet, stupid Yanquis to Central
America. He would be Joseph Conrad, hyperventilating near a convenient pyramid.
He would be Herman Melville, reversing Billy Budd, as if Christ were a black
hole or a woman's glove. But he thrashes his way - spaced out on ideas and angry
love, possessed by comparative religion, punished by God and history - to Fyodor
and a blue eye that turns into a blind sun. He swaggers in evil.

Here are the components of an exalted thriller: courage, dream, sex, compromise,
betrayal, blood, ambivalence. Tecan, a serf state somewhere in the ''waist'' of
the two American hemispheres, is on the verge of revolution; this time, the
mineral-hungry oligarchs have gone too far. That revolution will be abetted by
Atapa Indians so brutal in their simplicity, their ''vulgarization,'' as to
prove Marx prescient; by an American nun, ''the Queen of Swords''; by a
psychopath who has deserted from the United States Coast Guard; by gunrunners
who seem to have wandered in from a bad Fellini film, and by the usual Comintern
riffraff, including Hungarian Stalinists and Spanish romantics.

Rehearsal for Slaughter

Opposing the revolution are several less-than-charming employees of the Central
Intelligence Agency, a remittance man for international capital, a homicidal
Tecan police lieutenant, an albino dwarf, Mafia drug dealers and chicken hawks,
and many jeeps, like taxis to disaster, and many helicopters, like carrion
birds. Looking on are an American journalist who disappears in the mountains, an
American priest who drinks his way to heresy and an American anthropologist who
believes that ''Mickey Mouse will see you dead.''

Before the revolution, as if in dress rehearsal for the slaughter of the
innocent, dogs die - and children and young women just passing through. Anybody
in ''A Flag for Sunrise'' who isn't just passing through - anachronistic
hippies, European apparatchiks, ''dilettantes'' of apocalypse, tourists of a
South that ''reeks of poverty and revenge'' - has been ''turned around.''
Intellectuals have been ''turned around'' to become intelligence agents; the
Coast Guard deserter is ''turned around'' any time anyone hurts his feelings;
the face of God is ''turned around.'' Turning around requires a ''cover.''

The anthropologist, Frank Holliwell, falls in love with the Queen of Swords,
Sister Justin: ''It would be strange to see people who believed in things, and
acted in the world according to what they believed.'' Sister Justin - ''shroud
weaver,'' imagining ''serenity'' - wants to be ''used,'' if not by God then by
history. If we aren't in Holliwell's mind or Justin's, we are with Pablo, the
deserter and psychopath with a diamond in the pocket of his shirt and a knife
strapped in a plastic sheath to his leg.

Holliwell seems to be our best bet. A man of ''no blood or folk,'' from another
planet, ''forever inquiring of helpful strangers the nature of their bonds with
one another'' and for whom ''regret'' is ''second nature, the very fluid of his
veins,'' he is nevertheless a husband, father and teacher, ''capable of honor
and sacrifice,'' disdainful of murder, vampires, phantom worship, ''the gang,''
positive thinkers with ''their eyes awash in their own juice.'' He tells us, and
Justin, ''When I decide what happened, I'll decide to live with it.''

What he can't live with is Vietnam, where he was compromised. For most of the
Americans in ''A Flag for Sunrise,'' Vietnam is a disease: ''Cooking oil,
excrement, incense, death. The smell of the world turning.'' Another turnaround.
For these Americans, Vietnam holds ''a kind of moral fascination.'' They liked
being there, and can't forgive themselves. They no longer believe in ''the just
rule of the Lord'' that is proposed by the Roman Catholic revolutionaries. Their
Lord was north, and blue eyed. The Lord never should have discovered that ''each
is alone'' and ''the rest is fantasy.'' Holliwell can't rid himself of ''the
saffron taste'' of Vietnam.  ''The green places of the world'' swarm and bleed
and avenge; we experience ''existential dread,'' which is easy.

This thriller has gotten out of hand, hasn't it? We are made to understand why,
as a nation, we are hated. The blue eye is blind, sacrificed. Mr. Stone tells us
more than we want to know about guilt and strangers. His novel smells of bars
and jukeboxes, of boats and ideas, of a Roman Catholicism in the sweat tank of
conscience, hoping for a symbol and achieving merely a gesture. That his
characters can breathe at all, between the fingers clenched about their dream,
is amazing.

But the church yields to history. The drama is played out among spider monkeys
and coconuts, near a pyramid, looking at stelae that aren't quite Mayan - a
little Olmec here, with the jaguars; a little Toltec there, with human
sacrifice; some Yeats, and Calderon to terrify us - as we sink past that ''brain
coral'' in which we see ''the skull of the earth,'' with which skull we play
ball games.

Living in Heresy

The heresy here is Gnostic and Manichaean. There is a ''divine spark'' and ''a
library in a jar.'' Culture and love are both ''secret.'' The demiurge is a
tourist. The angels go south and are devoured. The ''messenger'' reports to a
C.I.A. machine. Holliwell is afraid to look at the sun. In the absence of evil -
to an anthropologist, nothing is evil, including himself - we have history:
snakes, feathers, lizards, jewels, a fanged cat, a wooden cross, a unicorn and
death without mercy.

Mr. Stone kicks the brain around; we live in heresy; Satan prevails; ''A Flag
for Sunrise'' is the best novel of ideas I've read since Dostoyevsky escaped
from Omsk.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Robert Stone

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LIFE TERM IMPOSED IN ESPIONAGE CASE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 624 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, Fla., Oct. 16


Joseph George Helmich Jr., the former Army code custodian who admitted selling
top-secret information to the Soviet Union for $131,000 to get out of debt 18
years ago, was sentenced today to life in prison.

''Congress has expressed its views on the seriousness of this offense,'' said
Federal District Judge Susan H. Black, adding that she thought Mr. Helmich
should be ''imprisoned for the remainder of his natural life.''

Mr. Helmich, 44 years old, will be eligible for parole in 10 years. If he had
been convicted on all four counts for which he was indicted, he would not have
been eligible for 40 years.

Lighter sentences have been imposed in other recent espionage cases. Christopher
J. Boyce, who was recently recaptured after escaping from a Federal prison, was
serving a 40-year term for selling secrets about Central Intelligence Agency
satellites to the Russians. David H. Barnett, a former intelligence agency
employee, received an 18-year sentence in January for selling sensitive
information to Moscow. The judge in that case noted that the average sentence
imposed in three espionage cases in 1979 was 46 years.

No Profit From Crime

Judge Black, when told that the former Army warrant officer might be planning to
write a book about his experiences, also ruled that any future income deriving
from his activities be paid to the Government.

On Sept. 28, four days into his trial, Mr. Helmich abruptly pleaded guilty to
one count of conspiracy to commit espionage by giving the Russians a maintenance
manual, technical details and key lists for the KL-7 Cryptosystem, a code
machine, in 1963 and 1964.

Under the plea agreement, announced after the first week of his trial, the
Government dropped the other three counts.  Mr. Helmich, who was the code
custodian for the Army Signal Corps communications relay station in Paris, said
he had decided to sell the information out of a ''desperate need for $500 to
$600.'' He said he had been ordered by his commanding officer to pay the debts
he had run up or face a court-martial.

Honored by Russians

Testimony at the trial disclosed that he was promoted to colonel in the Russian
Army and awarded a ''hero's medal of the first order,'' which still hangs in the
halls of the Kremlin.

Gen. William C. Westmoreland, retired, the commander of American forces in
Vietnam in the late 1960's, testified that if the enemy had had American codes,
it could ''read our mail'' and know the United States' war plans.

In seeking mercy from the judge, a court-appointed attorney, Peter Dearing,
presented letters and affidavits trying to minimize the damage Mr. Helmich had
caused. He noted that the KL-7 information was now in the hands of 15 American
allies, including France.

United States Attorney Gary Betz said Mr. Helmich was guilty of ''a crime of
greed and arrogance.''

'Traitorous Acts'

''These traitorous acts of Mr. Helmich were of the highest degree,'' he said.
''This crime strikes at the very fabric of our society. I request justice for
our country.''

Mr. Helmich had pleaded for leniency, saying that he had lived for 18 years ''in
my own private hell'' and ''with the knowledge of something I had done that kept
me in fear and dread.''

He requested and was granted permission to see his son, Kurt, 10, whom he has
not seen since his arrest July 15.  Mr. Helmich's wife of 23 years, Billie Jean,
said she thought the sentence was unfair and added, ''I have no intention of
leaving him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Donald R. Heath, 87; Served as a U.S. Envoy

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 177 words


Donald R. Heath, whose 40-year career in the United States Foreign Service and
as an Ambassador ended with his retirement in 1961, died on Thursday in Orinda,
Calif. He was 87 years old.

Mr. Heath entered the Foreign Service in 1920 after two years as White House
correspondent for United Press. He held a number of consular posts in Europe
and, after World War II, was director of political affairs in the American
military government in Germany. In the early 1950's he was the first United
States Ambassador to the newly independent countries in Indochina -Vietnam,
Cambodia and Laos.

After his retirement, he worked with a group seeking to gain repayment by
foreign governments on defaulted bonds held by Americans, and he held a
professorship at the University of California at Los Angeles.

Mr. Heath is survived by a daughter, Sue L. Brown of Kensington, Calif.; by a
son, Donald Jr. of El Cerrito, and by seven grandchilden and one
great-grandchild.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT SAYS U.S. SHOULD NOT WAVER IN BACKING SAUDIS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 17


President Reagan, elaborating on his pledge that the United States would not
permit Saudi Arabia to become another Iran, says he will not repeat mistakes
that he asserts the Carter Administration made in allowing Shah Mohammed Riza
Pahlevi to fall in Iran.

Mr. Reagan said the Shah would not have been ousted if the Carter Adminis-

Excerpts from remarks, page 39.
tration had given him unwavering support ''in whatever had to be done to curb
the revolution.''

The thrust of his elaboration of the pledge on Saudi Arabia - and of statements
by his chief aides in recent days - was that the President was not talking so
much about intervening in a domestic Saudi upheaval as about trying to prevent
such an upheaval with a show of American support. Such support, he says, was
lacking in Iran in 1979 when the Shah was overthrown.

Questioned by Editors

Mr. Reagan made his comments in a question-and-answer session at the White House
yesterday with out-of-town editors. A transcript was made public today.

He also touched on the matter of ''limited'' nuclear war. Asked by the visiting
editors if a nuclear war in Europe would

Many experts say the United States is ill equipped to help Saudi Arabia resist
domestic subversion. Page 14.
spread to the United States, Mr. Reagan said, ''I don't honestly know.''

He added, ''I could see where you could have the exchange of tactical weapons
against troops in the field without it bringing either one of the major powers
to pushing the button.''

Reagan Extols the Saudis

Mr. Reagan told the editors that the United States would lose ''all
credibility'' in the Middle East if it did not go through with the sale of radar
surveillance planes to Saudi Arabia.

In urging the Senate to support the $8.5 billion sale of Airborne Warning and
Control System planes and other military equipment, Mr.  Reagan extolled the
Saudis. He said that they ''want to be part of the West'' and that the
cease-fire in Lebanon last summer would not have taken place without their
intervention.

On Oct. 1, at his last news conference,the President was asked how he could
guarantee the security of the Awacs, given the experience in Iran, where
advanced equipment was lost. He replied, ''I have to say that Saudi Arabia, we
will not permit to be an Iran.''

That statement had been interpreted in some quarters as meaning that Mr. Reagan
was broadening the longstanding pledge to protect the Saudi regime from external
attack by including protection from internal upheaval as well.

When asked yesterday to elaborate on the Oct. 1 statement, Mr.  Reagan said:
''What I had in mind was that I don't believe that the Shah's Government would
have fallen if the United States had made it plain that we would stand by that
Government and support them in whatever had to be done to curb the revolution
and let it be seen that we still felt that we were allied with them.''

Says Carter Restrained Shah

He said the Carter Administration had not supported the Shah adequately and had
given him ''very bad advice at the time and restrained him for some time.''

Mr. Reagan said he had been told by a ''knowledgeable'' individual that the
revolution in Iran ''could have been headed off with the arrest of 500
individuals'' and that the Carter Administration had ''advised against that.''

Carter Administration aides have said they told the Shah that he had full
American backing, but they have complained that he so wavered about what to do
that he became ineffective.

There were differences among the Carter aides, however. Some, such as the
national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, favored an Iranian military
takeover to block the overthrow of the Shah's regime. Others, such as officials
at the United States Embassy, said the military was unable to take power and
that the best that could be hoped for was to gain influence with the
revolutionary leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, and his followers.

Mr. Reagan said yesterday: ''I suppose what I meant was that if we will make it
plain that we recognize we have a stake in the Middle East and that we are going
to stand by our friends and allies there, both Israel and nations like Egypt and
the Sudan and so forth, that I don't think that the same thing will happen -
that kind of an overthrow would take place. I think that if we, on the other
hand, retreat and step back fearfully and say 'well, we don't know what's going
to happen in the Middle East' to Egypt or anyone else 'and we better stay
clear,' then I think that we can bring about (an upheaval.).''

On his efforts to persuade a majority of the Senate to support the sale of Awacs
radar surveillance planes, Mr. Reagan said he was confident that he would
prevail. He denied reports that he was making deals with certain senators to
insure their votes.

He acknowledged that he had told Democrats who supported him in the tax and
budget battles earlier that he would not campaign against them, but he said, ''I
never said that about the Awacs deal.''

In answer to another question, he said that the 1974 legislation allowing
Congress to veto arms sales was approved ''in the aftermath of Vietnam'' and
that it went goes too far in weakening the President's powers.

He said that there should be some legislative safeguards but that the President
should be able ''to say, across a table, 'This is what we will do or what we
won't do,' and those that he's dealing with know that he has the authority to
say that.''

If the Awacs sale does not go through, he said, ''how do I then go forward with
this quiet diplomacy of trying to bring the Arab states into a peacemaking
process in which they can sit there and say, 'Well, we don't know whether you
can deliver yourself or not. You're not the fellow that's in charge. Congress
is.' ''

Mr. Reagan was asked whether he would be prepared ''to side openly'' with the
ruling Saudi family in case of a revolt ''and help suppress it.''

He did not reply directly but said, ''It won't happen if we're evident there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 MINOR PARTIES GIVE VIEWS ON THE RACE FOR MAYOR

BYLINE: By PETER KIHSS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 58, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


''Let's stop big government where it starts, New York City,'' says Judith Jones.
''Working people keep New York running, working people should run New York,''
says Wells Todd.  Miss Jones and Mr. Todd are candidates for Mayor of New York
City, having qualified for the Nov. 3 ballot by petition signatures. Miss Jones,
representing the Free Libertarian Party, submitted 15,066 signatures and Mr.
Todd, on the Socialist Workers Party line, turned in 17,537, according to the
Board of Elections.

Independent nominations can be made with 7,500 signatures. In last November's
Presidential election, the Free Libertarian candidate got 8,791 votes in New
York City and the Socialist Workers' nominee, 1,224.

For the first time in many years, the Communist Party, whose Presidential
candidates collected 4,892 votes, did not produce mayoral nominating petitions.
Jarvis Tyner, the state chairman, said the party was stressing neighborhood
organization.

Gary Greenberg, the Libertarians' campaign manager, says his party has a chance
of running second to Mayor Koch's Democratic-Republican candidacy, finishing
ahead of the Conservative, Liberal, Right to Life and Unity candidates.

A 'Third Party' Drive

Mark Friedman, the Socialist Workers' campaign manager, sees his party's drive
as part of an effort to form ''a new third party based on trade unions working
in alliance with civil rights, women's, antinuke groups and others.''

Miss Jones, 33 years old, of the Bronx, came here from Panama as a child. She
graduated from the Bronx Community College and is employed as a computer systems
analyst.

Mr. Todd, also 33, of Hollis, Queens, attended the High School of Fashion
Industries before being drafted into the Army and serving in Vietnam. A former
hospital technician, he works on the General Motors assembly line at the
Tarrytown, N.Y., automobile plant. Last year he was a founding member of the
National Black Independent Political Party.

The Free Libertarians are airing four television commercials with Miss Todd in
25 spots this month. In addition, Tom Avery, the party's research director, is
putting out four position papers totaling 40,000 words.

The first paper on crime proposes to repeal ''all victimless crime laws,''
including those on gambling, prostitution, voluntary drug use and possession of
weapons of self-defense, so that the police can concentrate on crimes of
violence.

Against 'Coercive Taxation'

Another calls for turning over some municipal services, including fire
protection and sanitation, to private agencies. The party asserts that
''coercive taxation has driven people and industry from New York.'' It charges
that ''rent control and zoning laws created cheap housing for the rich,
expensive housing for the poor and less housing for the middle class.''

The Socialist Workers call for a shorter work week with no pay cuts and would
divert military funds to create civilian jobs.  The party wants free mass
transit, with ''the rich'' to be taxed for improvements; free education through
college and guaranteed jobs for youths. It calls for ''citywide rent control
with no more than 10 percent of income for rent.''

''Stop police brutality - cops out of Black and Latino communities,'' it
demands. It would nationalize the energy industry and Con Edison. It calls for
reopening Sydenhanm and other closed hospitals - ''free health care for all.''

On the Libertarian slate for Comptroller is Robert Flanzer, a dentist; for
Council President, John Henry Francis, a high school teacher and United
Federation of Techers delegate; for Borough President of Manhattan, David Kahn,
a bank employee, and for District Attorney of New York County, Dolores Grande,
who sought the job four years ago.

The other Socialist Workers candidates are Raul Gonzalez, a subway car mechanic,
for Comptroller; Susan Wald, 28, a currently furloughed pipefitter for the
Coastal Dry Dock and Repair Corporation, for Council President, and Ken Miliner,
a refinery worker for Exxon Corporation in Elizabeth, N.J., for Borough
President.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Wells Todd photo of Judith Jones

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BETTMANN BEHIND THE ARCHIVES

SECTION: Section 6; Page 118, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4094 words


Helen Markel is a contributing editor of McCall's. By Helen Markel Within an
hour after the 1978 birth of Baby Louise, the first testtube baby, an 1832
woodcut showing an alchemist brewing up a child in his chemical retort turned up
on the desks of major newspaper editors. The next morning, the old print
appeared in papers across the country with the familiar credit line ''The
Bettmann Archive'' running chastely up the right-hand side.

The Bettmann Archive is a remarkable repository of visual history ranging from
photographs of George Washington's spring-powered dentures to pictures of
Sigmund Freud's original leather couch. It is the creation and life work of Dr.
Otto Bettmann, an enterprising, scholarly German-Jewish immigrant, who spent 45
years building it into an invaluable, irreverent and original source of graphic
materials that have rescued several generations of art directors, book
publishers, encyclopedia compilers, T-shirt manufacturers and cereal-box
designers from creative gridlock.

''Instead of visual cliches, I provided them with a graphic shorthand that
illuminates the present by revealing the past, preferably with humor,''
Bettmann, now a dapper 78, says with characteristic immodesty. ''I always used
to tell my staff what Harold Ross of The New Yorker told his: 'Don't only gimme
that grim stuff!' ''

Thanks to the mustiness of the word ''Archive,'' most people envision the place
as an old curiosity shop, with Dr. Bettmann a Dickensian relic, if indeed he
exists at all.

A recent dinner partner of his, upon discovering Bettmann's identity over her
vichyssoise, looked up in shock. ''I thought you'd died 300 years ago,'' she
said.

In point of fact, the archive is more I.B.M. than Dickens and the recently
retired lord of its files more Clifton Webb than Scrooge.  Part scholar and part
Barnum, Bettmann has a theatrical sense as shrewd as his editorial judgment.
''There is a certain commercial value to maintaining an image of antiquity,'' he
says cheerfully.  ''So I live happily with all rumors of my demise.''

His flawless tailoring, impeccable ascots, silver goatee and Herr Professor
accent made Bettmann as gilt-edged a landmark for Dry Dock country as Hammacher
Schlemmer, the archive's longtime neighbor across East 57th Street. Indeed,
Bettmann looks so much like Freud that a leading New York psychoanalyst keeps
his picture in his waiting room and no patient has yet questioned it.

Unlike Freud, however, Bettmann smiles a lot, especially for an archivist. To be
more accurate, he actually twinkles, a word everyone eventually resorts to in an
effort to describe him. The twinkle, the wry wit, the Old World courtliness
conceal a fiercely competitive drive and an elegant wheeler-dealer charm.  Last
January, Dr. Bettmann sold his archive to Kraus-Thomson Organization Ltd., a
small international publishing firm, for an undisclosed sum. ''Undisclosed,''
Bettmann says, ''because they don't want to defile the purity of the archive
with the vulgarity of a price tag.'' However, informed sources estimate that the
sale was a multimillion-dollar photo finish for its founder.

''I was fortunate to marry a fine Bostonian lady who is a strong, astute swimmer
on the ocean of life, just what this little German scholar needs. Women always
have their feet planted more firmly on the ground than men, especially American
women, to whom I am strongly addicted.''

He calls her ''Lieb'' (the diminutive of the German Liebchen); she calls him
''Sweetheart,'' tells him when he is driving in the wrong lane, monitors his
phone conversations, selects his clothes.

''Anne is my stylist, my art director, the creator of my physical persona,'' he
says, gazing lovingly upon her. ''We are a kind of marital phenomenon ... this
combination of retiring German librarian and with-it American woman has worked
miracles, personally and professionally.

''She is a wonder woman. During the sale, she spoke calmly while I became very
emotional, flinging my arms about and wringing my hands.  As we say in America,
I sold the steak but she sold the sizzle.''

After the sale, the Bettmanns moved from Manhattan's Sutton Place to Florida's
gilt-edged Boca Raton, near Fort Lauderdale, where Dr.  Bettmann continues to
enjoy the life of the mind in an opulent condominium. ''I reject the words
'condo' and 'senior citizen,' '' he says with a small shudder. ''We have simply
set up a little corner of New England on Florida's Gold Coast, where I am
spending a semiworking retirement. ''The life of the mind is our true wealth,
but the ambiance in which one lives it is not to be sneezed at.

''I admit that I surprised myself at the ease with which I have adjusted to the
languors of this climate. I find my time here a very pleasant hiatus between
being and nothing. Since I do not believe in the hereafter, the archive is my
afterlife, and I feel fortunate in knowing in advance what footprints I will be
leaving behind.''

The uninitiated believe that the Bettmann Archive, like the Smithsonian and the
Library of Congress, is a nonprofit institution.  The fact is that it is a
business with profit margins any Harvard Business School graduate would envy.
Bettmann has cautiously admitted upon occasion that the profits may run close to
30 percent in a good year, and insiders estimate that the business brings in
about $1 million annually.

Bettmann made his fortune by charging handsomely for materials that are in the
public domain. He created a unique enterprise in which no sale ever reduces his
inventory: The archive simply rents a copy of one of its three million pictures
to a customer for one-time use.

Although Dr. Bettmann does not agree that one picture is worth a thousand words
(''even though I realize I am biting the hand that has fed me handsomely''), he
has definitively proven that it can be worth a thousand dollars - and often
more. Fees range from $50 to $3,000, depending on the length of the rental and
the size of the target audience. (Lower rates are charged to academic and church
institutions, hospitals and the like.)

For example, a small picture he bought for a few francs during a Sunday stroll
among the Seine picture stalls turned out to be just the background a
photographer needed for a Vogue cover. He paid the archive $1,000 for one-time
use. When a Scotch whisky distiller wanted to do an advertising campaign based
on English drinking habits, Bettmann remembered a small cartoon book of
19th-century barflies he had picked up in a London flea market. The distiller's
advertising agency rented 12 pictures from the book for $2,000. And that's how
the money rolls in.  Bettmann was born in 1903 in Leipzig, the city of books and
of Bach, which were to become the two major influences in his life, together
with his grandmother's chicken soup - ''the ne plus ultra of Jewish culinary
arts,'' he says. ''Although I am not a religious man in the temple-going sense,
that soup has kept me genetically anchored to Judaism throughout my life.

''To be a Jew in Germany was always to be a fugitive of sorts.  America enabled
me to be a Jew proudly, a free man striving to lead an orderly life governed by
the ethics of Judaism. I have never returned to Germany and I never plan to.''

His father was a bibliophile and a noted Leipzig bone surgeon who studied with
Roentgen, the discoverer of X-rays. At age 12, Otto began methodically culling
through the family's wastebaskets for discarded mailing pieces with anatomical
and medical illustrations - ''the seminal kernels from which my archive would
grow.''

He took his Ph.D. in art history at the University of Leipzig and worked in a
Berlin publishing house before becoming the rare-books curator of the State Art
Library. He made his name there with an exhibition of Goethe on the art of the
book, and had the foresight to photograph each entry for his personal
collection.

He was fired on the eve of Hitler's takeover. On a gray November morning in
1935, he sailed for America wearing his father's best suit and with $5 in his
pocket. He chose to leave his clothes behind and instead pack two steamer trunks
with thousands of feet of exposed 35-millimeter film, the images of Western
civilization he had gathered over the years. The contents of those two trunks,
which were of no interest to a bored customs man, were the beginning of one of
the world's finest private graphic collections that 45 years later would fill
two floors of an elegant Manhattan office building.

An uncle in Cincinnati, a successful lawyer, staked his young German nephew to
the rental of a tiny office above a small German restaurant on West 45th Street
- ''the place always smelled of sauerbraten - and the smell was all I could
afford.''

But his timing was picture-perfect. Life and Look had arrived on the scene and
photojournalism was in its infancy. Everybody needed pictures. Magazine and book
editors heard about him, and one afternoon Frank Stanton, then head of research
for the Columbia Broadcasting System, dropped by in search of something
different to illustrate the impact of fledgling radio for a double-page
advertisement in Fortune.

Bettmann produced a blockbuster from one of his father's rare books he had
smuggled out of Germany - a 300-year-old line drawing by a Jesuit priest of a
medieval castle with huge, snail-shaped trumpets that transmitted sound from
room to room. (''We had a big run on that print after Watergate,'' Bettmann says
nostalgically.)

The advertisement won awards for CBS and put the small archive on the graphics
map. Bettmann invested in a new suit and his first ascot. He moved his quarters
uptown and his archive into the 20th century by buying up picture morgues that
had fallen upon hard times.

Ten years ago, he joined forces with the film publicist John Springer for
Springer's collection of old movie stills.  ''Snob that I am,'' Bettmann says,
looking back on that venture, ''I admitted Michelangelo but refused Cecil B. De
Mille to my salon.  But wiser - and younger - heads fortunately prevailed. Today
film has become a serious discipline and King Kong, Tarzan and W.C.  Fields are
big, serious business. Thanks to them, even 'The Late Late Show,' which I am
never awake to see, has achieved a sort of status.'' With the advent of
television and the demise of Life and Look, Bettmann took up the slack by
anticipating new demands for graphics depicting black nationalism, women's
liberation, solar energy, urban blight and suburban flight - ''You name it, I
was after it.'' During the Kennedy years, he collected a prodigious file of
first-rate rocking chairs, and the archive keeps a treasure trove of Thomas Nast
political cartoons available for all New York mayoralty campaigns.

What Bettmann wrought is a pictorial history of the world as classified by
subject matter. Now there are row upon row of space-age filing cabinets
containing more than three million pictures, fully annotated, cross-filed and
indexed into 50 groups, 5,000 subject categories and thousands of subcategories.

''We simply go from the Creation to Reagan,'' Bettmann says matter-of-factly.
The Reagan file is said to be developing nicely.  Personalities range from A
(''Beverly Aadland, the 17-year-old girlfriend of the late Errol Flynn, seen
taking her ease in her duplex Manhattan penthouse'') to Z (''Vladimir Zworykin,
the inventor of the cathode-ray tube for television'').

''Freud outsells Jesus today - we could never get enough Freuds,'' Bettmann says
glumly, since he holds the master personally responsible for the cult of
personality, a phenomenon he deplores as much as he does Marshall McLuhan.

''McLuhan sounded good, but there was nothing there. He was one of those
meteorites - after he died, they packed up his institute and he was never heard
from again. As I kept telling my staff, the medium is the medium, the message is
the message.'' The staff currently consists of three picture researchers, a
photo librarian, a permissions manager, a bookkeeper and four harassed clerks,
backed up by an elaborate photo lab and a battery of computers and other
electronic marvels that process about 50 orders a day: ''Give us everything you
have on abortion'' to ''Need a file on old bidets by noon.''

Unfilled requests range from a profile shot of the Mona Lisa to Thomas Jefferson
eating spaghetti, which a Midwest pasta manufacturer insists exists. The archive
maintains a standing offer of $1,000 for an authentic picture of the Earl of
Sandwich eating a sandwich or of the camera-shy Gabriel Fahrenheit with his
mercury thermometer.

The 57th Street archivists consider ''stock'' pictures a dirty word and politely
pass on all requests for alligators in Cypress Gardens or Nancy Reagan in the
Rose Garden to commercial photo agencies.

''I taught my staff that a fireman's scrapbook, a circus employee's photo album
- the discarded bread wrappers of daily life rather than the official
photographs - are the archivist's gold.''

Bettmann is an inveterate thrower-outer. He prided himself on rejecting most of
the 100,000 pictures the staff or outsiders brought to his desk each year. ''It
has been said that my pictures and my staff both trembled before me,'' he
boasts. The staff was rumored to go through his wastebaskets after hours in the
hope they could start their own archive from his discards. ''What they don't
have,'' Bettmann says comfortably, ''is the key that makes it all come
together.''

''The Smithsonian and the Library of Congress have about the same stuff,'' an
old customer said recently in some awe. ''It's just that you have to spend days
wading through it. What they don't have is Otto Bettmann for a memory bank.''

The archive's chief competitors are Culver Pictures Inc. and Brown Brothers.
''We have plowed the same furrows for many years in peace and harmony,''
Bettmann says. He admits Culver's superiority in film and theatrical pictures,
but maintains firmly that the archive cannot be touched in its overall global
collection of pictorial history: ''We cover a wider field with a more critical
eye.''

''But I am not running down my confreres,'' he adds hastily.  ''Brown Brothers,
which has dropped out of the New York scene, has a very valuable collection from
the 1890's and 1900's of the Teddy Roosevelt era and the rise of our industrial
and social empire. But both outfits are much less organized than we are.''

The heart of the archive is its retrieval system, as intricate and precise as a
Bach fugue, on which it is based. ''It's all there in Bach's music, if you only
take the time to listen to what he is telling you,'' Bettmann says. ''By
following his ground rules for composing a fugue, you can learn how to set up an
archive or become a good writer.

''I play the piano every day to try to get closer to the meaning of his work.
The only spanking I ever got was when my piano teacher Fraulein Schutze (those
two ominous umlauts!) told my parents I was not practicing. Today I am eternally
grateful that they engaged in that piece of unprogressive education. It's
amazing what dogged application combined with simple fear can accomplish.

''Thanks to Fraulein Schutze and a favorable number in my genetic lottery, I
have the ability to work relentlessly - my good wife would say compulsively. It
is a gift that fate smuggles into some fortunate cradles that is as vital as a
good larynx to an opera singer.'' This morning, the compulsive worker is taking
a break from what he calls his ''hang-up,'' a biography of Bach, to talk to a
visitor about his new life in Boca Raton.

Although he claims that he has officially retired, his staff affectionately
reports that his fine Renaissance hand still reaches to East 57th Street with a
new idea, a fresh manifesto.

''I have an incurable love affair with New York, the most obnoxiously beautiful,
dehumanizing, ill-smelling, overpriced and ethereal city in the world,'' he
says. ''Florida is still Frontierland in many ways - although I have finally
managed to find some luncheon companions who are not retired vice presidents of
ballbearing companies. The thing I miss most in Boca is the Manhattan Yellow
Pages, which I consider the greatest research tool in the world.

''At my age, you can't sell 300 days of sunshine short, nor the fact that you
can go out for a walk without fear. Older people should live in a kinder
ambiance than New York, even though I return every month to recharge my
batteries and look in on the archive. I have finally learned that you are not as
old as you feel, you are as old as you are, and I have adjusted to that fact.

''There is a certain wisdom to leaving the party before you're asked to go,'' he
continues quietly. ''I knew I would eventually have to face the music, so I did
while I could still dance to it.''

Wearing a navy blue blazer, a blue polka-dot ascot, and Teutonically pressed
gray slacks, Bettmann at 78 looks as though he could dance all night. He
attributes his physical and marital longevity to his wife.

''We have grown young together over 40 years. So many people die young of their
own dietary debaucheries,'' he says, sipping a glass of iced tea. ''I live an
orderly, Bach-inspired life: I refrain from excesses of all kinds, I avoid
cholesterol, and the only pill I believe in is a daily dose of that invaluable
vitamin, the book. But above all, a good wife helps you defy the calendar. That
plus a fivemile beach walk every day with Bach on my Sony Walkman.''

Melvin Gray, Bettmann's stepson and president of the archive for the past 10
years, says: ''My mother is a very dynamic woman. She wore out the two young men
who came down to Florida to start the negotations for the sale of the archive.''

Soon after that confrontation in Boca Raton, Hans P. Kraus, 74, a formidable
international rare-book dealer, announced the sale. The ceremony was held at Mr.
Kraus's East Side townhouse. Present were the two operating heads, Herbert W.
Gstalder, president of Kraus-Thomson, and Melvin Gray.

Since Gstalder is Kraus's son-in-law and Gray is Bettmann's stepson, both sides
put in a good word for nepotism. Then, with his usual sense of theater, Bettmann
turned the occasion into a publishing party for himself, a sort of last hurrah
during which he autographed 100 copies of his latest book, ''A Pictorial History
of the World.'' The inscription to one of the young men who had come down to
Boca read: ''To Arthur, in the hope that he will soon return to Florida, but
that the next trip will be less expensive.'' Since 1975, Bettmann has been
taking a Sun Belt excursion into academia. Appointed an adjunct professor of
history at Florida Atlantic University, he gave a course in the pictorial
history of civilization and was awarded an honorary degree of Doctor of Humane
Letters in 1979.

''After that,'' he says, ''I withdrew into this wonderful monastic office
overlooking the Atlantic, among my books and my records and my picture gallery
of the men with whom I have had personal concord over the years -Goethe,
Santayana, Henry James, Emerson - the friends of my interior lifetime. And Bach,
Bach above all. ...''

He is devoting full time to his Bach book, although he is less sure about that
project now than he once was.  ''That book will probably never be written,'' he
says slowly. ''A book is a long night's journey into day, a Sisyphean task
requiring the spiritual, mental and physical discipline of a young man.''

As a Brandenburg concerto plays on his stereo, he muses on the meaning of the
man he calls ''an enormous human being. I have lived with him so long now, I
know him so well, that I want to introduce him to others so that he can enrich
their lives, too. Knowing him has given me a willingness to face death -and to
realize that everything is preordained. Like the inexorable laws of a Bach
fugue, one has to come full circle, as it is written in the book of life.''

Curiously, this man of five million pictures still puts his faith in the written
word. ''I know of no picture that is worth one perfectly constructed sentence or
a single page of Flaubert or the noble ideas of Tolstoy. Matthew Brady's
photograph of Lincoln is a remarkably sensitive likeness. But you must read the
Gettysburg Address to see the man whole.''

This unreconstructed bookman has written or collaborated on nine books, among
them ''A Word From the Wise,'' a compilation of ideas and quotations that caught
his vast reading fancy over the years, ranging from Adlai Stevenson's definition
of diplomacy - ''Protocol, alcohol and Geritol'' - to Don Marquis's jaded
cockroach archie's observation: ''An optimist is a man that has not had much
experience.''

''Despite archie,'' he says, ''I am a man of experience who remains a confirmed
optimist. I deplore the cult of nostalgia, even though I have made a hell of a
living from it, because it blinds us to progress.

''Nostalgia is papier-mache history, sterilized of all pain, in which life is
seen as a continuous performance of the Ziegfeld Follies, and the blood, sweat
and exploitation of the poor have been swept under the Aubusson rugs.''

To prove his thesis, he wrote ''The Good Old Days - They Were Terrible,'' an
unsparing look at the alleged Gilded Age. Published in 1974, it is now in its
15th printing and has become something of a cult book.

In it, he reminds New Yorkers who yearn for clean air that their city in 1900
was ''a nasal disaster. There were 150,000 horses, each of which produced about
20 pounds of manure a day, with no pooperscooper law in sight. Pigs roamed
Broadway along with thousands of young ruffians fleeing slum housing. And like
the drug-addicted veterans of Vietnam, the Civil War survivors returned home
hooked on laudanum.''

He straightens a portrait of Henry James. ''Our misplaced passion for the good
old days blinds us to the good new ones,'' he remarks.  ''We refuse to accept
the price tags of progress: Welfare benefits create welfare abuses; atomic
energy brings in its wake terrible health hazards; the Model T produces
gridlock. But we do keep moving forward. ...

''I don't hold with the currently fashionable view that the world will end in
nuclear war in the year 2000. From my post at the picture window of history, I
see the pace of our progress like the march of the Crusaders as they approached
Jerusalem - two steps forward, one step back.

''With Faulkner, I believe that man will not only endure, but that he will
prevail. ...'' He smiles apologetically at his own solemnity: ''History does not
repeat itself, historians simply repeat each other. Of course, it's safe for me
to prophesy. ... If I'm wrong, I won't be around to eat my words.''

Otto Bettmann stretches, stands up and puts Bach's Fugue for Flute and Oboe on
his Sony Walkman. Then he heads for the beach to admire the mysteries of the
ocean and the intricate life of the shells at his feet. He picks up a perfect
pale pink conch and offers it to a visitor.

''Bach at his best,'' he says gently. ''Pure, inexorable, ageless perfection.
How can one fail to be optimistic about the future in the face of that?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of horse subway car in L.A. in 1925 anonymous
drawing of Dr. Bettmann's profile French lithograph (1882) photo of a 300-year
old line drawing by a Jesuit priest photo of a 1900 poster advertising the
Edison phonograph photo of Dr. Otto Bettmann

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A NOVEL OF LOST AMERICANS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WOOD; Michael Wood is the author of ''Stendhal'' and
''America in the Movies.'' He is writing a book on Luis Bunuel.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1396 words


A FLAG FOR SUNRISE By Robert Stone.  439 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $13.95.

SQUALID, spectacular, agitated, littered with ancient ruins and riddled with
more spies than you can shake a cloak at, Central America seems almost too much
of a good thing for a novelist: the treasure of the Sierra Madre tarted up for
an apocalypse. Robert Stone, setting his new, now novel in an imaginary but
circumstantial version of this place, is taking a serious risk; but the risk is
worth it, and the wager is won. We are ''south of cliche'' here, as a character
in the book says. Stone converts cliches into people, and people into questions.
''A Flag for Sunrise'' has the pace and suspense of a first-class thriller, and
it catches the shifting currents of contemporary Latin American politics.

It is Stone's third novel. His first, ''Hall of Mirrors,'' was set in New
Orleans, chosen, Stone said, ''because it is a city in which the American
condition is driven to extremity.'' His second, ''Dog Soldiers,'' brought
Vietnam, in the shape of drugs and violent states of mind, home to America. And
''A Flag for Sunrise,'' his third, shows, among other things, the human
condition driven to extremity by Americans. Vietnam is the secret anterior
horror in this story. It is where people have been, what they remember,
history's madness clinging to their skin, a ''special lunacy,'' in Stone's
words, a world of ''excuses and evasions,'' of ''lost dreams and death,'' the
world of our wars. It is because we have made them our wars that the memory of
Vietnam is so haunting and so fierce, and it is because Central America is not
Vietnam that the memory is so misleading, a form of proof that our mistakes will
not let us go.

The novel has several intelligence officers who are Vietnam veterans, burned-out
cases, or ''just badly seared,'' as one of them puts it. But not all the lunacy
is American. There is a sinister English policeman who has seen service in Kenya
and the French Foreign Legion, a Latin American psychopath and a German killer
of little children. America is mixed up in much of the ugliness in the book, but
America is finally perhaps a name for an international affliction, much as New
Orleans, in ''Hall of Mirrors,'' was a metaphor for America.

Extremity is Stone's domain, and it is represented not only by American
interventions and native conspiracies, but by the nearperpetual drunkenness of
many of his characters, and the constant reaching of others of them for whatever
drugs come to hand. These are people ''on the edge,'' as Stone says of a literal
jeep ride along the fringe of a darkening ocean. They are looking for ways of
living on the margin. ''The Jew is at home in the modern world,'' one of the
veterans wrote when he was still in Vietnam, and the phrase is an insidious
insult. We have no business being at home here, and when Frank Holliwell, an
anthropologist baffled by his own inconsistencies and prodded by the C.I.A.,
finds his spot in the world it is an ''outer darkness without friend or
faction.''

Frank did a job for The Company in Saigon and has been asked to do it a favor in
Central America, where he has gone to give a lecture.  He refuses the
invitation, but he comes close to spying all the same, betraying both sides in
the war he cannot stay away from. It was once thought that the ruins in Stone's
Central America would teach scholars something about everyday life before the
Spanish conquest, but this was wrong. All the carvings spoke of was human
sacrifice: ''It was as though there was no everyday life. Only sacrifice.''

The chief characters in the novel, apart from Frank Holliwell, are a young
American nun called Sister Justin and a defector from the United States Coast
Guard called Pablo. The three are intelligently and delicately drawn, although
Pablo gives Stone a little more trouble than the other two. Frank is supposed to
spy on the nun and the priest who works with her -both of them being suspected
of revolutionary leanings. The priest, drinking a lot and near the end of his
tether, is merely teaching gnosticism (''Satan is the way things are'') to a
group of American dropouts, but the nun is passionately committed to the
impending revolt. Besides spying, Frank has no other reason for being in this
tangled country and barely escapes from it with his life. In a bit of too
predictable plotting, he falls in love with (and makes love to) the nun, but his
love itself, its surprises and depths, are movingly evoked. Pablo meanwhile has
been employed by a team of gunrunners, on a trip that takes him to the outer
limits of his own paranoia. People are always ''turning him around,'' Pablo
thinks, and his response is a stubborn, confused and contaminating rage.

The only characters in the novel who know just what they are doing are the
revolutionaries. They are briefly glimpsed but memorably pictured. Don
Sebastian, a fragile, untiring old hand, and Emilio Ortega, prospective leader
of the changed country, discuss strategy and, with sadness but without regret,
decide on the death of a comrade who has become an American informer.

People as questions, and America as affliction. There is a powerful moment in
the book that brings together many of its most disturbing preoccupations and
also reveals how far this ostensibly political novel takes us from politics.
Frank goes diving off a coral reef, and at 120 feet senses something like
primordial terror: the presence of a shark, perhaps, or a distillation of fear
itself, scaring all the small fish in sight, ''an invisible shadow, a silence
within a silence.'' This fear is later associated with Pablo's craziness and
with the lurking, smiling ubiquity of the Englishman, who works for a private
security agency. ''I'm the shark on the bottom of the lagoon,'' he says. ''You
have to sink a damn long way before you get to me. When you do, I'm waiting.''

After the dive Frank thinks to himself that he had ''no business down there,''
and the pun is quickly underlined. Down there, off the reef, where the coral
falls away into an abyss. And down there, in Central America, where revolution
is brewing and the only part he can properly play is that of the spy. ''He had
no business under the reef. Nor had he any business where he was, under the
perfumed sky.'' But that is why he is there: because any business he might have
would be a front or a disguise, and because, down there, there is not only a
reef and a country but also a temptation, a form of exposure, a flirtation with
the deeps of death and disgrace. Vietnam, Central America, all states of war
whether domestic or public, all conditions of risk, down there, are versions of
Stone's kingdom of extremity, echoes of his New Orleans. Like Satan they are, in
this vision, the way things are, or, as Frank Holliwell thinks, grimly naming
the main subject of this novel, they are ''the smell of the world turning.''

Stone overwrites a little. We read here of ''creatures of sacerdotal dark,'' of
''the great steaming jakes of the mind,'' and some of the book's set scenes are
too heavily symbolic for my taste.  ''The sea on one hand, the woman on the
other,'' and the sunrise of the title is apt to come up ''blood red.'' I have a
weakness for gangsters who refer to Nietzsche and gunrunners who quote
Shakespeare, Yeats and Oscar Wilde, but other readers may not feel the same.
Stone's first two novels were all but buried beneath a pile of impressive names.
Conrad, Hemingway, Dreiser, Dos Passos, Traven, Malcolm Lowry, Nathanael West
were all mentioned as terms of comparison. The names the new book calls to mind
are Conrad and Graham Greene, although I think both of those writers ask more
questions than Stone does, and take them further.

What those names suggest, as names, is literature. Nothing wrong with that, of
course, but literature has its limits. Its sheer coherence and beauty, its
offering of plot and character and eloquence, the impression it gives of
imitating life a shade too smoothly, may at times make us want to murmur,
ungratefully enough, that it is only literature. Great books never make us feel
this way.  But a lot of very good books do, and this is less a complaint than a
sketch of a context. Stone is a good deal closer to Traven than to Conrad, but
he certainly finds treasure in the territory south of cliche.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSIAN CHEMISTRY

BYLINE: By THOMAS POWERS; Thomas Powers, the author of ''The Man Who Kept the
Secrets,'' is writing a book about strategic weapons.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1247 words


YELLOW RAIN A Journey Through the Terror of Chemical Warfare.  By Sterling
Seagrave.  316 pp. New York: M. Evans & Co. $11.95.

THE evidence is circumstantial. The first reports came more than 15 years ago
from mountain villages in Yemen where a bloody civil war was being fought
between royalist tribesmen backed by Saudi Arabia and a leftist government
backed by Egypt. In 1963 Soviet-built planes dropped unusual bombs which gave
off dense smoke variously described as dark gray, brown or black. Skin blisters
broke out on people touched by the smoke, suggesting mustard gas of the sort
used in World War I. Children were especially vulnerable. A British observer
reported that at least six died vomiting and coughing up blood. The blood was
puzzling. Conventional poison gases do not cause hemorrhaging.

Three years later new reports emerged of gas attacks on Yemeni villages. This
time the smoke was described as gray green in color.  A wide range of effects
was reported by a medical team from the International Red Cross that questioned
survivors: vomiting, blood pouring from nose and mouth, blood in the urine,
bloody stools, blood welling up through the mucous membranes of the eyelids. At
least several hundred people died in a number of separate attacks. It was
difficult to make a precise survey in the rugged and remote Yemeni mountains. No
actual sample of the alleged gas was obtained. None of the aircraft allegedly
involved were photographed. Pilots of the planes were never identified. Egypt
vehemently denied using poison gas. At the United Nations Secretary General U
Thant said, ''The facts are in sharp dispute and I have no means of ascertaining
the truth.''

In the late 1970's refugees from the Laotian highlands reported strange attacks
by Soviet-built planes which dropped large bags that burst in the air and spread
a fine yellow powder over Hmong villages. One witness described the people as
lying down and going to sleep.When the witness came closer, he saw skin blisters
on the victims and blood coming from nose and mouth. Some of those who did not
die right away twitched and jerked like fish out of water. That suggested nerve
gas of the sort developed by Germany before World War II, but never used. Other
reports described gas or mist or ''rain'' of different colors. A wide range of
medical symptoms was described, but common to most of them was the inexplicable
hemorrhaging. By 1979 as many as 15,000 to 20,000 people may have died in the
yellow rain. The Vietnamese vehemently denied using poison gas in their war
against the Hmong.

After the Russian invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979, reports trickled out
of similar gas attacks in remote areas of Badakhshan Province in the Hindu Kush.
Afghan rebels said their men died twitching and jerking, bleeding from every
bodily orifice. These remarkably consistent reports from three of the world's
most isolated corners - Yemen, Laos and Afghanistan - have been carefully
gathered and analyzed by the American journalist Sterling Seagrave, a former
reporter for The Washington Post and the son of Gordon Seagrave, the ''Burma
Surgeon.'' Despite their circumstantial nature, Mr. Seagrave argues that only
one conclusion can be drawn: The Soviet Union has developed a third generation
of lethal chemical agents and has been testing them in brush-fire wars for more
than 15 years. Since, Mr.  Seagrave says, the Soviet Army is known to be the
best trained and equipped army in the world for chemical warfare, this presents
a serious threat to the United States and its allies.

On September 13, partly prompted by the imminent publication of Mr. Seagrave's
book, the United States for the first time flatly charged Russia with using - or
at the very least providing - poison gas in Southeast Asia. The charges,
contained in a speech delivered in Berlin by Secretary of State Alexander Haig,
were backed up in Washington the following day. Reagan Administration officials
publicized chemical evidence - derived from foliage gathered in Cambodia last
March - that the yellow rain reported by refugees in Southeast Asia contained at
least three types of fungal poisons, or mycotoxins. Sudden and massive
hemorrhaging is one effect of mycotoxins.

These poisons are a by-product of fungus growths on grain that has been stored
in damp conditions. The trichothecene or T2 group of mycotoxins have long been
known in Europe, and especially in Russia, where a combination of famine and
poor grain storage resulted in outbreaks of mycotoxin poisoning during the
famine years of the 1930's. The implication, forcefully argued by Mr. Seagrave,
is that Russian research into the mycotoxins has allowed them to synthesize T2
poisons for large-scale use in war. Moscow has rejected the charge as a ''big
lie'' and countered that ''no country in the history of international relations
has used chemical weapons as extensively as the United States.''

This is, of course, arguably true. Using chemical agents the United States
defoliated millions of acres of forest and cropland in Vietnam and Cambodia
during the Vietnam War. Other agents were used as well, which, if they were not
quite ''poison gases'' in the usual sense of the term, could still cause death
when heavily concentrated, as they often were in operations to clear tunnels and
bunkers. Mr.  Seagrave does not stint in telling this unpleasant story and is
harsh in his judgments of the men who conceived the operation and carried it
out. But the main point at issue here is not what the United States has done -
that is well known - but whether the Russians have been developing and using
poison gases of a type banned by the 1925 Geneva Protocol and the 1972
Biological Weapons Convention.

The evidence in the case is the heart of Mr. Seagrave's book, and he has
presented it ably. He tells the story as it unfolded, slowly and tentatively, in
widely scattered bits and pieces, an approach that shows just how difficult it
is to prove the use of poison gas when a trained scientific team is not right
there on the spot to take samples and record effects. A defending lawyer might
have a field day with the circumstantial nature of the evidence, but Mr.
Seagrave is persuasive in making his case. It seems we must add one more horror
to the record of our unhappy century.

But what are we to do about it? Here Mr. Seagrave finds himself on confusing
ground, angry at everybody. He has nothing but loathing for the use of poison
gas in war. It kills and injures without much changing things on a purely
military level. It is the most indiscriminate of weapons. Mr. Seagrave draws a
horrifying picture of what would happen to ''innocent civilians'' downwind of
military operations in a European war. The development and use of gas is one
more sign that governments are incapable of moral sentiment. The last time the
United States went on a gas-making binge it manufactured thousands of tons of
the stuff, which is now threatening to leak out of rusting bombs and artillery
shells. But Mr. Seagrave does not think we can afford to ignore what the
Russians are doing. He reluctantly concludes the United States must respond in
kind by creating an elite, fast-reaction chemical warfare strike force using
modern binary nerve gases. Such a force, he says, would serve as a deterrent.
This is a word we have heard before. I think Mr.  Seagrave's recommendation can
be fairly described as a counsel of despair, and he seems to think so too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of chemical scientist

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THRILLERS ON LOCATION

BYLINE: By ALAN CHEUSE; Alan Cheuse is the author of ''Candace & Other
Stories.'' His novel ''The Bohemians'' will be published next February.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1251 words


SAVAGE DAY By Thomas Wiseman.  438 pp. New York: Delacorte Press. $14.95.
THE LAST AMBASSADOR By Bernard Kalb and Marvin Kalb.  276 pp. Boston: Little,
Brown & Co. $13.50.
THE TWELFTH POWER OF EVIL By Jerrold Morgulas.  419 pp. New York: Seaview Books.
$14.50.

MORAL thrillers? Whatever else John Gardner's polemical catch phrase has done,
it has not set heads turning in the direction of espionage or political
adventure fiction. But several recently published novels based on historical
events reverberate with powerful moral undertones, and readers interested in
more than just another fast-moving plot may find them compelling.

A ''mystery with a moral dimension'' is what Captain Richter, the former science
writer turned security expert at the Los Alamos compound in 1945, calls the
central problem that confronts him - and the reader - in Thomas Wiseman's
fascinating new novel, ''Savage Day.'' Richter's phrase might describe Mr.
Wiseman's entire project, since his subject is the hearts and (sometimes
inscrutable) consciences of the scientists, military men and technicians who
were present at the creation of the world's first atomic bomb.

One of the central figures in Wiseman's 1976 triumph, ''The Day Before
Sunrise,'' was none other than the late Allen Dulles, who, in that thriller, sat
gout-ridden in his Bern apartment directing secret negotiations for a cease-fire
with some fatigued but venal Nazi officers and police officials. In ''Savage
Day'' Mr. Wiseman has once again chosen an epochal event upon which to base his
story, but this time, rather than using actual people, he invents fictional
counterparts. J. Robert Oppenheimer, for example, becomes David Bamberger, or
''Bambi,'' as he is known by friends and enemies alike. Working with him are the
daring and amoral atomic physicist Leo Hepler and the seemingly ethereal
Professor Hofmannsthal, who taught the other two at Gottingen. There is also
technical secretary Allison Dubinski, widow of fellow traveler and physicist
Jake Dubinski, whose death by radiation poisoning was one of the first of a
series of often fatal ''accidents'' that plague the secret installation in
northern New Mexico.

These characters and a number of others in the book are amalgams and composites
of actual figures involved in the Manhattan Project.  In this respect, ''Savage
Day'' might at first appear to be what William Styron, referring to his own
''Nat Turner,'' called a ''meditation'' on history rather than a historical
novel. The book certainly opens in this mode, with Bamberger's intellectually
acute and restless wife wandering about the top of a steep-sided mesa pondering
the wreckage wrought by a 10-million-year-old volcano while her husband and his
crew prepare to ignite their ''match to light the sky'' above Alamogordo.
Philosophical debates on the order of those in ''The Magic Mountain'' - on the
virtues of science versus sorcery, isolationism versus interventionism, and the
pros and cons of nuclear warfare - soon rage among the scientists with the heat
and ferocity of the exploding bomb itself. And Mr. Wiseman dramatizes with
convincing effect the proximity of sex and death, genius and insanity, and
allies and enemies in this isolated location where a few minds and a few hundred
hands changed the world in which we live.

In the end Captain Richter's search for the perpetrator of the fatal accidents
within the Los Alamos fences diverts our attention from the contemplative and
the historical, but it certainly provides plenty of action in this penetrating
and ambitious melodrama.

All the makings of a searching fictional study of the consciences of the
Americans who made the Vietnam War are present in ''The Last Ambassador,'' a
collaborative effort by veteran diplomatic correspondents Bernard Kalb and
Marvin Kalb. Hadden Walker, their United States envoy to South Vietnam, is a
serious, determined but prideful senior Foreign Service officer who believes
that he can successfully change the course of the war as the North Vietnamese
army begins its April 1975 pincer movement around Saigon. Walker's daughter,
meanwhile, is cohabiting with a zealous C.I.A. agent whose own pride leads him
to entice her into a plot that will bring to light what he assumes to be
Walker's true sentiments about the rapidly dissolving South Vietnamese defense.
Plastic bombs begin to explode inside the city. From time to time we hear the
telephone voices of the United States Secretary of State and the President
himself in ritual hand-wringing and hand-washing conversations about the
impossibility of providing more aid for South Vietman during the closing days of
the war.

Other, more intimate conversations occur in the bedrooms and bars where the
ambassador's daughter and her Company boyfriend meet to hold hands: ''Oh, Tony
... believe me. I know how this is tearing you up. But I think ... this place,
this war ... it reaches into us and finds a hidden corner of rottenness.
Everybody's got a corner like that. Most people live their whole lives without
having to face it.'' Dialogue such as this - plus a great deal of awkward prose
and many unconvincing psychological insights - booms much louder than the guns
and bombs of the approaching army; it finally drowns out the voices of any
characters resembling real people. Fiction is not the con-tinuation of
journalism by other means, as the authors seem to want to make it. Their book is
honorable and, in its attempt to illustrate what they understand to be the
truths of our country's last days in Vietnam, deeply moral. Thrilling it is not.

There is no mystery as to the identity of the villains in Jerrold Morgulas's
uneven World War II thriller, ''The Twelfth Power of Evil.'' The directors of
the United States-based ''Criterion'' oil company are conspiring with Under
Secretaries of State, War Department officials and certain American diplomats in
the spring of 1944 to prevent the bombing of the rail lines leading into
Auschwitz because the raids will undoubtedly destroy a nearby I.G. Farben
factory in which German technicians, with the help of slave labor, have
constructed a new and innovative plant for the production of synthetic rubber.

Twelve thousand people a day die in the Auschwitz gas chambers while the greedy
industrialists and corrupt United States officials pass around their obstructive
memos (the historical counterparts of which Mr. Morgulas introduces, in the mode
of Rolf Hochhuth's controversial play ''The Deputy,'' into the body of his
novel).  This, according to underground printer Lieberman, whose Zurich press
turns out false baptismal documents used by Jewish Resistance fighters to save
Hungarian Jews from the death camps, is nothing less than ''the twelfth power of
evil.'' Mr. Morgulas makes a cunning and for the most part compelling fiction
out of the daring but ultimately unsuccessful efforts of the resistance team to
outflank the evil bureaucrats.  The contemporary sequences that frame the main
part of the story seem somewhat amateurishly put together. But Mr. Morgulas is
firstrate when setting us down along with his small team of underground soldiers
in the dreary streets of neutral Zurich, in Nazi-occupied Budapest, and in the
I.G. Farben factory itself. If, finally, the portraits of his heroes and victims
seem more convincing than those of the men conspiring against them, it may
simply be that the genre has been stretched to the limit by the pathos attendant
upon this powerful story.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Nonfiction in Brief

BYLINE: By James Nuechterlein

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1654 words


THE DISTORTION OF AMERICA By Oscar Handlin.  154 pp. Boston: Atlantic/Little,
Brown. $10.95.

This is one of those books whose cause is better than its argument.Oscar
Handlin, the distinguished Harvard historian, believes that American foreign
policy is in disarray, and that the deterioration of the American position in
the world owes as much to intellectual and moral failure as to strategic
weakness. He traces, in a series of more or less related chapters, the
disintegration of a national consensus for the doctrine of collective security,
which guided American policy from World War II through the mid-1960's. In the
wake of its collapse, he argues, we have witnessed an increase in moral and
political neutralism among both nations and individuals, a decline in standards
of international law and a growing inability or unwillingness among many in the
West to stand unambiguously against the expansion of Communist ideology and
military power.

Not surprisingly, Mr. Handlin attributes much of this collapse of will to the
Vietnam experience. He focuses his attention not on the official policy that
caused the war, but on the struggle against American involvement by antiwar
critics. Much of this dissent, he suggests, was sentimental in its analysis,
excessive in its attacks on American policies and values, and unrealistic in its
assessments of the limited choices America faced in the conflict. He concedes,
in the end, that the corpse of collective security cannot be revived, but he
argues that we need to replace it with some workable equivalent, which will only
be possible when policy makers and intellectuals renew their faith in the moral
superiority of the West and then learn to deal, without illusions and with a
disciplined sense of the possible, with the world as it is.

One can agree with many or most of Mr. Handlin's positions and still regret the
forms in which he has cast them. In the first place, this is not actually a
book. It is rather a reworking and updating of scattered articles the author has
published over the past 25 years. New material has been added, but the
individual parts do not form a coherent whole. Some of the chapters include
portions of as many as three earlier articles, and as a result they wander
confusingly in search of a central argument. The confusion and discontinuity
within chapters sometimes extend to the relationship between them. Mr. Handlin
has raised a number of important issues, but he has not developed them fully and
he has not brought them together in a continuous argument.

He also lacks a sense of proportion and context. Things have changed
considerably since the early 70's, but Mr. Handlin appears not to have noticed.
Those who feel about American foreign policy as Mr. Handlin does are more
numerous than he thinks, and they have elsewhere made his case more effectively
than he has managed to do here.
REFLECTIONS ON THE CIVIL WAR By Bruce Catton.  Edited by John Leekley.
Illustrated. 246 pp. New York: Doubleday & Co. $15.95.

Before his death in 1978, Bruce Catton had earned a reputation with the general
public - though not necessarily among professional historians - as the greatest
historian of the American Civil War.  This book, compiled by John Leekley from
tape recordings Catton made for educational distribution, adds little new to the
Catton canon, but it does provide, along with a capsule overview of the war,
evidence of his characteristic strengths and weaknesses.

Catton's discussion of the causes and conduct of the war is competent (with the
exception of his peculiar idea that slaves in the Deep South were regularly
worked to death), but it says nothing that could not be found in any adequate
textbook. Still, he at least understands that the war was about slavery and
race, a fundamental point that many academic historians, searching for
underlying causes of the conflict, somehow manage to talk themselves out of.

Catton demonstrates his mastery of the military history of the conflict (which
to Civil War buffs is what the war was really all about) through his analysis of
the major campaigns, although this section of the book is too summary to suggest
fully the depth of his knowledge.

He is at his best, and the book at its most fresh and useful, in the extended
discussion of the everyday experience of life during wartime. We get the sense
of what the war meant to civilians and to the ordinary soldier. Above all, we
are reminded how miserable life was for those who fought on either side. This
part of the book is illustrated with drawings from the sketchbook of a young
Union soldier, John Geyser.

To Catton, the Civil War, for all its tragic elements, was not in itself a
tragedy. It was worthwhile, he argued, because it both preserved the Union and
extended freedom. Even the defeated South managed over time to find consolation,
as it slowly built the legend of the Lost Cause. The entire war, Catton felt,
has been elevated in the national memory into the purest expression of
''American romance.''

Though this is all quite unexceptionable, one wishes Catton had been content to
leave it at that. Instead he pushes on to some hopelessly muddled reflections
concerning the war's deeper philosophical meanings and mysteries. And of all
events in American history, it is surely the Civil War that least requires a
pseudophilosophical gloss to lend it significance.
THE FORGOTTEN MEN By Jesus Torbado and Manuel Leguineche.  Translated by Nancy
Festinger.  Illustrated. 226 pp. New York: Holt, Reinhart & Winston. $14.95.

Though it ended more than 40 years ago, the Spanish Civil War has not lost its
capacity to arouse romantic imaginings or incite political controversies. For
the left, the conflict remains a noble, doomed enterprise in Popular Front
politics, an anti-Fascist crusade in which all decent people could participate
without hesitation or apology, while others, recalling the vicious ideological
factionalism within the Republican ranks, are more likely to think it a dubious
battle. It is easy in recollection, as it was easy then, to oppose Franco, but
unambiguous support for the Republican cause has always been more problematic.

This book, first published in Spain in 1977, suggests something of the nature of
the Republican cause. It consists of edited transcripts of interviews with 10
men (and some members of their families) who fought against the Nationalists and
who, fearing imprisonment or death after Franco's victory in 1939, went into
hiding within Spain, some of them for periods of 30 years or more. Those
interviewed include Communists, Socialists, liberal reformers and some ordinary
peasants and artisans who found themselves caught up, more or less by accident,
in defense of the Republic.

One encounters less ideology in these stories than might have been expected. The
survivors express as much anticlericalism as they do left-wing sympathy
(although one of the victims was hidden for several years by a friendly priest).
Their war seemed inspired as much by personal hatred as by political conviction.
One victim's son recalls: ''This village has always been famous for its harsh
and hardened people. ... People were always angry with one another, and the war
only gave them an excuse to use pistols and bullets to ventilate their hatred.''

These forgotten men hid wherever they could - in attics, closets, barns, caves
and behind false walls. A few experienced relatively comfortable conditions, but
most suffered horribly from cramped space, sparse food, desperate isolation.
Things were as bad or worse for their families. Authorities used beatings and
torture to extract information from wives, children and parents, and families
endured intense material and psychological deprivation from hiding their men and
at the same time trying to support themselves and preserve some semblance of
normal life.

In time, political fevers wore down, and the Government issued a series of
pardons. The early ones were qualified, but the last, in 1969, promised full
amnesty. Most of those pardoned leaped at the first opportunity for freedom, but
some stayed in hiding longer than necessary. Their reasons varied: lingering
fear and doubt of the Government's intentions; disinclination to surrender, even
without punishment, to Franco's authorities; uncertainty concerning community
reactions. For a few, hiding had become a way of life, the only one they knew.
''He could have come out earlier,'' one son says of his father, ''but by that
time he was so accustomed to the way he was living that it was difficult for him
to think about change.''

When they did come out, it was often as physical or psychological cripples.
Whatever one thinks of their cause, it is impossible, after finishing this book,
not to feel sympathy for the Spanish Civil War's last victims.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A TALK WITH ROBERT STONE

BYLINE: By, CHARLES RUAS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2299 words


FOR the past 10 years Robert Stone has lived with his wife and two children in
northern Massachusetts, where he moved after a stint of teaching at Harvard. Now
that the children have grown up and are preparing to leave home, he and his wife
are considering a move themselves. He leads a rigorously healthy life with
disciplined work habits. He's out in the woods walking with his dog as soon as
it gets light. After drinking a quantity of tea, he starts work and goes as long
as he can. His wife is the first to read his work in manuscript, and he consults
her if a decision of style is too close to call; except for his editor and his
agent, she is his only reader of work in progress.

Robert Stone, now in his early 40's, is of medium height, slender, with the
ruddy complexion of the country. His thinning hair
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Charles Ruas is writing a book on trends in contemporary American fiction.
and free-growing beard give the impression of an academician or of an
outdoorsman in town for the day. This is reinforced by his reserve and shyness.
He is soft-spoken and precise in his choice of words.  His wonderful speaking
voice makes his public readings very effective.

He was born in Brooklyn into a Scottish Presbyterian and Irish Catholic family
that worked in the tugboat business. He grew up on Manhattan's West Side and
attended a Catholic high school, which he left without finishing. ''However, one
thing the Catholic school system did for me was to teach me how to read and
write thoroughly and grammatically,'' he says. Although he won prizes at school
for his writing, he could never openly aspire to being a writer: ''My upbringing
was in a working-class context, and being a writer wasn't something that you
did, because it was insubstantial and not altogether respectable.'' His
rebellion took the form of rowdyism, drinking and a naive, militant atheism. In
retrospect, Robert Stone realizes that his loss of faith at age 17 was one of
the momentous events of his life.

From high school he enlisted in the Navy and after a year was made a third-class
journalist for the Armed Forces Press Service. In 1958 he joined the Merchant
Marine in New Orleans and wrote poetry, which he performed to jazz. ''When I was
21 or 22 I was no Carson Mc-Cullers,'' Robert Stone muses. ''I had no vision. I
didn't have enough sense of life lived in time, the shape of people's lives.
There was no pattern that I saw in things until I was 26. Then I could begin 'A
Hall of Mirrors.' ''

''On the basis of the first chapters of 'A Hall of Mirrors,' '' he recalls, ''I
got a fellowship at Stanford, and California in 1962 sort of knocked me out.''
It was there that he teamed up with Ken Kesey's Merry Pranksters and crossed the
country in a bus driven by Neal Cassady, the hero of Jack Kerouac's ''On the
Road.'' The generation gap between him and these counterculture figures was
apparent to Stone. ''Allen Ginsberg and Ken Kesey are going to be mad at me for
this, but because of my background I never picked up on the romance of Neal
Cassady. He looked to me like a guy who had done time. He was somewhat older
than me and - I hate to say this - I always had a feeling of a guy who was on
his way to being a bum. I've seen movie footage that Ken took, and it really
shows how pained and old Cassady looked. He was wearing himself out taking all
that speed to stay up and get in there with those crazy kids who had unlimited
energy.

''At the time,'' he adds, ''acid made me consider questions of reality, the
difference, as someone said, between words and silence.  It also brought back a
lot of latent religious feelings in me that I had turned my back on. Even though
drug mysticism is a vulgarization of the real thing, I think it made me come to
terms with my own religious impulses. There is some sort of religious impulse in
every novel I've written.''

For a long time ''A Hall of Mirrors'' existed as an abstraction for Robert
Stone: ''That book was like a process. It existed in, and parallel with, my life
for a number of really important years. I was learning to be a novelist, and I
was developing a style, and I was also pursuing a vision of things. I thought a
lot about my attitude toward the world, toward fear and violence, and that I had
something to say about these things. If you had asked me then what I was writing
about, I would have said, in a kind of Kerouac-like romantic vein, 'America.' If
you'd asked me about a writer I was thinking of emulating, I would have said
Gogol.

''When I was young,'' he goes on, ''I spent three years in a orphanage because
my mother was schizoid. As I grew up, I began to see the institutional
personality, people right around me who were going that way, affectless
sociopaths. There is a certain reverence for the sociopath as a major cultural
type in American society, along with the frontiersman, the puritan and the
outlaw. I was trying to recognize that very fact: the importance of the
rootless, emotionally crippled individual in American life.''

In 1971, living in London, he realized that if his subject was America and if he
was to remain faithful to it, he would have to go to Vietnam. Obtaining press
accreditation from the now-defunct English publication INK, he arrived in Saigon
during a lull in the fighting. Americans were being withdrawn from the lines
during a period of Vietnamization. However, he felt a moral responsibility to go
out to the line himself: ''If this is going to have any validity, I thought, I
really should get out there and see the line, and I did, on the back of
somebody's motorcycle.'' But it was not in combat that he found the subject of
his second novel, ''Dog Soldiers,'' but in Saigon, where he got, as he puts it,
''a good, close, scary look at the drug scene and the black market.

''A surprising number of respectable people, which includes the press corps,
diplomats, civil servants, and the military, too, were involved, to some degree
or other, in both drugs and gold. There was a very large press corps in Saigon,
and some of it was marginal.  There were plenty of people in the press corps who
were using and dealing.''

While he was abroad, most of his information about this country's reaction to
the war came from the English press and television. On his return to the States
in '71, he saw the impact of the war more clearly: ''It was the beginning of
post-Vietnam America. To me it seemed that, with the war, the drug explosion,
the music, all the wild things, whatever you want to call it, the world was so
different from the way it was before the war. It was almost like living in the
aftermath of a revolution. This is a different kind of country.''

The perspective gained by Robert Stone from being in Vietnam made him understand
that those who were involved in the war from traditional, honest motives were
involuntarily contributing to the corruption of American society: ''What is
worst about America was acted out. What is best in America doesn't export.''

He also became profoundly skeptical about the antiwar movement.  From being in
Vietnam, he understood that ''the other side, who had always been my good guys,
were not such good guys after all. I began to encounter, and to hear about, the
atrocities that they perpetrated. I think they were probably worse than ...'' He
paused, then continued. ''One feels one is taking leave of one's senses to talk
about whose atrocities were worse. But the image of the North Vietnamese or the
Vietcong soldier as representative of humanism and progress was not a very
correct one. I began to feel a lot of ambivalence, which was reflected in the
novel. Suddenly there was no more question of right and wrong. As one of V.S.
Naipaul's characters says in 'A Bend in the River,' 'It isn't that there isn't
any right or wrong, it's that there isn't any right!' It's just that the
ambiguities of life are infinite. Now, everybody's talking morality, but there
aren't a whole lot of people trying to practice it.

''There was America having this party. At the same time, this war was on. So we
were going to do three things at once: We were going to fight a successful war
in Asia, we were going to reform society, and we were going to have a terrific
party. That just wasn't on.

''I think everybody must be aware that this society is a whole lot shakier now
than it was before the war. I was trying to examine, in 'Dog Soldiers,' the
process of that blow falling on America. The novel is about the dreams that went
bad. It's about people pursuing sensation and experience for their own sake;
people doing things that they did both in Vietnam and in America, that they
still do.''

Since all the characters in ''Dog Soldiers'' are involved with heroin, I asked
him how he understood the drug.  ''It is something that activates the pleasure
centers of the brain. It is pure abstract desire. It goes in place of money, sex
and company. A magic and powerful substance, traditionally a gift of the gods,
and also a curse. If you've ever read junky poetry, people speak of it as though
they were speaking about God. It is the big H.  And it's really awful.''

Robert Stone had intended his next work to be a historical novel.  But on one of
several trips he and his wife took through Central America he became aware that
there was the subject of a novel there, a novel he thought he could write
quickly: ''I was sensing the American presence in all its variety and aspects.
The situation began to remind me of Vietnam. I was again seeing this irrational
sense of mission which Americans are consumed with when they are about their
business in the underdeveloped world - anthropologists, missionaries,
contractors, gunrunners, deserters, crazies, druggies, various people'' - and
indeed these are the characters who pass through his fictional country of Tecan.
In the shifting combination and permutation of characters, there recurs a silent
unacknowledged complicity that they once had worked at the same thing in
Vietnam.

''It's easy to create a country,'' he says and smiles. ''All you have to do is
to think of a name for it.'' The situation in Tecan resembles Nicaragua under
the old regime as well as Honduras. But geographically it is a combination of
Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador. Explaining his reasons for creating Tecan,
Stone says, ''It's representative of all those places in the world, particularly
in Latin America, that are beset by the American presence and that are
ill-governed. In another way, it isthe world.''

Robert Stone quotes Porfirio Diaz on Mexico: '' 'Poor Mexico, so far from God,
so close to the United States.' Every time this colossus of the north turns in
its bed, poor little Tecan is practically overthrown. The American presence is
serving its own interests as it sees them, but without actually meaning to it is
inflicting great hardship on Tecan.'' But, as with Vietnam, he sees the effect
of these forces as working both ways: ''It is going to be felt in the United
States. Yes, it's a due bill coming up for payment. Nothing is free, and we've
been getting our bananas, so to speak. We've been getting our potassium to stave
off our sense of existential dread. We've been sending in the marines and
pushing people around in Central America, and we're going to eventually have to
pay the price for it.''

The confrontation that opens ''A Flag for Sunrise'' is between Father Egan, who
seems unaware that he has committed the sin of despair, and a sadist who
perversely wants to confess the murder of a young woman and be absolved. ''It's
against that background of suffering that the action takes place,'' Stone says.
''It is the place that Father Egan has to start from. He stops being a
declining, cowardly, aging alcoholic and begins to reach out for God. It moves
him out of desperation toward the numinous. The element of the numinous is
always there for all the characters in their various ways, just on the edge of
vision. They're always getting little glints of what may or may not be God.
Sister Justin has lost her faith and decides to abandon her vows. Holliwell
thinks that in the end, there is justice. Pablo, in his primitive way, feels he
is a man of destiny. Everybody's after a new morning. What do we have to run up
and salute tomorrow? That is the meaning of the title.''

When asked if he would consider a Freudian interpretation of his book, reading
the quest for God as the search for the father, Robert Stone laughed. ''I'm not
much crazier than anybody else, but I'm not much saner. So one day I felt really
crazy and thought, I'll go see a shrink. I called my G.P., and he recommended
this guy I knew from around town. He was everything that a psychiatrist should
be, very humane and very together. I went to him, and I talked to him, and he
said, 'What you need is religion. What you should do is go to Uttar Pradesh in
India, because in Uttar Pradesh the ground is so holy that as you walk on it,
the vibes coming up from the ground will clear your head.' ''

Robert Stone relishes the humor of being referred to a higher authority.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert Stone

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEGISLATORS CHANGING PRIORITIES IN BUDGET

BYLINE: By FRANCES CERRA

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 1, Column 4; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words


DESPITE the pleading of interest groups ranging from Vietnam veterans to lovers
of the arts, Suffolk County's legislative leaders say that this year will not be
one of ''pork barrel'' dealing as usual. Instead, they assert, some - but
definitely not all - of the budget cuts and job reductions put forward in County
Executive Peter F. Cohalan's proposed 1982 budget will have to be put into
effect.

The resulting search for priorities, which is being pursued not only at public
hearings but also in private negotiations between legislators and Mr. Cohalan,
will end Friday, when the legislators vote on the contents of a bill amending
the proposed budget.

''In the past at budget time, it has been complete pork barrel, with each
legislator restoring his favorite items, and almost everything would go back
in,'' said the Democratic minority leader, Robert J. Mrazek of Centerport. ''In
the present climate there is no way we can do that. We are going to have to face
up in a mature fashion to some hard choices.''

''If you think this year is bad, just wait until next year,'' said Deputy County
Executive Howard C. DeMartini, asserting that many of the cuts were necessitated
by losses in state and Federal financing.  ''This is the first year that we've
had to deal with Reaganomics, and if the rest of his proposed cuts go through,
next year will be much worse. The state has said it will not be the safety net,
and we are not going to be either.''

The choices are indeed coming hard to the legislators, who last week heard the
anguished cries of interest groups at a hearing. The 1982 proposed budget, which
Mr. Cohalan described as ''Draconian,'' calls for 600 layoffs and reduced
services virtually across the board, but a tax increase, nevertheless, that
officials say is attributable to items they cannot control, such as Medicaid.

The $772.7 million budget calls for an increase in spending of 2 percent over
the 1981 budget of $757 million, and a general fund tax increase of 54 cents.
That would raise the tax rate from the current $2.13 for each $1,000 of assessed
valuation to $2.67. Taxes for county police services in the five western towns
would remain the same.

The budget also calls for the county to set aside $7.8 million for paying off
the debt of the Southwest Sewer District next year. Both Mr. Mrazek and William
C. Richards, the Kings Park Republican who is the Legislature's Presiding
Officer, say this proposal is headed for certain defeat.

''I told Cohalan that the legislators from outside the sewer district will not
vote for the transfer of those funds,'' Mr.  Richards said, referring to
legislators outside Babylon and Islip.  ''Returning that money to the general
fund will enable us to restore some cuts without raising the tax rate beyond
what the County Executive has proposed. But we will not be able to save all the
jobs and all the services, and that means it's going to be a mean, nasty time.''

Mr. DeMartini said that if the money was not set aside, residents of the
district would be faced with an increase in sewer taxes from the current 50
cents per $100 of assessed valuation to more than $1 in 1983.

Interviews with Mr. Richards, Mr. Mrazek and other legislators indicated that
the most likely elements to be restored to the budget, either in whole or in
part, include the day-care programs, both allday and after-school versions; the
Victims Information Bureau, which provides counseling and shelter for battered
wives; the home health aide program, under which workers prepare meals or give
other at-home care to the frail and disabled; the special investigations unit of
the Social Services Department, which is responsible for welfare fraud
investigation; the Veterans Service Agency, which counsels veterans on services
and programs availabe to them, and Health Department sanitarians who test the
water supply.

Mr. Mrazek, Mr. Richards and Wayne Prospect, a Democratic legislator from Deer
Park, each criticized Mr. Cohalan for proposing cuts in services that they
deemed essential. Mr. Prospect, for example, asserted that the threatened
pollution of Suffolk's drinking water made the elimination of any sanitarians
particularly unwise.  Mr. Mrazek characterized the proposed cut in day care as
''economically counterproductive'' and said it was ''important to restore in
human terms.''

Speaking of the woman who makes use of the day-care program, Mr.  Mrazek said:
''The only thing that keeps her working is pride, and if she lost the day-care
option, she would simply end up on unemployment.''

Mr. DeMartini said that negotiations were in progress with the legislators to
develop a package of items that would be restored in part or in whole. Making
this process easier, he said, is a recalculation that shows $3.5 million more in
revenue than budget officials had previously counted upon. He defended the
original proposal, however, as being necessary because of cuts in state and
Federal aid.

Among those elements and programs that the Legislature may not save from
substantial cuts next year are cultural affairs, the County Consumer Affairs
Department and the county center of Empire State College in Hauppauge. Empire
State allows students to obtain a degree without attending formal classes, but
by meeting instead with mentors who design an individual program for each
student. The county has offered this program to employees as a fringe benefit,
reimbursing them for 75 percent of the tuition cost. About 100 students are now
enrolled, at a cost to the county of $202,000.

''Seventy-nine percent of the students are women in lower-level clerical
positions,'' said Martin Lichterman, dean of the college on Long Island. ''Most
of them have family responsibilities as well as full-time jobs, and it's the one
way they have of moving up.''

Mr. Mrazek noted that the County Executive had set aside $212,000 for supporting
cultural institutions such as the Long Island Philharmonic. ''I am a strong
advocate of cultural affairs,'' he said, ''but if it comes to a choice between
day care and cultural affairs, I will advocate cutting cultural affairs.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOR WEINBERGER, SWEDES STRESS ARMED MIGHT

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, Oct. 18


In a small park in downtown Stockholm stands a statue of Charles XII, King of
the Swedes in the early 18th century when they were the most powerful nation in
Northern Europe. In his right hand, the King holds a sword while he points with
his left toward Russia. The look on his face seems to say: ''There lies my
enemy.''

For the last three days, the present leaders of Sweden have been saying much the
same thing to Caspar W. Weinberger, the first American Secretary of Defense to
visit this nation.

Asked why neutral Sweden had taken so much trouble to arrange the elaborate
demonstrations of Swedish military power that have marked Mr. Weinberger's
visit, a Swedish official replied carefully: ''It is in our interest that the
United States Secretary of Defense and the NATO alliance do believe that we have
a good defense capability.''

Referring to Sweden's basic policy of armed neutrality, the official continued:
''It is in our interest to show Mr. Weinberger that we have the capability and
the will to defend ourselves.'' The official, who asked not to be identified,
concluded by saying ''If our military power is not credible in Washington,
Brussels and Moscow, we have failed.'' Brussels is the headquarters of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.

Strength of Sweden's Defenses

But he acknowledged that Sweden's defenses had to be credible in Washington and
Moscow for different reasons. The Atlantic allies must be sure that Sweden can
and will make every effort to help stop the Soviet Union from turning NATO's
northern flank in Europe, a rising concern to strategic planners in the West. On
the other hand, in the Swedish view, Moscow must realize that an attack on
Sweden will be costly.

To make the point to Mr. Weinberger, the Swedes led him through underground
caverns that shelter ship and submarine pens, underground hangars for aircraft,
and underground command centers for civil defense. They showed him how they
make, service and fly highperformance fighter aircraft. They demonstrated the
ability of young conscripted soldiers and explained their plans for mobilizing a
force of 700,000 men, only a bit smaller than the present strength of the United
States Army, in phases over four days.

Swedish officials said that two developments in Soviet military strength in the
last 10 years have caused them increasing concern.  One was the buildup of the
Soviet submarine fleet at Murmansk in northern Russia, relatively close to
Sweden, making that a strategic target for the United States. Both submarines
armed with medium-range nuclear missiles and submarines designed to attack
allied shipping in the Atlantic are based there.

A Move Into Finland

Thus, in the Swedish view, the Soviet Union might move westward into Finland to
improve its defenses of Murmansk. ''Any Soviet pressure on Finland to enter into
a closer military association would be considered extremely serious here,'' a
Swedish official said.

Secondly, Moscow has expanded its naval forces, especially amphibious ships, in
the Baltic. In addition, five of its seven airborne divisions are within quick
striking distance of Sweden.

To his hosts, Mr. Weinberger clearly indicated that the Reagan Administration
wanted to put into the past the sour relations between Stockholm and Washington
that arose during the Vietnam War, when Swedish leaders were bitterly critical
of the United States.

He told the Swedes that the Reagan Administration was willing to sell to Sweden
an advanced version of the Sidewinder air-to-air missile that the Swedish Air
Force wants for its Thunderbolt fighters. Mr. Weinberger said today that the
request had come from the Swedes and ''they fell on friendly ears.''

He also agreed, in principle, that General Electric could sell to Sweden new
aircraft engine technology for a plane to replace the Thunderbolt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Rogue Elephants at Large

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 520 words


If the Central Intelligence Agency can punish former agents who break its rules
against disclosing secrets learned on the job, why can't it do something about
former spies who train foreign terrorists? The question becomes more compelling
with each revelation about the exploits of Edwin Wilson and Frank Terpil. These
former agents, currently fugitives from gun-running charges, have exploited
their service-connected skills and credentials in the cause of terrorists like
Idi Amin and Colonel Qaddafi.

Wilson and Terpil have become central figures of The Times's continuing reports
about the unauthorized transfer overseas of America's advanced technology,
weapons and expertise. For all their resemblance to fictional spy stories, these
tales depict an alarming lack of control over lawless action, sometimes taken in
the nation's name. Fortunately, Congress and some parts of the executive branch
are beginning to show concern.

The reaction was swift enough three years ago when Frank Snepp, a C.I.A.
official at the end of the Vietnam war, published a book about his experiences
without clearing the manuscript. The Justice Department sued him for every cent
the book earned and the Supreme Court upheld this method of holding former
agents to their oaths of secrecy.

No such contract clause seems to prevent the C.I.A.'s alumni from exploiting
their knowledge to recruit Green Berets to train guerrillas in Libya, or
enlisting Government contractors in their schemes. Criminal laws prohibit
sneaking military equipment and technological expertise out of the country, but
there seem to have been no safeguards preventing people from being gulled into
thinking the Government secretly approved such activity.

Wilson and Terpil may be the worst examples of the ''retired'' hired gun. Yet
they are undeniably a product of their professional world, exploiting what it
teaches about covert operations and disguised affiliations. Business firms and
Government officials are said to have been led - or willing to be misled -into
believing that they were still on official business. And there appears to have
been no way for any suspicious person to check on them.

It is one thing to countenance undercover dealings that the C.I.A.  deems, even
misguidedly, to be in the national interest. It is quite another to tolerate
activities that directly aid despised regimes.  The C.I.A. as rogue elephant is
bad enough, but what protections does it offer against purported C.I.A. activity
that it opposes?

Writing rules that curb the Wilsons and Terpils may prove more difficult than
drafting censorship contracts. It may also be far less appealing to an
Administration that wants in fact to lift the restraints on intelligence
operations. But if Government fails to prevent such free-wheeling sabotage of
its foreign policy and to deny such operatives their connections, the world can
only conclude that they acted with official sanction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN POLICY NEEDS

BYLINE: By Jean Mayer

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 812 words


4MEDFORD, Mass. - A great number of diverse regions and nations now play an
important role in international affairs. The cultural universe in which American
diplomacy has to operate and which American citizens need to understand is more
varied and complex than ever before in our history. We do not move with
assurance in that universe.

One of the most serious problems we face in the United States today is the need
to maintain a strategic foreign policy that, while flexible, remains
fundamentally consistent over time.

We have enunciated a strong (though not necessarily consistent) East-West
policy, but the success of such a policy depends to a great extent on the
understanding and commitment of our allies, and we have a wavering policy of
consultation and joint decision-making with the Western Europeans and the
Japanese.

Indeed, conversations with high-ranking members of the foreign ministeries of
several of our main allies (including one foreign minister) have convinced me
that the frequency and substance of consultations have reached a new low.

We have no North-South policy, although it is here, in our relationships with
the developing nations, that the future of the world may be decided.

At this point, only 0.26 percent of our gross national product, the lowest
percentage of any industrialized country, is going to developing lands, and most
of this is delicated to two political allies, Egypt and Israel.

We have an Administration that is inclined to an apocalyptic vision, seeing all
the world's problems as linked entirely to the conflict between the United
States and the Soviet Union. Clearly, we need a more sophisticated view of the
world and a more comprehensive one. (Indeed, it is useful to remember that many
of the points of conflict between us and the Soviet Union are related to
third-world countries and their problems.)

Many of the problems we face have a long, convoluted history. This does not mean
they cannot be solved but first they must be understood. Some are local, and it
is often these that are the priority issues for the peoples of the region. Some
are general.

Above all, there is the overwhelming problem of the rich and the poor, which
cannot simply be equated with technical competence versus noncompetence,
industrialized countries versus underdeveloped countries. There are many types
of situations. Some developing countries have money but no technical competence.
Some have technical competence but very little money. Others have neither. Some
are open, historically and culturally, to the Western type of industrial
development, others far less so. It is essential that those whom we are training
to be diplomats have a better understanding of the economic, ethnic, and
particularly historical complexities of the world in which they will operate.

In addition, there is a curious trait in American foreign policy: If we do not
like a country's philosophy, we tend to delay recognizing its existence as long
as possible. We have done it with the Soviet Union, with China, with Cuba, we
are doing it with Vietnam.

In this clash of ideals, we deprive ourselves of the means of action, not only
in protecting our short-term interests, but often in advancing our ideals. It is
not beyond the judgment of wellintentioned, experienced persons to find
compromises between longterm objectives and present realities, but unless we
train people to uphold the vision of freedom and equality and to take practical
action, we will end up negating our ideals and engaging in counterproductive
actions.

The greater part of diplomacy does not take place in a vacuum. In a democracy,
it is an expression of the goals that an informed and educated public wants to
achieve. The foreign policy of the United States involves many others besides
the members of our Foreign Service. It must be understood by midcareer officers
in the armed forces and other governmental agencies involved in foreign affairs,
by international business leaders, personnel in international agencies, in
nongovernmental and public-service organizations, in journalism and
communications, and in the academic professors, both teaching and research.
These, also, are our ambassadors. Finally, it must be understood by the general
public.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Jean Mayer is president of Tufts University. This article is adapted from his
recent remarks at the opening of the John and Elizabeth Cabot Intercultural
Center of Tufts' Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PROTESTS PLANNED OVER BUDGET CUTS

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL SHEPPARD Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 791 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, Oct. 18


A coalition of more than 100 labor, social and political organizations, meeting
over the weekend to devise a strategy for combating the Reagan Administration's
slashes in social services, voted overwhelmingly to conduct a week of major
demonstrations around the country beginning April 26.

The All People's Congress pledged to work through the winter to devise
''imaginative ways'' to pressure President Reagan to rescind his cuts in social
programs for the needy and to stop the United States' military buildup.

The demonstrations, called ''Days of Resistance,'' will take place in Detroit,
Washington, New York, Chicago and other urban centers, spokesmen for the
coalition said.

The two-day gathering at Cobo Hall drew about 2,000 delegates from 43 states.
They sat through speech after speech in which Mr.  Reagan's was denounced and
his program was described as a ''ploy by the greedy to take from the needy.''

Coalition Issues Statement

''The Reagan program of cutbacks, attacks on labor, racism, sexism, lesbian and
gay oppression and buildup for war,'' the coalition said in a statement, ''is
meant to increase the enormous privileges of the rich at the expense of the
majority of the people, particularly the poorest, most discriminated against and
most oppressed.''

Speakers included representatives of unions, black, Hispanic and women's
organizations, Vietnam veterans, homosexuals, politicians, community
organizations and foreign activists.

Despite the overall cohesiveness and buoyant mood, there were signs of
dissension.  When William Cousins, president of Local 321 of the Professional
Air Traffic Controllers Organization, finished an attack on the President, there
was a short shouting match among delegates over whether his union should be
supported, since it backed Mr. Reagan in the Presidential election.

Hisses and Catcalls

And when Herbert Jackson prepared to speak on behalf of homosexuals, there were
hisses, boos and catcalls from some in the audience. But these were drowned out
by cheers and applause.

Similarly, there were shouts of ''What about the baby's rights?'' as Eleanor
Bader, coordinator of the New York City chapter of the Religious Coalition for
Abortion Rights, gave her speech.

Outside the meeting, a group of Nazis demonstrated for a short time, and vendors
sold copies of The Workers Vanguard, a Marxist biweekly newspaper, which
denounced the congress as ''All People's Circus: Front for the Democrats.''

Although the congress was much more diverse in its issues and makeup and its
members on average were much older, it resembled the antiwar rallies of the
1960's and 70's.

Audience Brought to Its Feet

When Debbie Thurman of the Illinois Welfare Rights Organization said, ''We must
tell Pharaoh Reagan to release our people or face the consequences of the Red
Sea,'' the audience rose and began chanting, ''We're fired up, we won't take it
no more.''

When Raphael Cancel Miranda, a Puerto Rican nationalist, described Mr. Reagan as
''a Grade B actor, repeating lines written by the big corporations,'' the
audience again rose and chanted, ''Free Puerto Rico right now.''

By far the biggest difference between the coalition and the antiwar movement was
the diversity of the organizations the former represented. The antiwar effort
was largely conducted by white college students, but the All People's Congress
is made up of groups ranging from veterans' organizations to Dykes United
Against Racism Everywhere to United Automobile Workers Local 900 to the National
Black United Front.

Some of the organizations involved helped orchestrate the People's Antiwar
Mobilization that brought thousands of people to Washington May 2 to protest
American involvement in El Salvador.

Working-Class Movement

In the protest at the Pentagon, participants pledged to forge a working-class
movement that would embrace the needs of the poor, minorities, women,
homosexuals and the disabled.

Member organizations subsequently held a series of protests in Detroit, Atlanta,
Chicago and other cities, then organized the All People's Congress to develop a
unified plan to resist Mr. Reagan's budget cuts.

Moved by the success of its congress, the coalition voted to choose cities for
protests this winter, then conduct large-scale protests in the ''Days of
Resistance'' week.

''I think it is time we put on our marching shoes and took to the streets
again,'' said Ethel Matthews, an activist from Atlanta.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 930 words


A RAM Bakshian, a 37-year-old special assistant to President Reagan for the
arts, is scheduled to step into the vacant job of chief White House
speechwriter. Mr. Bakshian wrote speeches for Presidents Nixon and Ford and has
written several books, including ''The Candidates - 1980,'' and ''The Memoirs of
Robert Stolz,'' which is about the life of the last Viennese waltz king, who
died in 1975. The job of chief speechwriter at the Reagan White House has been
unfilled since Ken Khachigian left last spring to return to his consulting
business in California.

S URVIVORS of Nazi brutality and representatives of the nations, East and West,
that liberated the German concentration camps will gather next Monday in an
unusual three-day conference at the State Department to recall, and keep alive,
the memory of the Holocaust.  The conference, which will be addressed by
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., ''is a unique event, liberators and
survivors coming together in this way,'' said Mark Talisman, vice chairman of
the United States Holocaust Memorial Council, which is sponsoring the panel
discussions, seminars and tributes.

Mr. Talisman said that delegations from the Soviet Union, Czechoslavakia, Poland
and Yugoslavia, as well as many Western nations, are scheduled to attend. ''The
point is for the nations which liberated the concentration camps to stand
united, however different their relations with each other are today, in the
conviction that the Holocaust must not be forgotten and must not be repeated,''
Mr. Talisman said.

I T WAS in December 1979 that Roger Molander grew alarmed about the prospect of
nuclear war, a nightmare, he says, that lurked in his mind during the years he
worked on the White House national security staff in the Nixon, Ford and Carter
Administrations.

''The Russians had invaded Afghanistan and I somehow felt that the bell had
begun to toll, that we had to crack into people's consciousness,'' he said.
''Faced with a reality as horrifying as a nuclear war - the death of oneself,
the death of one's family - is something people can't confront. Psychic numbing
takes place. People check out. Don't want to deal with it.''

Speaking to friends and colleagues, Mr. Molander struck on the idea of devoting
a week in major cities across the nation to a ''concentrated and nonpartisan
educational process on nuclear war, a forum for education, discussion and
debate.'' Democrats and Republicans have been invited to participate in ''Ground
Zero'' week, April 18-. So have organizations as diverse as the American Legion,
the United Auto Workers, the Rotary and the United States Catholic Conference.
To date ''Ground Zero'' week has obtained $100,000 in grants from the
Rockefeller Fund and other contributors.

''This issue has to be placed on the national agenda,'' said the 40-year-old Mr.
Molander. ''You can't just say, 'It's too terrible.  There's nothing I can do
about nuclear war.' We've got to focus on a constructive and productive solution
to the nuclear war dilemma.  We've got to face reality, break through defense
mechanisms. Nuclear war can happen.''

S EATED in the basement cafeteria of the Rayburn building this morning, the Rev.
William Mahedy stared at his black coffee and said he was very tired. Mr.
Mahedy, who is an Episcopal chaplain at the University of California at San
Diego, had flown into Washington on the overnight ''red eye'' from Los Angeles
in order to appear at a Congressional hearing on the Government's Vietnam
veterans' counseling program.

''Can hardly wait to go back to California,'' said Mr. Mahedy, an activist in
Vietnam veterans' issues. ''Perspective in Washington is so different. What's so
important here, all these power plays, all these games going on, is absolutely
insignificant out in the bush.  People here don't understand human life as it's
lived out there.''

Francis X. Clines Bernard Weinraub

I N Washington, a political appointment often evolves into a source of
speculation about motives for the announcement. Take the case of Richard Starr.
Mr. Starr is an expert on Soviet affairs at the Hoover Institution, a
conservative enclave on the Stanford University campus whose faculty has
provided some of the intellectual underpinning for the Reagan Administration's
policies.

Mr. Starr is scheduled to be named shortly to head the ongoing and sluggish
talks on mutual and balanced force reductions in Central Europe, which have
failed so far to result in any substantive agreements. He will replace Jonathan
Dean, a Foreign Service officer. Some officials speculate that because Mr. Starr
is conservative it will be easier for the Senate to ratify any agreement that he
may help to shape. Others, however, say that because he is conservative, and
favors a hard line toward the Soviet Union, the appointment indicates that there
will be no agreement at all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF MAYOR KOCH'S ADDRESS TO DEMOCRATIC STRATEGY COUNCIL IN

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1661 words


BALTIMORE Following is the text of a statement by Mayor Koch, which stirred
controversy over the weekend, before the Democratic National Strategy Council in
Baltimore Friday:

To My Fellow Democrats: Like others at this conference, I am deeply concerned
about what has happened to the Democratic Party. I am concerned as a Democrat.
I am concerned as a mayor who has to deal with large Federal cuts - cuts that
are to no small extent the product of our failures. And I am concerned as
someone who, when in Congress, shared in many of the mistakes that have brought
us to where we are.

The record of the last three Presidential elections is a striking demonstration
of just how badly we have failed. For a majority party to have lost two
elections by landslides and to have narrowly won the third with a candidate who
seemed to be running against his own party's record is extraordinary. Certainly
it is possible to put down the candidates, to argue that if only our message had
been clearer, our media advisers better, the outcome would have been different.
But to take that approach misses the larger point. In 1980, the American people
rejected not just our candidates but our party as well.

I believe that over the past decade, the national Democratic Party lost the
sense of where it came from, what its purpose should be, and what the reality
facing America was all about. My fear is that we will not rethink our role, but
will accept the present assault on government - either out of desperation, or
out of hope that Republican cuts and Republican economics will drive the public
back to the Democratic Party. Such an approach, while it may bring some
short-term benefits, will not serve the long-term needs of the people or of the
party.

Problem Unlike Labor Party's

The problem is not that we became narrow and ideological like Britain's Labor
party, but too often in recent years we have allowed ideologues to determine our
direction to a degree that never happened under Wilson, Roosevelt or Truman. The
problem is not that we became an elitist party, though there were times our
candidates seemed more focused on the concerns of the editorial board rooms than
on those of the public, and times our new procedures for making the party more
democratic made it less representative.

What happened over the last decade is that we became the party of the status
quo, the party of government for government's sake, the party of abstraction.
Rather than seeing ourselves as the inheritors of a dynamic, pragmatic, humane
tradition, we sought to embalm our past successes - the New Deal, the Fair Deal,
the New Frontier, the Great Society - in regulations and programs. We lost touch
with reality.

We became unable and unwilling to recast programs that, however
well-intentioned, had faults. When some pointed to abuse of welfare, Medicaid
and food stamps, we avoided the issue. When job training programs did not work,
we put more money in. Poverty programs provided jobs for the people running the
programs but often did not help the poor. We looked the other way. When it came
to crime, though we talked tough, we consistently sided with the need to protect
the civil liberties of the criminal, not the victim. Just look at the way we
structured the L.E.A.A. Is it any wonder the program is being disbanded?

We conferred on special interests -particularly friendly special interests like
labor, environmental groups, organizations for the handicapped - the right to
set out legislative agenda. We believed that a mandate from Washington - to make
transportation ''accessible to the handicapped,'' to make waters ''swimmable and
fishable,'' to provide special education to the emotionally and physically
handicapped -could solve problems without money or, in some cases, even without
the necessary technology.

We remained locked into busing as the way to correct the inadequacies of ghetto
schools, even after blacks, whites and virtually every scholar who looked at the
issue agreed busing was not the answer. We supported racial quotas to end
discrimination, even after it became clear that quotas were pitting race against
race, ethnic group against ethnic group, rather than helping to bring about
racial harmony. In foreign affairs, as Russia dramatically increased its
conventional arms buildup, we continued to follow the defense policies that had
served us adequately before the Vietnam War.

A Reason for Rejection

Understandably, America - beset by inflation, high interest rates, an uncertain
position in the world and a declining quality of life - rejected what we were
offering.

Since the 1980 election, our response too often has been an echo of the
President's program, not an alternative. Probably the single greatest mistake
the President has made so far was not to accept the Democratic tax program,
which was as ill-conceived as his own, and which, when it failed (as it surely
would have), he could have attacked. Just consider that it was the Democrats -
not the Republicans -who gave the oil barons a break on the windfall profits tax
that will cost $16 billion over the next five years.

The answer to the present state of the Democratic Party should not be the
abandonment of what we have stood for, but rather its refinement and reform.
Certainly government needed to be cut. But there is a broad middle ground
between where we used to be and what the Republicans are advocating. It is on
that middle ground that we should be standing. We need to return to the basics
of what the Democratic Party has stood for.

We also need to return to the constituencies that have provided the party's
basic strength in the past - to New York and other cities, to regions like the
Northeast and Midwest, which bear a disproportionate share of the country's
problems.

Fundamental Initiatives

As we reshape and refocus our program, I think there are certain fundamental
Democratic initiatives which need to be kept in mind:

- Poverty must be treated as a national problem. This means that over time, the
cost of welfare and medical assistance should be assumed by the National
Government. This does not mean that welfare and medical assistance should simply
continue in their present forms. Indeed, all too often, present welfare programs
have discouraged work and encouraged dependency, while Medicaid has pushed up
the cost of medical care without improving its quality.

- The Federal Government has an obligation to provide shelter.  Without Federal
subsidies, the poor and even the middle class will not have adequate housing.
Again, this does not mean that we have to simply continue existing programs. The
Section 8 program - with its deep subsidies, its tax shelters, and its lack of
accountability - is both lavish and flawed.

- Washington has an obligation to help local governments rebuild their
deteriorating physical plants - not only through direct local grants, but
through the creation of a new Reconstruction Finance Corporation.

- Certainly the Federal Government has an obligation to insure employment,
though here the emphasis should not be on the kinds of job training programs
tried in the past - programs that far too often trained people for jobs that did
not exist. Instead, the emphasis should be on an overall economic strategy,
which does not simply rely on tight money and on targeted assistance to
education.

- There needs to be greater flexibility in programs to assist local governments
through the elimination of mandates and the creation of block grants. But block
grants should not simply become the equivalent of a return to states' rights, as
seems to be the thrust of the Reagan program. There have to be minimum
standards.

- The Federal Government must have a role in curbing the current epidemic of
crime. Right now the Federal Government spends only $4 billion a year for
criminal justice to provide domestic security, while it spends $220 billion a
year on defense. The Federal Government should assist in the construction of
state and local prisons. It should take over responsibility for the prosecution
and incarceration of heroin offenders. It should ban the manufacture and sale of
Saturday Night Specials.

- Washington cannot abandon assistance to mass transit, as it currently plans.
It makes absolutely no sense to remove subsidies for the most energy-efficent
form of transportation, a form of transportation that serves the least affluent
Americans, while we continue to subsidize the growing of tobacco.

- While I believe in a strong defense, I think it would be a terrible mistake
for the Democratic Party to exempt it from the search for waste and
inefficiency.

'A Return to the Basics'

What I am advocating does not represent a return to big spending and ever bigger
government. It does represent a return to the basics of what the Democratic
Party at its best has been all about. I believe we can afford the kind of
initiatives I have outlined, particularly if we eliminate the $16 billion
windfall-profits-tax giveaway I mentioned before and restore the 70 percent tax
rate on unearned income. That would provide an additional $40 billion over the
next five years.

In short, I believe we can recapture the American public by recapturing the
center of American politics. I believe our strength today lies, as it did in the
past, in our ability to be the party of balance, of tolerance, of competence and
of common sense.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mayor Koch with Edward M. Kennedy and
Christopher J. Dodd

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 21, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECURITY ADVISER OUSTED FOR A TALK HINTING AT WAR

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 783 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 20


The chief military adviser to the National Security Council was dismissed today
after saying in a speech that the Russians had achieved strategic superiority
over the United States, were ''on the move'' and were ''going to strike.''

The White House disavowed the comments by Maj. Gen. Robert L.  Schweitzer, who
told the Association of the United States Army that the Soviet military buildup
was producing a ''drift toward war.''

President Reagan said he disagreed and that increased American emphasis on the
military had prevented such a movement toward war.  ''I think this country could
have been on a road that could be described that way when we were unilaterally
disarming and had a widening window of vulnerability and narrowing margin of
safety,'' he said.

Aim of Military Buildup

Mr. Reagan added that the Administration's military buildup was designed ''so
there won't be a drift toward war.'' General Schweitzer, 53 years old, was
dismissed from the council staff at 7:15 A.M. today by Richard V. Allen, Mr.
Reagan's national security affairs adviser. He will be reassigned to a post in
the Pentagon, White House officials said.

Mr. Allen, who indicated that he had neither seen a transcript nor heard a tape
of the remarks, said that General Schweitzer had been dismissed because he had
not cleared the remarks in advance. ''The fact of the matter is that in the
National Security Council there is a rule that speeches will not be given unless
they are specifically cleared by me and the content of the speeches are known in
advance,'' he said.

No Similar Report by Allen

Mr. Allen refused to disclose what information or documents formed the basis for
General Schweitzer's remarks. He added that he had not told Mr. Reagan that he
perceived a drift toward war.

General Schweitzer refused to comment on the incident, but the White House
communications director, David R. Gergen, said he understood the general
believed that his remarks were off the record and that he was speaking freely
among his ''army buddies'' at the association's annual meeting.

Neither the White House press office nor the security council nor the general's
office would release a transcript of the remarks, but the White House confirmed
that The Washington Post quoted the general correctly in an article this
morning.

General Schweitzer, who told the group that the United States was ''in the
greatest danger that the republic has faced since its founding days,'' said that
the Soviet Union had achieved superiority in the strategic triad of land and
sea-based missiles and in air power. ''The Soviet Union knows that for the first
time they have superiority in every leg of the triad,'' he said.

The White House swiftly responded that General Schweitzer's comments were ''his
own.'' At a press briefing this morning, Mr.  Allen said he believed the general
had overstated his case.

Obligations of Staff Members

''Being a member of the staff of the Administration means one must be doubly
careful and weigh every word,'' said Mr. Allen. ''The rules have been in effect
since a couple of previous incidents, and we insist the rules be observed.''

One of the previous incidents involved Richard V. Pipes, a Soviet specialist on
Mr. Allen's staff who said in an interview late last winter that war with the
Soviet Union was inevitable unless Moscow changed its political system. Mr.
Pipes also suggested that Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West
Germany was susceptible to pressure from the Russians.

The White House and the State Department later repudiated the remarks, but Mr.
Pipes was permitted to retain his National Security Council position.

General Schweitzer will be replaced by Rear Adm.  James W. Nance, U.S.N.,
retired, who is Mr. Allen's deputy. Like General Schweitzer, he served under
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. when the latter was head of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization. Admiral Nance is closely associated with Senator
Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina.

General Schweitzer, who entered the service as a private in 1950, commanded
units in peacetime and in the Vietnam and Korean conflicts.  Both President
Reagan and Mr. Allen had words of high praise for General Schweitzer. Mr. Gergen
said that Mr. Reagan had described the general as ''a good soldier.'' Mr. Allen
called General Schweitzer ''a man of great integrity, loyalty and dedication to
the President and the goals of the Administration.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert L. Schweitzer (page A27)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 21, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

3 KILLED IN ARMORED CAR HOLDUP

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1399 words


Armed robbers waiting in ambush killed a Brink's guard in a blaze of gunfire at
the Nanuet Mall in Rockland County yesterday and minutes later killed two police
officers from Nyack, N.Y., in a shootout at a roadblock several miles away.

The robbers, who wore dark ski masks and fired shotguns, automatic pistols and
automatic rifles, made off with $1,589,000 in six bags, according to the
authorities.

The money was later recovered when four suspects - two men and two women - were
captured as they fled in two cars. One of the cars crashed into a stone wall
after a chase through Nyack.

At least two persons in the other car escaped when they opened fire on several
police officers and detectives who had stopped them at a roadblock at an
entrance to the Gov. Thomas E. Dewey Thruway.

A third police officer and two other Brink's guards were wounded in the two
exchanges of gunfire.  More than a hundred state troopers, aided by helicopters,
searched through the wooded area near Route 59 and the Thruway for the suspects,
and roadblocks were placed on the Tappan Zee Bridge and major roadways.

The shooting stunned Nyack, a community of 8,000 about 25 miles north of
Manhattan. When a police officer blocking the door of the two-story, red-brick
police headquarters was asked the size of the department, he said, ''It was
22,'' emphasizing ''was.'' Then he shut the door.

Kenneth Gribetz, the Rockland County District Attorney, told a news conference
at midnight that four of the robbers jumped out of a red van parked near an
entrance to the huge two-story shopping complex and began shooting.

''They just opened fire on them,'' he said.  ''It happened very fast,'' said
Jack Horan, a security officer at the bank. The Brink's guards left the bank, he
said, ''and the shooting started. People started shouting and we saw the van
leaving.''

After a Brink's guard fired a single shot, the robbers drove off, abandoned
their van in the parking lot of a Korvette's store on Route 59, and changed to
two other vehicles, a yellow Honda and a rented van, Mr. Gribetz said.

The two police officers were killed a few minutes later when they stopped the
van at the roadblock.  ''As a detective was proceeding away from the back of the
van,'' he said. ''individuals, believed to be three, jumped out and opened fire
on the police officers.''

Description of Shooting

A witness described how one officer, 45-year-old Waverly Brown, known as
''Chipper'' throughout town, was killed.  ''The door swung open and one came out
shooting and shot Chipper,'' one witness said. Then the witness saw other
suspects ''all out and jumping around'' as one of them shot Sgt. Edward O'Grady.

''They shot him in the back - he didn't have to do that,'' the witness said.  As
officers fired back, a man pulled an elderly woman out of a silver sedan and
drove down a fork in the road toward Mountain View Road.

The injured suspect, tentatively identified as Solomon Bouines, was reported in
critical condition with a head wound. The three other suspects in custody were
identified as Judith A. Clark, 31 years old, of 209 West 97th Street in
Manhattan; James Lester Hackford, 37, of 82-21 264th Street, Floral Park,
Queens, and Barbara Edson, 38, address unknown.

Three Suspects Arraigned

Three of the suspects were arraigned early this morning, on three counts of
murder in the second degree, before Judge Robert P. Lewis, the village justice,
in Nyack Village Hall. They were remanded without bail to the Rockland County
Jail in New City. Mr. Bouines is to be arraigned today. There will be a hearing
on the other charges Friday.

The three were marched into the courtroom with their hands manacled behind their
backs. Miss Clark and Miss Edson were dressed in simple gray prison-issue
dresses, Mr. Hackford in gabardine work clothes.  His shoulder-length black hair
was dissheveled.

As they waited for the final preparation of the papers, Miss Clark asked Judge
Lewis, ''Is this a court?'' ''Yes,'' the judge replied.  ''I have not been able
to call my lawyer,'' she said.  ''You'll be able to call him later,'' the judge
answered.  The suspects were seated and occasionally glanced at one another.
Finally, the judge read the charges.

Crowd Gathered Outside

At 1:45 this morning, a crowd of some 50 people was still gathered outside the
Village Hall, a two-story brick building at 12 North Broadway.

An ambulance carrying a man with a heart condition was diverted to take one of
the wounded officers to Nyack Hospital. As other ambulances and emergency
vehicles rushed to the hospital, two cars collided in front of the hospital, and
both drivers were treated for neck sprains.

After an emergency operation on Sergeant O'Grady lasting an hour and a half, Dr.
Herbert Sperling, a surgeon and chairman of the hospital's medical executive
committee, said an examination of three bullet fragments seemed to indicate that
the gunmen had used ''hollow-nose bullets of some type.''

He said the hospital normally handles between one and six gunshot cases a year,
mostly from hunting accidents.  The dead Brink's guard was identified as Peter
Paige, 49, of East Brunswick, N.J.  Thomas Coffey, Chief of the Nyack Police
Department, described the two slain officers as ''good cops,'' and said they
were outgoing and friendly.

On Force for 11 Years

He said Sergeant O'Grady had been on the force for 11 years and a sergeant for
four years. A graduate of Nyack High School, he had served in the Marine Corps
during the Vietnam War. He was finishing his fourth year at St. Thomas Aquinas
College in Sparkill in his spare time. Sergeant O'Grady was a resident of Pearl
River and had a wife and three children.

Officer Brown, a member of Sergeant O'Grady's squad, had served with the Nyack
police for 13 years, according to to the Chief. An Air Force veteran, he lived
in Spring Valley and is survived by two daughters.

The holdup began at about 3:45 P.M. outside the sprawling, twostory enclosed
shopping complex with large Sears and Bamberger's stores and more than a hundred
smaller stores in the town of Nanuet, just outside Nyack.

The Brink's guards parked their gray armored car on a road that runs alongside
the upper story of the mall's East Arcade to make the pickup from the Nanuet
National Bank, just inside the arcade entrance.

Mr. Gribetz said the guards had followed their standard procedure: One guard
loaded the money in the armored car while another remained in the vehicle and
the third positioned himself with his back against a building wall.

'He Might Have Been Grazed'

One witness who rushed from a nearby restaurant at the sound of the shots ''saw
one of the guards, who seemed to be shot in the stomach, sitting down on the
ground holding his abdomen.''

''I saw another guard lying on the ground and a third guard standing with his
shotgun broken open,'' the witness, who declined to be identified, said. ''He
seemed to be in shock, and he might have been grazed.''

Several hours later, the body of the dead guard was still sprawled on the
sidewalk under a blue blanket. There were two marks on the bulletproof
windshield, one a white graze where a bullet had bounced off, the second a hole
where a bullet penetrated.

Three shotgun shells and a .45-caliber semiautomatic pistol were circled in blue
chalk on the street.  Mr. Gribetz said that only four gunmen were observed
during the robbery and that drivers were in the two getaway cars waiting on
Route 59.

One injured Brink's guard, Joseph Trombino, 48, of Clifton, N.J., was in serious
but stable condition with a gunshot wound in the shoulder, a hospital spokesman
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of where shoot-out occured (page D23) photo of
police watching helicopter searching for robbery suspects

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 21, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

ADVISORY AND OVERSIGHT PANELS ON INTELLIGENCE NAMED

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 20


The Reagan Administration announced today that it was reconstituting the
President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board in an effort to improve ''the
quality and effectiveness of intelligence available to the United States.''

At the same time, the White House appointed the members of the Intelligence
Oversight Board, a three-member panel desiged to insure the ''legality and
propriety'' of intelligence activities.

Richard V. Allen, the President's national security adviser, who made the
announcement, called the two groups ''key elements in the President's program to
revitalize and strengthen American intelligence capabilities'' while ''insuring
that constitutional rights of all Americans are fully protected.''

Mr. Allen said that Anne Armstrong, a Republican who is a former United States
Ambassador to Britain, and Leo Cherne, a Democrat who headed the 19-member
advisory board. under President Ford, would serve as chairman and vice chairman
of the reconstituted group.

Mr. Allen also announced that W. Glenn Campbell, director of the Hoover
Institution on War, Revolution and Peace at Stanford University, would head the
oversight panel.

Advisory Board Controversial

The advisory board has had a controversial history. Its ancestor, known as the
President's Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities, was created
by President Eisenhower in 1956, when the Suez invasion and the Hungarian and
Polish uprisings brought serious questions about the adequacy of the nation's
intelligence-gathering.  Renamed in 1961, the board retained its mandate as an
independent body to assess American foreign intelligence efforts.

President Ford created the Intelligence Oversight Board in 1975 in response to
abuses by the intelligence agencies disclosed after the Vietnam War and
Watergate.

In May 1977, President Carter abolished the advisory board, but retained the
oversight panel. Former members of the advisory board said that Mr. Carter had
been told that while it had little direct effect on intelligence operations or
policy, it had been a source of tension in the intelligence community.

Two Teams Were Set Up

Mr. Cherne recalled today, for example, that it was the advistory board's
recommendation that prompted the Central Intelligence Agency to establish two
''teams'' to examine Soviet military strength and spending. That experiment made
the board unpopular among some intelligence officers, Mr. Cherne said.

Mrs. Armstrong said in an interview today that the advisory board had ''a
splendid track record,'' including having pressed intelligence agencies to place
greater emphasis on overhead reconnaissance, economic intelligence and
competition in analysis.

Mrs. Armstrong stressed that she and President Reagan, who telephoned her this
morning to offer her the post, believed in ''competition'' in analysis, and that
fostering it would probably be one of her key goals.

According to the executive order recreating the advisory board, it will report
directly to the President. It will have authority to ''review the performance of
all agencies'' in intelligence collection, analysis and execution, as well as a
full-time staff and consultants to conduct special inquiries. It will report at
least semiannually, but Mrs. Armstrong said she expected that her group might
meet two days every two months, or more often.

Once Had Authority to Initiate

Mr. Allen was less specific about the oversight panel, and his office declined
to respond to questions about mandate and operations. Under the Carter
Administration, the panel also had three members and was given authority to
initiate investigations into possible abuses by intelligence agencies.

However, a proposed executive order governing intelligence activities being
reviewed by the Reagan Administration would limit the oversight panel to
conducting investigations of charges actually reported to it.

Although President Reagan vowed in his campaign to re-establish the advisory
board, the appointments to both groups were repeatedly delayed by fierce
jockeying for membership. e

The advisory board is composed of some long-time friends of Mr.  Reagan's, such
as Alfred S. Bloomingdale, chairman of the board of Diners Club, and Clare
Boothe Luce, who served on the panel in 1973-77.

An appointment that has already stirred some debate is that of H.  Ross Perot,
chairman of the board of Electronic Data Systems in Dallas, who announced last
year that his company had begun a private effort to free the American hostages
held in Iran.

In addition to Mr. Campbell, members of the oversight panel are Frank D. Stella,
president of the F.@D. Stella Products Company in Detroit, and Charles Tyroler
2d, a Democrat identified as a business ''consultant on national problems,'' and
a director of the Committee on the Present Danger, a conservative group.

In addition to those named above, the advisory board members are David Abshire,
executive director of the Center for Strategic and International Studies,
Georgetown University; William O. Baker, former chairman of Bell Laboratories;
Frank Borman, chief executive officer of Eastern Air Lines; W. Glenn Campbell;
John B. Connally, Secretary of the Treasury in 1971-72; John S. Foster Jr., vice
president of TRW; Leon Jaworski, a partner in Fulbright & Jaworski and director
of the Watergate special prosecution force in 1973-74.

Also, Thomas H. Moorer, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 1970-74; Peter
O'Donnell Jr., director of the First National Bank in Dallas; Joe M. Rodgers,
president of JMR Investments and finance chairman for the Republican National
Committee in 1979-80; Paul Seabury, professor of political science at the
University of California at Berkeley; Robert F. Six, chairman of Continental
Airlines; Seymour Weiss, director of the State Department's bureau of
politico-military policy in 1973; and Edward Bennett Williams, partner in
Williams & Connolly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 26, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article Wednesday on intelligence oversight incorrectly described the
activity of H. Ross Perot, chairman of Electronic Data Systems, regarding
hostages in Iran. In February 1979 Mr. Perot said he had financed an assault by
Iranians on a Teheran prison that led to the freeing of two of his company's
employees.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Anne Armstrong

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 21, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

INDIAN ANGER AT THE U.S.

BYLINE: By Rahul Singh

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 920 words


Not since the era of Dwight D. Eisenhower, when the United States looked upon
India's neutralist leader Jawharlal Nehru as a stooge of Moscow, have relations
between Washington and New Delhi reached as low a point as they have today.

Earlier, it was the inability of Washington - and, to some extent, of public
opinion as well - to appreciate that a newly liberated country would want to
steer an independent middle course between the superpowers. ''If you're not with
us,'' went Secretary of State John Foster Dulles's simplistic argument, ''you
must be with them.''

These sentiments were reinforced and given a dangerous twist by McCarthyism,
which made liberalism unpatriotic. The socialism that India and many other
third-world countries adopted as their creed was unacceptable. To most
Americans, Socialists and Communists were birds of a feather. Right-wing
military or authoritarian dictatorships were, of course, O.K. since they usually
outlawed the Communists and made sweet sounds to the Americans in return for the
arms and aid that helped to prop them up. (That these regimes often were
violently toppled by popular, anti-Western leftists, as in Cuba and Egypt is
another matter.)

Though the Vietnam War made matters worse, it had a beneficial side effect: It
exposed American public opinion to realities of the developing world, and
brought about greater understanding of Asia.  Jimmy Carter's emphasis on human
rights as a touchstone of foreign policy, however impractical, carried the
process further. It gave notice to autocratic regimes like those in South Korea
and the Philippines that unless they moved toward democracy, they could not
count on American support. Individuals outside the United States fighting for
civil liberties must indeed have been invigorated by the Carter Administration's
stand.

Unfortunately, the Reagan Administration is turning the clock back and we are
rapidly reverting to the one-dimensional 1950's mentality of good guys versus
bad guys. Thus, Vice President Bush's Presidential-inauguration toast to
Ferdinand E. Marcos - ''We love your adherence to democratic principle and to
the democratic processes'' - for his ''victory'' in in the Philippine election,
ignoring the elaborate stage management involved in the ''victory.''

This shift in American policy has had a tragic impact on Indian-United States
ties. One would have imagined that the world's two largest democracies would
have had much in common and that over the years they would have drawn closer in
mutual cooperation. Yet, more often than not they have been deeply suspicious of
each other and on at least one occasion -the Bangladesh war, in 1971 - openly
hostile. Furthermore, a series of recent events have generated an outburst of
virulent anti-American feeling, even among the more responsible quarters of
Indian public opinion.

First, there was the promise to supply sophisticated arms to Pakistan,
particularly F-16 jets, which would place the industrial port of Bombay, with
its nuclear reactor and petrochemical plants, within range of Pakistani bombers.
These arms will be a godsend to Pakistan's President, Gen. Zia ul-Haq, whose
rule is shaky, and a severe blow to his democratic opponents, who often have
challenged him to face the public in an election - a challenge he has studiously
avoided. As in the Philippines, the United States may well have undermined those
hoping for a return to democracy and thus left the field open to the extremists.

Indian distrust of American intentions has been underlined by New Delhi's recent
refusal to accept the posting of a senior diplomat, George G.B.

Griffin, as political counselor in the United States Embassy, because of his
alleged Central Intelligence Agency connections; by the continued American
refusal to supply India with nuclear fuel; and by an apparent American attempt
to stall a $5.7 billion World Bank loan to India.

The result has been a tirade against the Administration by Indian commentators
who otherwise are not unsympathetic to the United States, many having toured the
United States at Washington's expense. Girilal Jain, editor in chief of the
Times of India, accused President Reagan of ''waging a war not so much on the
Soviet Union as on third-world countries which refuse to fall in line with its
policies.''

It is understandable, often easy, for third-world countries like India to want
to take cheap potshots at America, if only to thumb their noses at a nation that
in the popular imagination represents unbridled might and vulgar affluence.
Periodic anti-American outbursts are something that the United States has got to
live with.  But the Administration seems to be going out of its way to invite
such hostility by befriending third-world leaders who trample on civil liberties
and by antagonizing people who are struggling for the ideals of freedom and
democracy that America ostensibly believes in. This is a paradox that America
should ponder.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Rahul Singh, former assistant editor of The Times of India, is editor in chief
of the Indian Reader's Digest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Pull Out of Cambodia, U.N. Tells Vietnam

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 21


For the third year in a row, the General Assembly today urged Vietnam to
evacuate its forces from Cambodia and called for United Nations-supervised
elections. The appeal was expected to have little effect.

The vote came as no surprise although it was slightly higher than last year's,
with 100 in favor, 25 against and 19 abstentions.  In 1980, the vote was 97 to
23 with 22 abstentions. The resolution did not refer specifically to Vietnam;
instead, it called for ''the withdrawal of all foreign forces'' from Cambodia.

Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978 and overthrew the Peking-backed Pol Pot
Government, which had been accused of killing as many as three million
Cambodians during four years in power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VISIT BY SOUTH AFRICA RUGBY TEAM VIEWED AS COSTLY TO NEW ZEALAND

BYLINE: By PAMELA G. HOLLIE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: AUCKLAND, New Zealand, Oct. 18


A month after the strongest protests and demonstrations in this country since
the Vietnam War, most New Zealanders believe that the invitation to the South
African Springbok team to play rugby here was not worth it.

In Auckland, New Zealand's largest city, 63 percent of those asked in an opinion
poll last week said they thought that the consequences of playing rugby with New
Zealand's longtime rival had cost the country too much.

''Bitterness has divided families, work places and communities,'' said Wallace
E. Rowling, leader of New Zealand's Labor Party and the chief opponent of Prime
Minister Robert D. Muldoon in the elections scheduled for November.

There were other undesirable effects, Mr. Rowling said. ''Police activity has
been raised to a level that has not previously been acceptable in the country,''
he said. ''Other sporting organizations have seen their international
opportunities blocked, and the international standing of New Zealand has been
un@dermined.''

Tour Originally Had Support

Most New Zealanders evidently had no idea that things would turn out this way.
Last year, when the New Zealand Rugby Union elected to invite its rival of 50
years, the Springboks, on a 56-day tour, New Zealanders, who often are
passionate about sport, tended to support the decision. That support came
despite the country's endorsement of an international agreement discouraging
sports contacts with South Africa and despite the protests of some New
Zealanders who felt it was morally wrong.

Mr. Muldoon's National Party Government officially opposed the tour, which began
in July and ended a month ago, but, apparently because of the election scheduled
Nov. 28, the Government took no steps to prevent it.

As soon as the South African team arrived, thousands of people took to the
streets in protest. Over the six weeks of the tour, more than 2,000 were
arrested and hundreds were hurt when what were to be peaceful protests turned
into riots.

''Long before it began, I said the Springbok tour would be a disaster,'' Prime
Minister Muldoon said after the tour ended. ''I believe I was right.''

Maoris Change Their Minds

A year ago, however, only one-third of New Zealand's residents opposed the tour,
and they tended to be urban, educated, non-sportsminded and women older than 55
years. Despite the issue of apartheid, the Maoris, the indigenous New
Zealanders, also supported another round of contests with the Springboks.

''But now the Maori people are finally beginning to see that we have a stake in
combating racism wherever it breeds,'' said Merata Meita, a Maori film-maker who
opposed the tour. ''We cannot afford to endorse racism anywhere and feel safe
here.''

The tour forged a union between church members, students and minorities and gave
rise to several protest organizations that gained strength from the
confrontations with the police and the military.  Halt All Racist Tours, which
was a product of the Springboks tour, has said that it will continue to be a
watchdog against racism in New Zealand. The organization recently tried to get
New Zealand's national rugby team blacklisted from international competition.

Cricket Team Affected

New Zealanders who believe that sports and politics should not be linked soon
found that other nations tended to use sports to punish New Zealand. Before the
international cricket schedule was drawn up, the West Indies team, which
oppposed New Zealand's decision to invite the Springboks, denied New Zealand's
request for a cricket tour. And a group of black African nations attending the
meeting of Commonwealth heads of government in Melbourne, Australia, earlier
this month strongly suggested that New Zealand be barred from the Commonwealth
Games in Brisbane, Australia, next year.

As far as the Commonwealth members are concerned, New Zealand has reneged on its
endorsement of the 1977 Gleneagles Agreement that discourages sport contacts
with South Africa because of its apartheid policies. Mr. Muldoon had hoped to
persuade other Commonwealth countries who met in Melbourne to accept the
principle that governments have a responsibility to their athletes. But Prime
Minister Malcolm Fraser of Australia was successful in keeping the issue off the
formal agenda.

Competition Termed 'Worthwhile'

There are still many New Zealanders, however, who strongly believe that to have
barred the Springboks would have been a travesty for the national sport. ''The
tour was well worthwhile,'' said Ronald Don, chairman of the Auckland Rugby
Union. ''But it is a pity that threats of violence kept so many people away.''

The supporters for the tour were, and still are, mainly from New Zealand's rural
dairy and sheep-raising areas. For rural New Zealanders, sports and politics are
separate issues. ''The statements that the country has been divided down the
middle by the tour are absolute myths,'' Mr. Don said. ''This may be the
situation in the large cities, but the feeling in towns such as Invercargill,
Napier and Whangarei has been very much in favor of the tour.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ORGANIZED LABOR'S ALL-AMERICAN ROLE- PAST AND PRESENT

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 721 words


To the Editor:

In a recent Op-Ed piece, titled ''A Friend of Labor,'' Robert Claiborne
-one-time office manager of a local union and worker in a war plant - explains
why he is no longer a friend of labor. He faults unions on three counts:
McCarthyism, Vietnam and civil rights.

As a union president who looked upon Joe McCarthy as a major menace, who had
mixed feelings on Vietnam and who has engaged in the civil rights struggle as
intensely as in the battle for worker rights, I should like to suggest a
perspective to Mr. Claiborne and others like him who, out of their perceived
shortcomings of organized labor, have joined with those who couldn't care less
if unions exist or not.

McCarthy's red-baiting was no unknown bit to union people. Hardly a labor
organizer in this country has ever escaped the charge of ''outside agitator,''
''red,'' ''pinko,'' ''Communist.'' McCarthy was just a larger-than-life
caricature of every anti-labor, anti-liberal mudslinger we ever encountered.

To some of us, he conveyed a special irony. We had been fighting Communists for
decades, at a time when the Communists in Wisconsin were backing McCarthy for
public office. Yes, we were both anti-Communist and anti-McCarthy. This may be
puzzling to Mr.  Claiborne, who seems to imply that if labor was anti-Communist
it had to be pro-McCarthy - a dangerous either/or sort of logic that fails to
recognize the positive role of a dynamic democracy, here or in Poland, in
combating the intolerances of both the left and the right.

As to Vietnam, American unions were divided - as was the rest of America - with
most unionists probably feeling as did the majority in their respective age
groups. Some of us were internally divided, eager to contain Communism while
aware that this was an irrelevant war to most of those expected to lay down
their lives in a distant soil. Most unions officially backed the war; some
openly opposed it.

Would Mr. Claiborne advise workers to join some unions and not others on the
basis of their attitude toward the war? Or does he oppose all unions because at
one time most of them were -by his lights - in error?

As for civil rights, he might research the legislative history of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, when the A.F.L.-C.I.O. insisted on the inclusion of a fair
employment practices clause over the opposition of the Kennedy Administration -
and of many local unionists.

Mr. Claiborne's general complaint against labor is that ''what they see as their
interest has very little to do with what I see as my interest.'' I think he may
wish to reconsider if he gives but a few seconds' thought to some of the things
labor wants - for the nation.

Labor wants full employment as expressed in the Full Employment Act of 1947 and
the Humphrey-Hawkins Act. It favors a redistribution of income from bottom up
and opposes the reverse redistribution embodied in the policies of the present
Administration.

Labor wants to abolish sweat shops, where millions are enslaved, especially
undocumented aliens, and to enforce a minimum wage that does not discriminate
against youths, women, minorities or employees in agriculture, local or small
establishments.

It wants national health insurance, Medicaid, health research, lowincome
housing, mass transportation, urban planning; it wants safety on the job and a
more salubrious environment; it wants equal pay for equal work and an Equal
Rights Amendment; it wants truth in lending, consumer protection, a reversal of
the Fed's high-interest policy; it wants a continuance of food stamps, college
loans, aid for dependent children. It wants all this and more to be written into
laws not just for dues-paying members but for the whole nation.

It is ironic that Mr. Claiborne's piece appeared on Sept. 19, the day hundreds
of thousands of people went to Washington to join labor in the largest protest
rally ever held there: minorities, environmentalists, consumers, educators, the
poor, women, liberals, the aged, the handicapped and even radicals - all of whom
stated their solidarity with organized labor in a common cause.

Too bad Mr. Claiborne could not have witnessed the event before writing his
confessio anti-fidei. Maybe he wouldn't have done it.
SOL C. CHAIKIN, President, International Ladies' Garment Workers Union New York,
Oct. 2, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

2 WOMEN IN BRINK'S CASE IDENTIFIED WITH WEATHERMEN FROM START IN '69

BYLINE: By PAUL L. MONTGOMERY

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1723 words


The lives of the two women arrested in the Brink's robbery in Nanuet, N.Y.
-Katherine Boudin and Judith Alice Clark - had been entwined with the terrorist
Weathermen movement since its inception in 1969. But they had apparently gone
separate ways since the armed band of 40 or so radicals went underground in
1970.

Miss Boudin, 38 years old, had fled with Cathlyn P. Wilkerson from an explosion
at a Weathermen bomb factory in Greenwich Village on March 6, 1970, and had
eluded the authorities since.

As arrests and retirements whittled down the movement to its present strength of
perhaps 15, she remained one of its leaders and one of its enigmas, apparently
maintaining a commitment to armed violence while most of her comrades turned
themselves in and returned to work in the world they had denounced as corrupt.

Both Drawn to Radicalism

Miss Clark, 31, had been indicted with Miss Boudin in 1969 in connection with
the Weathermen's ''Days of Rage'' demonstrations in Chicago, and like her she
had jumped bail. She was captured by the Federal Bureau of Investigation at an
East Side movie theater in December 1970 and served an 18-month prison sentence
in Chicago.  Thereafter her life was apparently above ground.

She lived on West 97th Street, reportedly worked in a bookstore and participated
in a civil suit against former President Richard M.  Nixon in 1978 charging
illegal wiretapping. The case is still pending. Miss Clark also was active in
the radical May 19 Coalition.

Both women are from well-to-do families and attended good colleges; Miss Boudin
went to Bryn Mawr and Miss Clark to the University of Chicago. Both turned away
from established values to the disorder and violence that characterized the late
1960's in the United States, a period that has largely been replaced by other
concerns.

Dozens of Bombings

The Weathermen, who were responsible for several dozen bombings of public
buildings and at least five deaths before they stopped open terrorism in 1975,
were the last violent remnant of Students for a Democratic Society, a mass
movement among college youth that grew out of the civil rights and anti-Vietnam
War struggles of the 1960's.

To many, the movement seemed irrelevant to the 1980's, though the last few
members still lived a fugitive life in cells of three or four, issuing
occasional manifestos on guerrilla warfare and radical feminism. Until yesterday
most of the only news the Weathermen had made since 1975 was when another of
their leaders surrendered to authorities to begin life again above ground.

In recent years authorities had sought links between the remaining Weather
Underground and the outlaw Black Liberation Army, a group that had participated
in the murder of policemen around the country.

Chesimard Escape Mentioned

An investigator in the Essex County Prosecutor's office said there was
considerable speculation that the Weathermen had assisted in the escape of
Joanne Chesimard, the Black Liberation Army leader, from a New Jersey prison two
years ago. Miss Clark had been seen at a hearing in Manhattan Criminal Court
several years ago involving Miss Chesimard. This was before Miss Chesimard's
imprisonment.

Miss Boudin was born in New York City on May 19, 1943 and attended private
schools here. Her father is Leonard B. Boudin, a prominent civil liberties
lawyer who has defended many radicals; I.F. Stone, the writer, is an uncle. Miss
Boudin was graduated with honors in Russian literature from Bryn Mawr in 1965
and spent her senior year studying in the Soviet Union.

She had worked in the civil rights movement in Cambridge, Md., in 1963 and after
graduation moved to Cleveland to work as a community organizer in a Students for
a Democratic Society project. Through the years she moved up in the student
movement's leadership and was arrested at the 1968 Democratic Convention in
Chicago, charged with throwing stink bombs into the lobby of the Conrad Hilton
Hotel.

The next year, 1969, was the year of turmoil for the student movement. Factions
developed around a variety of ideologies: revolutionary violence, nonviolence,
organization of workers instead of middle-class students, alliance with the
Black Panthers. Each issue produced a further split and by the fall the movement
was in disarray. The most visible remnant was the Weathermen, adopting their
name from a line in Bob Dylan's 1965 song ''Subterranean Homesick Blues'': ''You
don't need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows.''

The Weathermen, who later changed their name to Weatherpeople and then Weather
Underground because of the sexism involved in the original, wore leather jackets
and crash helmets and carried clubs and chains at demonstrations they vowed
would be violent.

Against 'Everything That's Good'

''We are against everything that's good and decent in honky America,'' said an
early manifesto. ''We will loot and burn and destroy. We are the incubation of
your mothers' nightmares.''

Miss Clark was born in Brooklyn on Nov. 23, 1949 and entered the University of
Chicago in 1967. It was in 1969 that she became associated with the Weathermen.
She had been expelled from the University of Chicago earlier that year for
participating in a demonstration.

The climax of the ''Days of Rage'' demonstrations was a charge by 100 women in
crash helmets, swinging clubs, on an armed forces induction center in Chicago on
Oct. 9, 1969. In the ranks were Miss Boudin, Miss Clark, Miss Wilkerson,
Bernardine Dohrn and others whose names and pictures were to appear on wanted
posters around the nation. Miss Boudin and Miss Clark were among those arrested
and released on bail, and neither appeared for trial the next spring.

The explosion at a townhouse owned by Miss Wilkerson's father at 18 West 11th
Street on March 6, 1970 changed the radical movement profoundly. The Weathermen
lost stature as a result of the accident and were driven underground.

According to later accounts, a group of at least eight from the movement were in
the house while Mr. Wilkerson was on vacation. There were at least 60 sticks of
dynamite in the basement workshop.  Apparently someone misconnected a wire while
making what were later described by the Weathermen as ''antipersonnel'' bombs.

Three people were killed instantly -Ted Gold, 23, a leader of the 1968 Columbia
student rebellion; Diana Oughton, 28, a former member of the Peace Corps and
daughter of a banker; and Terry Robbins, 21, a former Kenyon College student and
a leader of the faction.

Two Disappear After Blast

Miss Wilkerson and her friend Miss Boudin were upstairs when the explosions
rocked the building and were driven naked and dazed into the street. After a
neighbor gave them clothes, they got into a taxi and disappeared.

The Weathermen took responsibility for at least 20 bombings between 1970 and
1975, including explosions at Police Headquarters here in 1970, the United
States Capitol in 1971 and the State Department in 1975.

Miss Clark in the meantime had been arrested.  She was attending a movie on the
East Side on Dec. 17, 1970, near the headquarters of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, and was recognized by the agent in charge of her case. She was
returned to Chicago and sentenced to 18 months in prison.

Convictions Are Upset

Four years later the ''Days of Rage'' convictions were voided because the F.B.I.
had used burglaries, mail openings and illegal wiretaps in obtaining them, and
Miss Clark joined in a suit against Mr. Nixon and his aides.

Miss Clark's last known radical association was with the two-yearold May 19
Coalition, named for the joint birthday of Malcolm X and Ho Chi Minh. The
coalition was said to be a violence-prone faction inspired by the Weather
Underground's ''Prairie Fire,'' a guerrilla warfare manual published in 1974.
The manual begins, ''We are a guerrilla organization. We are Communist women and
men, underground in the United States for more than four years.''

According to New York police sources, Eve S. Rosahn, the owner of record of one
of the cars used in the robbery Monday, was also associated with the May 19
Coalition. Miss Rosahn, who is being sought by the police, is a 30-year-old
former Barnard College student who had a record of several arrests in protests.

Around 1975 some leaders of the Weathermen began to talk of alternatives to
violence, and in 1977 there apparently was a split between members favoring
legal public action and those who wanted to remain clandestine and violent.
Little is known about the life of the members in those years.

In 1977 Mark Rudd, the leader of the 1968 Columbia University takeovers and
subsequently a member of the Weathermen, became the first of the movement's
leaders to surrender. He was fined $2,000 and given two years' probation; he now
is a teacher at a technical school in Albuquerque, N.M.

In November 1978, five adherents of the Weather Underground were arrested in
Houston and later convicted of conspiring to bomb the offices of a conservative
California state senator. All are now in jail.

In the summer of 1980, Miss Wilkerson surrended in New York. She pleaded guilty
to possession of dynamite and. began a three-year sentence last January.  She is
currently in the state prison at Bedford Hills.

Last Dec. 3 in Chicago, Miss Dohrn surrendered and was fined $1,500 and placed
on probation for three years.  According to Federal authorities, there are still
active cases against four members of the movement. They are Jeff Jones and his
common-law wife, Eleanor Raskin, wanted in connection with a bomb explosion in
Hoboken, N.J., in 1979; Katherine Ann Power, wanted for bank robbery and murder;
and Silas Trim Bissell, accused of bombing a Reserve Officers Training Corps
building at the University of Washington in 1969.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Katherine Boudin in 1970 photo of William
Kunstler, Leonard and Jean Boudin

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HERO SHUNS ROLE, HAILS FALLEN MEN

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. GEIST

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 374 words


Michael Koch was being called a hero yesterday for capturing Katherine Boudin, a
member of the Weather Underground, and he was not pleased.

''The officers up there are the heroes,'' he said, referring to the two Nyack
police officers and a Brink's security guard who were fatally shot Monday in an
attempted holdup. ''I don't feel at all like a hero, and I don't care who the
woman was. It was terrible.''

Mr. Koch, 35 years old, left his job as an officer for the Department of
Correction on Rikers Island to appear at a news conference at the Criminal
Courts Building in Manhattan. Squinting into television lights, he spoke softly
about the incident.

He said that he was off-duty, driving north on the Gov. Thomas E.  Dewey Thruway
from his home in Yonkers to a friend's gasoline station.

Sound of Gunfire Heard

''I slowed down,'' he said, ''when I saw what looked to be a police roadblock
across the Thruway on a southbound exit ramp. Then I heard a shot. I slammed on
the brakes and backed up. I saw an officer go down. Then I heard automatic
weapons fire and saw people running.''

He pulled his .38-caliber revolver and badge and ran across the Thruway into
what he called ''a firefight, like I was back in Vietnam.'' He saw a woman,
later identified as Miss Boudin, run down the Thruway, gave chase and caught
her.

Mr. Koch said it was nearly impossible to determine who were passers-by trying
to get out of the way and who was trying to escape. He said he yelled to the
woman: ''Who are you? Who are you with?'' and that she had answered, ''I didn't
shoot him, he did!'' She was unarmed but did not surrender without a struggle.

Suspects Flee in Stolen Cars
''I had my weapon drawn and a bystander pleaded with me not to shoot her
mother,'' he said. ''She thought I was with the others.''

Some suspects fled in stolen cars and suddenly it was quiet.  Mr. Koch turned
Miss Boudin over to the authorities and continued to his friend's place, ''where
I washed the blood and dirt off.'' He reported at Rikers Island on Tuesday
morning. ''I didn't sleep,'' he said. ''Those officers died.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SKETCHES OF VICTIMS OF SHOOTINGS;
Sgt. Edward O'Grady

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 439 words


At the age of 33, and after 11 years on the Nyack Village Police Department,
Sgt. Edward O'Grady was continuing his education in the field of criminal
justice. He and Police Officer Waverly Brown, a member of Sergeant O'Grady's
squad, who was killed at the same time, frequently worked together. A week ago
both men assisted in the delivery of a premature baby who died the next day.

Sergeant O'Grady served in the Marine Corps in the Vietnam War era.  He is
survived by his wife, Diane, and three children, the youngest an infant,
according to acquaintances.  He was raised in the old Village of Nyack and moved
his family about a year ago to a modern high ranch home set on a hillside on
rustic Blauvelt Road in Pearl River, a neighboring community. He had been a
sergeant for four years and was close to completing credits at St. Thomas
Aquinas College in Sparkill for his Bachelor of Science degree in criminal
justice.

Officer Waverly Brown

A Spring Valley resident who joined the Nyack Police Department 13 years ago,
Officer Waverly Brown, 45, since the recent retirement of another officer had
been the only black member of the force. Known by the nickname Chipper, he was
popular among youths in Nyack as a friendly counselor, according to people in
the village.

''Officer Brown knows almost every youth in this town,'' said Quirlene Augustin,
a young admirer of Haitian descent.  Officer Brown is survived by two daughters,
both of whom are in the Air Force, one of them overseas. Their father, a chunky
six-footer, was in the Air Force himself for a period after the Korean War.

He lived alone for many years in his garden apartment, according to neighborhood
acquaintances, making friends but not often revealing details of his personal
life. Neighbors said he owned land in Virginia and spoke frequently of his
desire to retire there after leaving the police force. They said he had recently
vacationed in the South, where his mother lives.

Peter Paige

A veteran of 24 years of service as a Brink's guard, Peter Paige, 49, lived in
East Brunswick, N.J. He worked out of the company's Newark office, according to
a Brink's spokesman.

Mr. Paige had a wife and three children ranging in age from 9 to 19.  The
Brink's spokesman said that at the time of the shooting, Mr.  Paige was acting
as a ''messenger'' carrying the money while being protected by a fellow employee
with gun drawn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Edward O'Grady photo of Waverly Brown photo of
Peter Paige

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BETTER HOMES: SELLING DREAMS

BYLINE: By N.R. KLEINFIELD

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1207 words


The magazine was called Fruit, Garden and Home when it was spawned in 1922, the
same year that Reader's Digest sprang into being and a year before something
called Time hit the racks. The first issue had a story about the Delicious
apple, and another article went into what you could do with $50 in your
backyard. In 1924, the name was rewritten to what it has been ever since -
Better Homes and Gardens.

What has changed since those embryonic days is the home, as well as the people
who dwell in it. But while many big circulation magazines, notably those geared
for the homemaker, have been hobbled by circulation woes and identity crises,
Better Homes struts along.

Feeding America's middle class a diet of insulation tips and Strawberry Banana
Freeze recipes, it has never cut its circulation in its 59-year history, and, in
fact, debates now whether to increase it.

Waiting List for Subscribers

As it is, Better Homes, whose newsstand price is $1.25, is snapped up by eight
million readers, depositing it behind only TV Guide, Reader's Digest and
National Geographic as the most widely bought magazine in America. Actually,
there has been a waiting list to become a subscriber. The response was so big to
a subscription drive last December that readers have had to wait for six months
or more before the monthly magazine squeezed them in, since it did not wish to
swell much beyond its eight million base.

What is the magic of this publication, edited, of all places, in Des Moines, and
sneered at by the younger set as something fit for one's grandmother?

''We're devoted to the single subject of home and family,'' said Robert Burnett,
president of the Meredith Corporation, the communications company that owns
Better Homes. ''We're the most obvious magazine in America.''

''Robert Frost once defined a poem as a momentary stay against confusion,''
chimed in Gordon Greer, Better Homes' editor. ''Our readers, over the years,
have been buffeted pretty bad by the Vietnam War and Richard Nixon and whatnot.
So we try to give them some solace, which they don't get much of anywhere
else.''

Books and Services, Too

The prized niche that Better Homes fills in the nation's living rooms has
spurred Meredith to loose a multitude of Better Homes progeny, which, along with
the magazine, showered it with $230 million in the fiscal year ended June 30.
Among them: the Better Homes and Gardens Cook Book, which, since its debut in
1930, has sold more than 21 million copies, making it the biggest-selling
hard-cover book short of the Bible; some 70 other books bearing the Better Homes
stamp; a string of special-interest magazines; a crafts club; even a network of
Better Homes and Gardens realtors. An attempt to sell insurance by mail,
however, flopped.

Recently, Meredith formed a video unit to cook up programming for cable
television; its maiden project is a show called Better Homes and Gardens
Notebook. ''But there's a limit,'' Mr. Burnett said. ''We wouldn't start
doughnut shops or muffler shops or anything like that.''

Despite its circulation prosperity, Better Homes has had ad traumas. Though
Folio magazine, which covers the magazine industry, ranked it ninth in total
revenues last year among all magazines, grossing $162.9 million, Better Homes
has lost ad pages for four consecutive years. Whenever there is a home-building
slowdown, as at present, ads evaporate.

November Issue a Record

However, Better Homes is persnickety about pushing up both its ad and
subscription rates, and says that the latest fiscal year was the most profitable
ever. In fact, the November issue of Better Homes will bulge with $12.3 million
worth of ads, a record for a single issue of any magazine, eclipsing the
November 1979 Better Homes issue.

''One of our problems,'' said J. Wesley Silk, Better Homes' publisher, ''is the
young space buyer at an ad agency who lives in an apartment who doesn't
understand our magazine. When they get that first mortgage, they understand
us.''

A key to Better Homes' longevity is its willingness to change, albeit while
clinging to its belief in service.  ''The main thrust of any change we've made
is in the definition of home,'' Mr. Greer said. ''If you go way back to caveman,
I would say the cave was the home. If the cavemen came out, the dinosaurs ate
them and so they tended to stay inside. Now we've expanded it. In the early
days, we had no travel at all, but we cover travel now, so in a sense the whole
planet earth is home.''

Fads Are Ignored

In many respects, Better Homes doggedly dances to its own particular drummer. It
has spurned some of the fads that have paraded across the pages of many other
magazines.

Mr. Greer, who thinks of Better Homes ''as a friend, a neighbor,'' is especially
adept at pointing out what the magazine is not. It is not a scoop magazine.
(''We practice wait-until-you-see-the-whitesof-their-eyes journalism.'') It is
not overly opinionated. (''We're not selling anything except magazines.'') It is
not a dream magazine. (''We're not going to run a story on Jane Fonda and so the
reader thinks, 'Oh don't I wish I were young and beautiful like Jane Fonda.'
Then the reader says, 'Oh well, I'm dumb and ugly so I might as well go back to
making my oatmeal.' '')

It runs no letters. (''What good would it do to run a letter saying I hated your
recipe on broccoli? Why expose millions of people to this?'' Still, it fields
some 1,000 letters a day, the most perisistent complaint of which concerns the
cigarette ads.) Also, it runs no fiction, no fashion, no first-person
tattle-telling articles and no celebrity profiles. Its covers depict souffles or
pot roasts or split-level homes. However, in a slight break with the rules, it
will plant a celebrity on its December cover - Santa Claus.

E.T. Meredith, the magazine's founder, used to say, ''No piffle, no passion, no
fiction, no fashion.''

Housing Prices a Concern

One of the more fearful trends to Better Homes is the skyward rise in house
prices. Many couples wonder if they will, in fact, ever own a home, and, of
course, anyone who is homeless is likely to be Better Homeless. The magazine
addresses such concerns in a two-part series scheduled for next spring. And it
concludes that, one way or another, people will find ways to own shelter.

''If they put up pup tents in the street, they're going to live somewhere,'' Mr.
Greer said obdurately, implying that if such were the case, Better Homes would
order up articles on pup tent foyers and the best way to heat a tent.

Whatever further upheaval there is in the social ways of the country, Better
Homes figures it can groom itself so that it will still sprawl on the coffee
tables of Middle America. It expects to keep on being a good neighbor, a
momentary stay against confusion.

''If you go down the street tonight and ask people walking by what they're
thinking about,'' Mr. Greer said, ''nine out of 10 of them are thinking about
how am I going to put the kids through college, or the father is sick, or what
am I going to cook for dinner, or what am I going to do on the weekend. Pretty
mundane, but that is what people have been concerned about since ancient times
and always will be. So will we.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: chart (page B6) photo of Gordon Greer

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

RECRUITER FOR PROJECT IN LIBYA SOUGHT PERSONNEL IN ALABAMA

BYLINE: By EDWARD T. POUND, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1340 words

DATELINE: DOTHAN, Ala., Oct. 22


Working under a contract to maintain Libyan aircraft and train pilots, Edwin P.
Wilson, a former American intelligence agent who is now a fugitive in Libya,
sent a retired Army sergeant here this year to offer $60,000 to $72,000 a year
to pilots, mechanics and other flight personnel if they would work for the
Libyan Air Force.

According to several people familiar with the recruiting effort, Kenneth G.
Beck, the Army veteran, returned in July to southeast Alabama, where he lived
before going to North Africa to work for Mr.  Wilson, in an effort to recruit a
dozen pilots and other specialists for Mr. Wilson's Libyan operations. Some of
those interviewed by Mr.  Beck said that his main recruiting pitch was that the
job was a chance to earn a lot of money in a short time.

It could not be determined how many Americans Mr. Beck recruited.  Only one,
Richard L. Love, a helicopter pilot, is known to have signed on with Mr.
Wilson's London-based company, Western Recruitment Inc., as a result of Mr.
Beck's efforts. Officials at Gatwick Airport at London said today that Mr. Love
and several others left this morning on a flight to Libya.

Near Fort Rucker Center

Nonetheless, Mr. Beck was recruiting in presumably fertile territory. Just
northwest of here is the Fort Rucker Army Aviation Center, where thousands of
civilians and military personnel work.

Mr. Beck did not answer a telephone call placed to him in Libya.  Mr. Wilson has
repeatedly refused to return calls after messages were left for him.

In Washington, a State Department spokesman said that it was not in the interest
of the United States for Americans to work for the Libyan Air Force, but
high-level officials at the White House declined to comment on the matter. (Page
B6.)

Follows Report on Pilots

The disclosure of Mr. Beck's recruiting activities follows reports from
associates of Mr. Wilson that American pilots and mechanics, including some
military veterans, had been flying and maintaining Libyan Air Force planes for
two years in an operation organized by Mr. Wilson.

Mr. Wilson was a covert agent of the Central Intelligence Agency before he went
to work in the 1970's training terrorists for Libya, which has a belligerent
relationship with the United States. Last year, a Federal grand jury in
Washington indicted Mr. Wilson on charges that he had shipped explosives to
Libya.

According to former employees of Mr. Wilson, he obtained a contract late in 1979
to maintain 20 CH-47 helicopters, known as Chinooks, owned by the Libyan
Government. The contract, these employees said, called for Mr. Wilson to provide
mechanics and pilots who could train Libyan fliers.

Recruitment efforts began in September 1979, according to former employees, and
continued as late as July, when Mr. Beck tried to recruit personnel here.

According to one Western pilot interviewed earlier this week, American pilots
flew helicopters in support of the Libyan invasion of Chad this year. However,
two former employees of Mr. Wilson said yesterday in telephone interviews that
they had not been involved in combat missions.

Many Worked on Iran Project

Mr. Wilson seems to have focused on obtaining personnel with military
backgrounds. In the 1970's, many people who later became his employees worked
for an Italian manufacturer in Iran as mechanics and pilots on CH-47's.

One Alabama man, Vance Hill, worked for Mr. Wilson's Western Recruitment from
October 1979 through mid-1980. His wife, Frances, said that her husband, a
retired Army helicopter pilot, became disillusioned. She said Mr. Hill, who was
out of the country and unavailable, came home complaining that ''Ed Wilson was
selling the flag.''

Mr. Hill was one of the first Americans to go to Libya to work for Western
Recruitment. He and four other men were recruited in September 1979 by an
associate of Mr. Wilson, according to Lloyd D.  Jones, a helicopter mechanic who
returned from Libya last June to go back home to Holdenville, Okla.

Mr. Jones said he was one of the five men recruited by Diana Byrne, who is in
charge of the office where Mr. Wilson bases his London operations. She has
declined to discuss her activities for Mr.  Wilson.

Assumes Wilson Had List

He said that he and some of the others recruited by the Wilson company worked in
Iran in the 1970's maintaining helicopters for Augusta, the Italian company. He
said: ''I assume that Western Recruitment got all the names connected with
Augusta on the CH-47 project in Iran.''

Mr. Jones also said that he had had a ''pretty close'' relationship with Mr.
Wilson. ''I believe he's been wrongly accused of things,'' Mr. Jones said. ''His
comments to me were that he's between the rock and the hard place and can't come
out and defend himself or he'll be detained because he's under indictment.''

Another former Western Recruitment employee, C. Dale Chavers, who lives in the
Houston area, said he went to Libya earlier this year because ''I had to make a
living for my family.'' Mr. Chavers said he returned home in July.

Saw None in Combat Roles

Both Mr. Jones and Mr. Chavers said they saw no Americans in any combat support
roles.  Mr. Beck, who is in his mid-40's, was a 20-year army veteran, retiring
in the late 1960's as a sergeant first class, according to associates here. He
was in Iran from 1972 through 1978 working for Augusta.

In February 1980, Mr. Beck, a helicopter maintenance superviser, went to work
for Northrop Worldwide Aircraft Services, a Northrop Corporation subsidiary that
holds a maintenance contract at Fort Rucker. His supervisor at Northrop said Mr.
Beck was dismissed for ''unsatisfactory work'' in November 1980.

Associates of Mr. Beck said he went to work for Mr. Wilson and Western
Recruitment last January as a mechanic.  A retracing of Mr. Beck's recruitment
efforts showed that he placed an advertisement in a local newspaper, The Dothan
Eagle, in July. The ad said that a London-based company ''urgently'' needed
helicopter mechanics, electricians and other support personnel for CH-47
helicopters. It made no mention of Libya and said that starting salaries were
$4,000 to $5,000 a month. Applicants were urged to contact Mr. Beck at the
Holiday Inn in Ozark, a town near here.

His Argument Was Money

According to one applicant, Bobby Motes of Ozark, Mr. Beck's ''pitch'' was
simply money. After he arrived at Mr. Beck's motel room, Mr. Motes said, Mr.
Beck told him that he would be working in Libya.

''He was offering me $5,000 a month,'' said Mr. Motes, who earns $15,000
annually as an aircraft electrician for Northrop. Mr. Motes said Mr. Beck told
him that Libya ''wasn't an exciting place, no whiskey, no women, but that I
could earn a lot of money.''

He said he decided not to take the job because he felt it would be
''unpatriotic'' to work in a country that was unfriendly to the United States.

Another applicant, Roland Rhodes of Ozark, who said he knew Mr.  Beck from their
Army days together, said he, too, lost interest when he learned Mr. Beck was
recruiting for work in Libya.

Another military veteran, James L. Fitch, who flew combat missions in Vietnam
for the Army, said he learned of Mr. Wilson's recruiting efforts from a friend
and in August phoned the former intelligence agent in Tripoli. Mr. Fitch said
Mr. Wilson had said he was willing to pay $72,000 a year.

Mr. Fitch, who worked with Mr. Beck both at Northrup and in Iran, described
himself and others like him as ''contract personnel,'' adding: ''the loyalty is
money.'' ''We go where the money is,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Up From the Underground

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 350 words


A few months after the 1970 explosion in a Greenwich Village townhouse that
killed three Weathermen, their leader, Bernardine Dohrn, said, ''We became aware
that a group of outlaws who are isolated from the youth communities do not have
a sense of what is going on.''

Weather Underground, as the group was later called, never did have a sense of
what was going on. Its members went to Cuba to meet the Vietcong; they went to
Algeria to meet the P.L.O.; yet both the black and women's movements spurned
their overtures. They were everywhere and nowhere - amateurs of revolution,
self-styled urban guerrillas.

Their specialty was bombing, at which they were not adept, as evidenced by the
famous townhouse explosion that killed part of their membership. Nonetheless,
during the years of Vietnam protest, they were responsible for at least 20
intentional bombings, and several deaths. If their bombing was clumsy, their
thinking was inchoate: to read Weather Under-ground's 1974 political statement
is to drown in rhetoric. Their only real skill, in fact, was masterly
manipulation of media. Members of a small, lunatic cell, they won a place in the
national consciousness far out of proportion to their number.

Tuesday, after years of silence, Weather Underground surfaced again. Katherine
Boudin, a fugitive from the townhouse explosion, and Judith Clark, who served a
prison term in connection with the 1969 ''Days of Rage'' in Chicago, were
captured as they fled the scene of the killing of two Nyack policemen. The
officers had set up a roadblock to halt bandits who had killed one Brink's guard
and wounded two others during a $1.6 million robbery.

Although their language was invariably grandiloquent, the members of Weather
Underground have never been precise in defining The Enemy. ''Perpetrators of
global violence'' is a fair sample. The victims, however, are easily described.
Working men, white, black, parents.  Ordinary people.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MISPLACED RESOLVE IN U.S. FOREIGN POLICY

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 364 words


To the Editor:

Ronald Steel's thoughtful essay on your Oct. 7 Op-Ed page (''Buying Mideast
Allies'') pointed to a dangerous fallacy underlying the Administration's
containment policy.v.hen President Reagan said he would not allow Saudi Arabia
to become ''another Iran,'' he failed to explain just how he would prevent such
an occurrence or just what he thought had caused the Shah to fall in the first
place.

It is the Administration's deeply held belief that the Shah was toppled by Jimmy
Carter's human-rights policy. Perhaps, as George Bush said during last year's
Presidential campaign, an American statement of support for the Shah would not
have been an intrusion into Iranian politics, but does anybody really believe
that this would have deterred the mobs in Teheran? Just how far would our
leaders have us go to preserve unstable regimes, and at what price?

The idea that our international troubles are due to some lack of will or to a
lack of loyalty toward our ''friends'' in the world has found its way to other
foreign-policy issues. Vietnam, we are now told, was a potentially winnable
struggle which was lost because the Government would not go all out. Ergo, we
must follow through with unlimited support to unstable ''allies,'' no matter
what the cost, how lost the cause or, as in Vietnam, how remote the national
interest. This is called ''resolve.''

But surely there is a difference between resolve and blind devotion to a phony
security interest beyond any consideration of the costs and benefits of foreign
intervention. Like Lewis Carroll's Red Queen, they would have us running ever
faster without gaining an inch. This is not resolve but fanaticism.

All the determination the U.S. can muster will not serve a doomed Shah or prop
up an unpopular Asian regime. This is not a defeatist attitude; a winning
foreign policy begins with an understanding of what is feasible and what is
worth our effort.  GEORGE MARTIN Philadelphia, Oct. 8, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DAVID J. GILBERT'S TRAIL: ACTIVIST AND A FUGITIVE

BYLINE: By LESLIE MAITLAND

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 499 words


Like many members of the Weather Underground and other radical groups that
seized public attention in the late 1960's, David Joseph Gilbert began his
political activities in his college years with protests against the Vietnam War.

But for him, what began as social action ended in a police chase, the crash of a
getaway car and his arrest in Rockland County on robbery and murder charges.

Originally, the authorities investigating Tuesday's shootout in Rockland County
that left one guard and two police officers dead were uncertain of Mr. Gilbert's
identity. They knew only that he was not James L. Hackford, the name on a
driver's license found in his possession. Yesterday, a fingerprint check gave
them Mr. Gilbert's name and a sketchy picture of a man who had been linked to
violence in the past.

They still do not know how he obtained the driver's license in the name of a
retired New York City police officer disabled in the line of duty.

Arrested Twice Before

Identified by District Attorney Kenneth Gribetz of Rockland County as being in
his mid-30's and as having lived most recently in Cambridge, Mass., Mr. Gilbert
has been arrested twice before, in New York City and Colorado.

Last night, the New York Police Department could not describe the earlier
charges against him. But the United States Attorney's office in Denver said he
had been charged there in 1971 for assault on a peace officer and arson and that
he had become a fugitive. A Federal fugitive warrant was no longer in effect
when he was charged in the Brink's armored-car holdup with Katherine Boudin,
Judith A. Clark and Samuel Brown.

Neighbors of Miss Boudin and Miss Clark recalled his having visited both women's
Upper West Side apartments. Miss Boudin's roommate, Rita Jensen, said she had
known him as Lou Wasserman and believed him to be the father of Miss Boudin's
child and to work for a moving company.

Like both women, Mr. Gilbert was well educated. He graduated in 1966 from
Columbia College, where he majored in philosophy, and the next year attended the
New School for Social Research, the Police Department said.

Known to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the police as a longtime member
of the Students for a Democratic Society, a nationwide college activist
movement, he was also chairman of the Columbia University Independent Committee
on Vietnam, formed in 1965, when he was a junior.

In that capacity, he was one of 50 students disciplined in connection with a
campus protest that forced the cancellation of a ceremony of the school's Naval
Reserve Officers Training Corps.  Charged with playing ''an instigating,
shouting role in the noisy mob'' that blocked the door to the building where the
ceremony was scheduled, Mr. Gilbert defended himself by saying peaceful action
had been planned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of David Joseph Gilbert in 1969

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

POLICE FIND A HISTORY OF ARRESTS

BYLINE: By LESLIE MAITLAND

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 646 words


In 1969, when Katherine Boudin, Judith A. Clark, David Joseph Gilbert and
countless other college students across the country were clashing with the
police in protests against the Vietnam War, Nathaniel Burns and a score of
fellow Black Panther party members were charged with plotting to kill police
officers and dynamite department stores.

Details of the reputed conspiracy had been obtained by three undercover agents
who infiltrated the cadre of black militants in New York. The agents later
testified to hearing the Panthers plot to bomb police stations and to watching
them train in guerrilla warfare.

But Mr. Burns, arrested yesterday in the investigation into last Tuesday's
holdup of a Brink's armored truck and the killing of two police officers and a
guard, did not stand trial with the other Panthers who were prosecuted and
acquitted 10 years ago.

Escaped Brooklyn Raid

On the day that the police officers, heavily armed and wearing bulletproof
vests, rounded up the Panthers in early-morning raids, Mr. Burns escaped. The
young man, also known as Nathaniel Williams and Sekou Odinga, leaped 35 feet
from the window of his apartment on Prospect Place in Brooklyn and ran off.

Yesterday, Mr. Burns was armed and wearing a bulletproof vest, but he
surrendered after a wild chase in Queens and a gun battle with the police in
which a companion, Samuel Smith, was shot and killed.

For Mr. Smith, who was 37 and sometimes used the African name Mtajuri Sandiata,
yesterday was not the first time he had fired upon police, according to
department records. In 1970, when he, too, lived in Brooklyn, he was charged
with attempted murder in the shooting of two officers trying to question him
about a holdup, the police said.

Mr. Smith was also charged with the assault and robbery of a grocery owner who
identified him in a lineup. The Police Department last night did not know the
outcome of that case nor have much more information about either of the men.

Police Commissioner Robert J. McGuire said that Mr. Smith's body showed signs of
bullet ''trauma'' consistent with being wounded through a bulletproof vest in
recent days - giving the police reason to suspect that he might have been
involved in the Nyack shootout from which several participants got away. The
chest bruise was bandaged and a .38-caliber slug was in his pocket.

Prosecutor George L. Schneider of Essex County said he was attempting to
determine whether Mr. Burns was the same man who, under the name of Willie
Guilford, had been charged with armed robbery in New Jersey.

Investigators were also attempting to ascertain whether the two men had joined
Miss Boudin, Miss Clark and Mr. Gilbert in a conspiracy against the police.
Authorities pursuing the Brink's case have found lists naming specific officers,
duty rosters and floor plans of city precinct houses.

In the 1971 Panther conspiracy trial, Mr. Burns's name frequently came up in
testimony. He and another man, Donald Weems, had been charged with attempting to
set up a sniper post across from the Highbridge station house in the Bronx where
a bomb exploded and with engaging in a shootout with two passing patrolmen
shortly afterwards.

That 1969 shootout was the subject of several weeks of testimony from the
officers, who reported that Mr. Burns and Mr. Weems managed to escape by fleeing
into the woods near the Harlem River Drive.

Mr. Weems later pleaded guilty to helping a sniper fire on the police, becoming
the only one of the defendants to be convicted on a charge arising from the
indictment. He did not name Mr. Burns when admitting to the incident and was
never called upon to testify against him, because until yesterday, Mr. Burns
could not be found.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of suspect identified at Nathaniel Burns

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

INSULTING VIETNAM VETS

BYLINE: By Tom Carhart

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 798 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Unless something unexpected happens, ground will soon be broken for the Vietnam
veterans' memorial on the Mall here in Washington. Although I have long awaited
this moment, as it now approaches I feel only pain.

I believe that the design selected for the memorial in an open competition is
pointedly insulting to the sacrifices made for their country by all Vietnam
veterans. By this will we be remembered: a black gash of shame and sorrow,
hacked into the national visage that is the Mall.

When I arrived in Washington, in March 1980, I eagerly joined the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial Fund as a volunteer. I had earned two Purple Hearts as an
infantry platoon leader in Vietnam, and I was proud not only of my own service
but also of all those who served with me. I was especially proud of those who
gave their lives, and I saw this as the opportunity for our nation to finally
render honor that was due. Congress agreed, and authorized the Fund to build a
memorial on the Mall to ''recognize and honor'' all those who served in Vietnam.
An open competition was held to decide the memorial design and 1,421 entries
were received.

The winning design was chosen by a jury made up entirely of civilians - in other
words, people who had seen no military service in Vietnam. While this may seem
unimportant, we should reflect on it for a moment.

There were really two wars in that era: The first was a military war fought in
Vietnam where 57,000 Americans died and whose veterans the Fund is authorized by
Congress to ''recognize and honor''; the second was a political war waged here
at home.

The jurors know nothing of the real war in Vietnam - the television portrayal
was far from adequate. But the political war cut so deeply through society that
everyone had to take sides. The net result is that the design the jury chose as
the winner was necessarily a function of their perception of the war they lived
through in America. It may be that black walls sunk into a trench would be an
appropriate statement of the political war in this country. But that is not the
war whose veterans the Fund has been authorized to memorialize.

If this design is built, there will be a black wall 400 feet long, sunk 10 feet
into the ground in the form of a V. The legs of this V will be directed toward,
and form a triangle on the Mall with, the Washington Monument and the Lincoln
Memorial. These others are wellknown edifices of white marble rising in massive
splendor to honor great Amerian heroes.

The proposed design is defended on artistic grounds, but the issue is not one of
art: If Americans allow that black trench to be dug, future generations will
understand clearly what America thought of its Vietnam veterans.

There are three other memorials in Washington that are at least partly black:
the Sea Bee Memorial, the 101st Airborne Division memorial, and the Marine
Corps' Iwo Jima memorial. But these show heroic figures rising in triumph on top
of black pedestals, while the proposed Vietnam memorial is anti-heroic - a black
hole, the reward we get, and the place we have been given in our national garden
of history, for faithful service in a confused and misunderstood war.  Black
walls, the universal color of sorrow and dishonor. Hidden in a hole, as if in
shame. Is this really how America would memorialize our offering?

It may be that, in the future, all memorials to American heroes will be black
and underground. I doubt it, but even if that's true, why should we Vietnam
veterans have to be the first?

The only underground memorial I know of is a tomb. Yes, we lost 57,000, but what
of the millions of us who rendered honorable service and came home? Why can't we
have something white and traditional and above ground?

I favor the marketplace approach to decisions of this importance to the whole
nation. I believe - and I speak only for myself - that the Vietnam veterans
memorial design should get the full and fair and open hearing it deserves and
has not yet had.

President Reagan has called the nation's Vietnam experience a ''noble cause.'' I
hope that he and the rest of America do not want us to be remembered by
posterity in this way.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Tom Carhart, who is a civilian lawyer at the Pentagon, was graduated from West
Point in 1966. This article is adapted from his recent testimony before the
United States Fine Arts Commission. Afterward, the commission reaffirmed its
decision to proceed with the proposed design for the Vietnam veterans memorial.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
Gristle In The Wind

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 850 words


When I was 11 and briefly commanded the allegiance of four or five 8- and
9-year-olds, being of bureaucratic mentality I decided to organize them into a
gang. I composed and issued membership cards and drew up rules specifying
degrees of punishment for various derelictions such as losing your membership
card and interrupting the leader when he was talking.

One evening when everybody but me was bored with bureaucratic details and
loafing on the sidewalk, certain hotheads complained that the gang was too
passive and never did anything, so to calm this challenge to leadership I
ordered them to go around on Pratt Street and find some people we could fight
with.

What was a gang for? When they dispersed I settled onto the front steps to muse
upon the lonely burden of leadership. Before long they all came running back
flushed with success. They had found some guys around on Pratt Street willing to
fight, and these guys were even then assembling a few other guys, and soon they
would all arrive to fight.

Arrive they did a few minutes later. A meaner, nastier-looking group of brutes I
had never seen. The smallest, though scarcely more than 15, was constructed like
a stevedore. His fist felt like a sledgehammer when it landed on my nose.

Despite a craven suit for peace, I went to school next day with bruised ribs, a
black eye and a loose tooth. Some months later, studying Theodore Roosevelt in
history class, I analyzed my error correctly.

Speak softly, carry a big stick was T.R.'s advice. I had blustered loudly and
carried a limber twig. I am reminded of all this by the curious behavior of the
Reagan people since their arrival in Washington.

They came speaking loudly at the Russians about their muscularity and speaking
loudly to everybody about what a weak stick they were carrying. Even as an
11-year-old leading a prepubescent street gang, I would never have considered
this kind of policy.

Imagine the instructions that would have been issued to the gang: ''O.K.,
everybody, I want you to go around on Pratt Street and tell any kids you see
that we're going to beat the bejeebers out of them one of these days.''

''Yippee!'' from the gang as they start to run off.  ''Just a minute, everybody.
I want you to tell them something else too. Tell them I weigh only 79 pounds and
am in terrible shape but plan to send away for the Charles Atlas body-building
program as soon as I get the money, so in two or three years I'll be built like
a tank.''

I know what Wisengoff would have said, though he was only 8 years old.  ''You're
nuts!'' Wisengoff would have said. ''Tell them that and they're going to come
around here and cream the bunch of us before we can get in shape with the
Charles Atlas body-building equipment.''

Whether the United States military weighs only 79 pounds and is built like a
creampuff is doubtful, of course. The loud talk about carrying a weak stick is
partly an expression of genuine concern about the drift of military policy and
partly a political device to scare up popular support for fattening the Pentagon
budget.

The Reagan people worked it effectively in the 1980 campaign to create an
impression that the Democrats had imperiled the country's safety. They were
clever enough, however, to suggest that the moment of danger was still a few
years off - the moment when the infamous ''window of vulnerability'' would open
to Soviet missiles - and that fast Republican action might yet save us.

Historians may recall the Kennedy campaign of 1960 working the same political
territory with its terrifying ''missile gap,'' which if not closed at immense
expense would leave us exposed to catastrophe.

After a few weeks in office, however, Kennedy found that closing the ''missile
gap'' would place dreadful strains on his budget, and the Democrats announced
that they had made a mistake and the missile gap didn't exist -which, events
proved, it didn't - and it was forgotten.

This did not stop the Kennedy Administration from a policy of extreme
bellicosity with its failed attempt to invade Cuba through the Bay of Pigs, its
threat of nuclear war during the Cuban missile crisis and its commitment of
American prestige to victory in Vietnam.

Unlike Kennedy, President Reagan refuses to put his ''window of vulnerability''
in the storehouse of old campaign artifacts, but insists on broadcasting it as
evidence of American frailty while at the same time loudly talking about how
tough we shall be with Moscow once we close the window.

He has rewritten Teddy Roosevelt's dictum. Speak loudly and let them guess
whether you're a 79-pound windbag or 195 pounds of gristle - that's the new
formulation. The guys around on Pratt Street would have scouted out the answer
to that one in short order. Surely the Russians can too, let's hope.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

INDEX;
Index;
International

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 945 words


Greece decides to upgrade status of P.L.O. office in Athens 2
Budget cuts threaten cultural ex- change programs 3
Iran's Speaker claims victory over leftist guerrillas 3
Around the World 4
Excerpts from Polish Govern- ment statement 5
Conference ends without agree- ment on antipoverty strategy 6

Government/Politics
Social Security legislation in diffi- culty in House 7
Reagan aide suggests states and localities raise taxes 10
Florio and Kean offer programs to curb violent crime 26
Fund disclosure ordered on prison bond issue campaign 27

Washington Talk
Briefing 10
Palestinian's man in Washington spreads his people's message 10

Style
Consumer Saturday: Pursuing small claims 16
Cashmere sweaters: A guide to best buys 16
De Gustibus: Lowly tea bag con- quers the world 16
Bargain time at the Lighthouse 16
School dress grows more conser- vative 16

General
Around the Nation 7
Clue by detective led to two sus- pects in Brink's robbery 8
Defendants are held without bail in Rockland County killings 9
Jimmy Carter may drop plans to sue Washington Post 10

Education/Welfare
University of Pennsylvania inau- gurates a president 7
Paul Robeson honored at Colum- bia University dinner 27

Religion
Pope names conservative as in- terim head of Jesuit order 2

Arts/Entertainment
Joffrey Ballet performs Jiri Kylian's ''Transfigured Night'' 11
Returned to Spain, Picasso's ''Guernica'' is on display 11
''Sixty Stories'' by Donald Bar- thelme reviewed 13
Veterans protest PBS documen- tary to be telecast Nov. 11 48

Obituaries
Edward Caton, dancer, teacher and choreographer 15
Barbara Rhodes, a literary agent 15

Sports
Yanks face Valenzuela without Jackson and Nettles in lineup 17
Starting role for Smith of Dodgers depends on his arm 17
Gossage thriving in postseason play without losing control 17
Gomez and Graham ready to challenge Salazar in marathon 17
Nets and Knicks close to a Lucas- Williams deal 17
Islanders beat Capitals, 4-2; Bossy and Tonelli each score 2 18
Peat Moss wins Kelso Handicap for 2d straight year 18
Rick Kuhn denied motion in point- shaving trial 18
Dave Anderson on Valenzuela and Righetti 19

Features/Notes
Going Out Guide 12
Saturday News Quiz 13
Sports People 18
Notes on People 26
About New York 27

News Analysis
R.W. Apple Jr. on the first vic- tory of Britain's alliance party 1
William Serrin on consequences of controllers' strike 7

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 22

Metal and nuclear safety When in doubt, stamp it out A final West Side
compromise Letters 22
Russell Baker: just gristle in the wind 23
Sydney H. Schanberg: 'I live here and you don't' 23
Tom Carhart: insulting Vietnam vets 23
Constantine Papas: autumn, thy name is, uh, autumn 23
William French Smith: immigra- tion reform 23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: diagram

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV NOTEBOOK;
VETERANS PROTEST PBS NOV.11 SPECIAL

BYLINE: By TONY SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 48, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words


One of the unfortunate byproducts of public broadcasting's marginal existence is
that its most powerful promotional tool must often be controversy. In contrast
to the commercial networks, PBS simply does not have the money to advertise
widely and promote all its programs. But there is nothing quite like vocal
opposition to a program to pique the interest of potential viewers.

Last year, for example, the Saudi Arabian Government raised strong objections to
''Death of a Princess'' in the ''World'' series. It was a re-creation of an
incident in which a Saudi princess and her lover were reportedly executed on the
grounds of adultery. Pumped up by front-page headlines about the protests, the
program became the fourth most popular in PBS history.

Another PBS project is beginning to stir opposition. On Veterans Day, Nov. 11,
at 9 P.M., public stations including WNET-TV in New York, have scheduled a
two-hour special, ''The Vietnam Veteran: A Matter of Life and Death.''

In Several Segments

Produced by WGBH-TV of Boston, it is highlighted by an hourlong documentary,
''Frank: A Portrait of a Vietnam Veteran,'' and includes a shorter documentary
about the wives of Vietnam veterans and special reports on black veterans and on
veterans in prison.

It is ''Frank,'' first shown on WBGH in May, that has provoked on outcry from
two veterans' group.  ''The individual on the program is totally unlike the vast
majority of Vietnam veterans,'' Arthur J. Fellwock, commander in chief of the
Veterans of Foreign Wars, wrote this week to Lawrence S. Grossman, president of
PBS. Referring to Frank, Mr. Fellowck said, ''He admits to being a dope addict
prior to entry into service, and while on duty a war criminal, an alcoholic, and
unable to cope with his service experiences.''

Writing as the representative of the V.F.W.'s 2.6 million members, Mr. Fellwock
characterized the broadcast of the program on Veterans Day as a ''travesty to
those who served honorably during the Vietnam War.''

'Powerful Retelling'

His sentiments were echoed in a letter sent to Mr. Grossman this week by Jack W.
Flynt, national commander of the American Legion. Mr Flynt suggested that the
showing of ''Frank'' would be ''perceived by many as justification to challenge
the concept of serving the nation.''

In his reply to Mr. Fellwock, Mr. Grossman called the documentary a ''powerful
retelling of one man's reaction to the war,'' adding that the program ''in no
way implied that Frank's experiences were universal ones.'' Mr. Grossman also
said that the show had received a strong positive viewer response when it was
broadcast in May.

According to Peter McGee, program manager of WGBH, the station set up telephone
banks to receive calls after the program, and nearly 300 were received, most of
them from veterans, and all but a few of them were laudatory.

Mr. McGee said telephone banks were being set up around the country for the Nov.
11 showing. ''It's true that we're not celebrating Veterans Day with patriotic
songs and hymns to past greatness,'' he said. ''The two hours focus on veterans
who need help, and it's intended for them. If that's treason, we mean to make
the most of it.''
Independent Women

If prime-time television truly reflects the temper of the times, as network
executives are fond of saying, then the women's movement seems to have reached
the masses. This fall, no less than a halfdozen shows feature independent,
career women, ranging from Helen Shaver playing an ambitious, unmarried
television reporter on CBS-TV's ''Jessica Novak'' to Pam Dawber of ABC-TV's
''Mork & Mindy,'' who retains her job at a television station this season,
leaving her husband, Mork (Robin Williams), at home to take care of their new
child.

But will audiences buy the new woman? While most of the network's new fall shows
have yet to begin, CBS had a remarkable experience two weeks ago with a movie
about two women police officers, ''Cagney and Lacey.'' Competing against a
baseball playoff on NBC-TV and the season's debut of ''Taxi'' and ''Bosom
Buddies'' on ABC, ''Cagney and Lacey'' garnered a 42 percent share of the
viewing audience and finished as the week's fourth highest-rated prime-time
program.

Perhaps fittingly, the movie got a boost from Ms. magazine, which features its
stars, Loretta Swit and Tyne Daly, on its cover this month. In addition, to help
promote the program -and the magazine - Gloria Steinem, an editor of Ms.,
appeared with Miss Swit on the ''Donahue'' program.

CBS is hoping to turn ''Cagney and Lacey'' into a series and to use it as a
midseason replacement.  In the meantime, ABC has ordered four one-hour episodes
of another comedy with feminist overtones, ''9 to 5,'' an adaptation of the film
about three secretaries battling a sexist male boss. Jane Fonda, who starred in
the film with Dolly Parton and Lily Tomlin, will be one of the executive
producers.
News Ratings Changing

NBC may still be mired in last place in the audience-popularity ratings, but its
New York station, WNBC-TV, seems to have climbed back into contention, at least
in news.

Last month, WNBC won the Associated Press award for the ''best regularly
scheduled newscast,'' an award that the station had not won since 1976. For the
October ''ratings book,'' WNBC's 6 P.M. newscast bested its competition at
WABC-TV and WCBS-TV for the first time since May 1968.

In an exceptionally close race, WNBC received a 9.7 rating from A.C. Nielsen,
compared to a 9.6 for WABC and 9.3 for WCBS. For WNBC, that represented a jump
of nearly three ratings points over last October. At 11 P.M., WABC was the
victor, with an 11.5 share, compared to 10.5 for WNBC and 9.5 for WCBS.

WCBS was the only one of the three to suffer a substantial decline compared to
last year. Its 11 P.M. news was off 1.5 points. However, the ratings for the
news programs at all three are substantially affected by the strength of the
shows that lead into them. This month, WABC had the highest rated lead-in
programs to the 11 P.M.  slot, and WNBC had the strongest lead-in for its 6 P.M.
edition.

In WNBC's case, the lead-in program to the 6 P.M. newscast is not a network
program, but its own ''Live at 5,'' a news and celebrityinterview program that
has become the most popular in its time slot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOTEBOOK: 3 CRITICISMS FOR EDITORS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, Oct. 22


Over the last three days, the editors in United States newspapers have been
berated by, among others, Canadians, the New Right and critics of the news
media.

The Canadians complained that, for the most part, the United States press did
not report about its northern neighbors and, when it did, the articles conveyed
stereotypes rather than reality.

The New Right offers much the same critique, while conceding that the coverage
has increased since last year's Presidential campaign.  The critics of the news
media painted with an even broader brush, saying the press routinely
underreported, overreported or misreported most important events.

That advice was helpful, said Tom Koenninger, editor of The Columbian in
Vancouver, Wash., but not quite so useful as that he got from his Chinese
fortune cookie last night, which read:

''Say little and write even less is always a safe policy.''

Advice about food was one priority for the 350 journalists and their families
attending the annual Associated Press Managing Editors convention here. They
traded notes about the restaurants of the Yorkville section with as much vigor
as they exchanged reports on how well they were doing with foreign news,
minority employment, writing quality or using cable television to reach wider
audiences.

All the latter subjects were on the formal agenda, but experienced press
convention-goers said that much of the true business of the meeting was the
private conversations about who was succeeding and how, what jobs might be open
and other potential rewards of the craft.

Those rewards were detailed with unusual precision in a study of the earnings of
these supervisory editors. . The top salary was $180,000 a year, reported by the
executive editor of a Northeastern paper with a circulation of more than
250,000. The average pay for 256 editors, executive editors and managing editors
responding to a questionnaire was $37,698 and the low was $13,000.

More than half the editors said that they also got performance bonuses,
averaging $5,000, but ranging up to $60,000 for one whose family happens to own
the business.

Robert W. Ritter of The Nevada State Journal and Reno Evening Gazette, who
assembled the data, said he was presenting the material ''with a minimum of
interpretation,'' leaving it to others to make of it what they would. One
managing editor, asking for the same anonymity as the questionnaire respondents,
said he could imagine several ways to use it the next time he talked to his
publisher.

The tally is in on the Camel Scoreboard. The editors vetoed, by a vote of 124 to
63, the proposed package of advertising surrounding the Monday morning sports
scores. Even those whose papers would accept the advertisement said that it
would blur differences between editorial and advertising material.

R.J. Reynolds, which spends more than $100 million on newspaper advertising, has
said it is going ahead with the idea in more than 100 newspapers. But it is
running into some resistance over its unwillingness to pay for the full amount
of the space the advertisement and scores would occupy.

Albert McCready of The Portland Oregonian said he was in favor of the
advertisement because it would mean more space for other sports coverage and
involve only tabular material assembled by clerks, not reporters. ''I don't mind
the Camel having slipped his nose under the tent,'' he observed, because ''I'm
not going to let the other part of him in.''

The Rev. Jerry Falwell, the founder of Moral Majority, was scheduled to be on
the New Right panel discussion today but canceled at the last minute. Skeptical
editors suggested he did not want to face the potentially hostile gathering, but
his pinch-hitter, Cal Thomas, told them that Mr. Falwell simply had had another,
more pressing engagement. In any event, Mr. Thomas; Representative Mark
Siljander, Republican of Michigan; Edward McAteer of the Religious Roundtable
and Paul Weyrich of the Committee for the Survival of a Free Congress adequately
represented his point of view. Why, they asked, was the press sounding alarms
about fundamentalist churchmen who were taking a political role while it was
silent when the liberal clergy did the same on issues like the Vietnam War?

But Senator Paul Tsongas, Democrat of Massachusetts, said it was ironic for the
news media to be attacked as the enemy of the New Right when it had produced
such men as Mr. Thomas, Mr. Weyrich and Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North
Carolina. With that kind of lineup, said Senator Tsongas, the media ''sounds
like the farm system.''

A number of papers publish current affairs quizzes that the editors say are fun
for readers. One speaker, Peter Schwartz, a California ''futurist,'' used their
own toy against them.

''Remember Angola?'' he asked. ''Who were our allies, who were our enemies and
who won?'' Not a hand was raised to disturb the embarrassed silence of a group
that routinely had put war articles from that African country all over their
front pages.

P.S. - Mr. Schwartz's answer: ''The Red Chinese and the French were on our side;
the Russians, the British and the Belgians were on the other side, and Cuban
mercenaries are guarding Gulf refineries.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ACT I: THE PULITZER, ACT II: BROADWAY

BYLINE: By ROBERT BERKVIST

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1664 words


How does the world look to a young playwright whose first fulllength work wins
the Pulitzer Prize for drama? Beth Henley, who was awarded the prize last April
for ''Crimes of the Heart'' without ever having had a play on Broadway, says it
looks simultaneously ''wonderful'' and ''pretty terrifying.''

In New York for rehearsals of her play, which will finally make its Broadway
debut at the Golden on Nov. 4, Miss Henley looked composed but sounded worried
as she brooded over whether ''Crimes'' would live up to its reputation. The
play, which concerns the tangled, frequently bizarre lives and loves of three
eccentric sisters in a small Mississippi town, has been praised for its offbeat
humor and compassionate view of human frailty.

''I hate the pressure of feeling that the play has to be seen as really great,
instead of just an enjoyable evening in the theater,'' Miss Henley said, in the
soft drawl that proclaims her Mississippi roots. In that respect, she went on,
winning fame at such an early stage in her career had drawbacks as well as
delights. True, she became the heroine of her hometown of Jackson and suddenly
found herself being courted as a writer. On the other hand, all her future work
would receive the intense scrutiny accorded ''the Pulitzer Prize-winning author
of etc., etc.''

Her first reaction was to stow the award certificate in a drawer.  ''I don't
want to keep it out where I can see it,'' she said, laughing. ''It's too
intimidating.'' Judging from events, however, Miss Henley is far too busy to be
intimidated.

''I had two other plays written before the award came along,'' she explained,
adding that both of those works are now slated for production. One, ''The Miss
Firecracker Concert,'' is already in rehearsal at the Studio Theater in Buffalo.
The other, titled ''The Wake of Jamie Foster,'' is under option by Ulu Grosbard
and will go into rehearsal Jan. 1 at Connecticut's Hartford Stage. Meanwhile,
Miss Henley's first screenplay, ''The Moon Watcher,'' is scheduled to be
produced by Jonathan Demme.

In addition, she has started ''collecting ideas'' for a new play, although -what
with shuttling between Buffalo and Broadway - she hasn't had much time to work
on it. ''I'm afraid I'll wreck it by talking too much about it,'' she said,
''but it's going to be about a debutante in Jackson, Miss.''

Miss Henley's favorite setting is the South, for several reasons.  For one
thing, it's the land she knows best. For another, she says, ''if a play is set
in the South, it can be kind of eccentric and people will accept it. The
language can be more poetic, too.'' Indeed, when ''Crimes of the Heart'' was
staged Off Broadway at the Manhattan Theater Club last December, Frank Rich
found echoes of Flannery O'Connor and Eudora Welty in in what he called Miss
Henley's ''Gothic humor.''

There are autobiographical echoes as well, although the playwright denies any
direct parallels with her own life and experience. For example, Miss Henley
herself has three sisters but says they were not models for the three loony
MaGrath sisters in ''Crimes of the Heart.'' ''The feelings are kind of
autobiographical,'' she explained, ''the business of how sisters relate, or bear
grudges - things like that. But none of the events depicted in the play ever
happened to my family, although some of them were things I had heard of.''

''Crimes of the Heart'' did not exactly leap from Miss Henley's desk into the
limelight. The playwright says she finished the work in 1978 and sent it off to
a number of regional theaters, among them San Francisco's highly regarded ACT
company, all of whom rejected it.  Then a friend and fellow playwright, Rick
Bailey, read ''Crimes'' and sent a copy of the script to Jon Jory's Actors
Theater of Louisville, as an entry in that theater's annual Festival of New
American Plays. (Mr. Bailey's Vietnam War play, ''The Bridgehead,'' was a winner
at Louisville in 1977. The Actors Theater has also introduced D.L. Coburn's
''The Gin Game,'' James McClure's ''Lone Star'' and Marsha Norman's ''Getting
Out.'')

''The fact that Rick sent in my play may have helped, since they already knew
him and his work,'' Miss Henley said, ''but they're real good about reading all
the plays submitted to them.'' They were ''real good'' about Miss Henley's play,
which was read, approved and duly presented by the Actors Theater in February
1979. The reviews were good, and ''Crimes'' went on to be produced at several
other regional theaters.

By this time Miss Henley had an agent who thought highly of the play and sent it
out on a new round of submissions. ''Despite Louisville, it was turned down all
over town,'' she said. ''I guess it's not an easy play for people to pick up the
tone of - to know whether it's funny or sad. Even Lynne Meadow said no the first
time.  She reread it when Melvyn Bernhardt said he wanted to direct it, and
that's how it came to be done at the Manhattan Theater Club.''

As it turned out, ''Crimes of the Heart,'' directed by Mr.  Bernhardt, who
staged ''Da'' on Broadway, opened to rave reviews at the MTC last December and
quickly sold out its limited run. A month later, the Broadway production was
announced, along with the news that its three principals, Lizbeth Mackay, Mary
Beth Hurt and Mia Dillon, would return to play the sisters, once again under Mr.
Bernhardt's direction. The Pulitzer followed in April. Six months later, Miss
Henley is inclined to dismiss the process that led to her discovery as simply
''luck.''

''Not to denigrate my play or anything, but all this acclaim is just the way the
cards happened to fall,'' she said matter-of-factly. ''Theater is such a
business now that it's got nothing to do with art or good work. My kind of
writing happens to be salable these days.  I'm sure there are a lot of talented
people out there who aren't writing plays but working in factories while they
wait for someone to 'discover' their stuff.''

There are Broadway producers who insist that good work always comes to the fore,
that there are no undiscovered playwrights of demonstrable talent laboring
undiscovered in musty garrets or, for that matter, factories. What does Miss
Henley say to that view? In a word, ''Baloney! Look at all the garbage that gets
put on,'' she said derisively.

''The theater makes it pretty hard for a writer,'' she went on.  ''People can be
real mean about your plays. I don't blame some writers for turning to Hollywood
for money and praise.'' Miss Henley insists that she herself will never forsake
Broadway for Hollywood, although she says she has already made a movie deal for
''Crimes of the Heart.'' An ideal arrangement, in her eyes, would be to keep
writing plays - ''because that's what I like to do'' - and then reap larger
rewards ''by making them into screenplays.''

Miss Henley, who now lives in California, nurtured her love for the stage at
Southern Methodist University in Dallas, where she majored in theater - not
playwriting, but acting. (Among other S.M.U.  theatrical alumni are the
aforementioned Messrs. Bailey and McClure, and Jack Heifner, author of the
long-running Off Broadway hit ''Vanities.) She wrote her first play, a one-act
called ''Am I Blue?,'' when she was a sophomore and finally saw it performed
during her senior year.

After graduation, still thinking of becoming an actress, she moved to Los
Angeles only to find herself part of an army of unemployed hopefuls. She turned
to writing. ''I didn't like the feeling of being at everyone's mercy,'' she
said, ''so I decided to do something creative. Of course, everyone in Los
Angeles is working on a screenplay, so what I did wasn't bizarre at all. But no
one at the studios would read my screenplay because I didn't have an agent, so I
thought I would write a stage play that might at least get performed in a small
theater somewhere. That's when I wrote 'Crimes of the Heart.' ''

Against astronomical odds, both her first screenplay and her first full-length
stage play have found their way into production - a fact that virtually
guarantees her a busy career at the typewriter. Even so, she hasn't altogether
given up on being an actress, at least once in a while. ''I acted in a play in
Los Angeles last summer,'' she said, ''a radical farce about the Depression of
the 1980's in which I played a shopping bag lady. I had a great time and I hope
I can do something like that again. In a way, acting a role is the same as
creating characters when you write a play. It also gives you a feeling for
what's theatrical.''

Miss Henley says she begins a new play by first fleshing out the characters and
their relationships, then mapping out the first scene in great detail. ''The
rest is really sketchy,'' she said, ''and the ending is just a blur in my mind.
But once I start writing the dialogue, I've virtually got the play written.''

She is impatient with those who accuse women playwrights of writing works that
are identifiably ''women's plays'' because of their themes and, therefore, might
be of less than universal interest. ''Women's problems are people's problems,''
she declared. ''There are certain subjects I mightn't get into, simply because I
don't have the necessary knowledge, but I don't think my being a woman limits my
concerns.''

Does she think ''Crimes of the Heart'' is identifiable as having been written by
a woman? ''Probably,'' she replied, with some heat, ''but I don't think that's
such a bad thing, do you?'' b

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Beth Henley photo of Lizbeth Mackay, Mary Beth
Hurt, Mia Dillon

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NUCLEAR FEARS STIR EUROPE AND STRAIN THE ALLIANCE

BYLINE: By R.W.APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1317 words


LONDON THREE comments from three European officials, all of them swimmers in the
mainstream of politics and public opinion and none of them intemperate or
demagogic, suggest the mounting anxiety in many parts of this continent over the
prospect of nuclear cataclysm.

At the British Labor Party's annual conference a month ago, Alex Kitson, a
Scottish trade unionist serving as the conference chairman, roused the crowd
with the observation that when the United States and the Soviet Union speak of
limited war, ''they mean limited to us'' - in Western Europe.

Meeting with American reporters, a Dutch Cabinet member wondered aloud whether
citizens of New York would react much differently from those of the Netherlands,
if told that nuclear weapons in large numbers were to be based on Long Island.
And during a seminar on the Atlantic Alliance, a West German diplomat observed
that the United States had placed greater hopes in detente than Western Europe
had and was therefore behaving like a spurned suitor, while the Europeans' more
modest hopes remained more or less intact.

However uncomfortable or incomprehensible the Reagan Administration may find it,
a new spirit is abroad in Europe - stronger in some places than others,
different in important ways from country to country, but growing almost
everywhere. It is creating a climate far less favorable to American policy and
making life miserable for politicians who believe deeply in the goals of the
alliance.
Outvoted at NATO

It was in this context that President Reagan's remark last weekend -
entertaining the possibility of a limited nuclear battle ''without it bringing
either one of the major powers to pushing the button'' - attracted so much
interest in Europe. The point was not that he said anything new. What was
upsetting was the belief that he was restating what many Europeans feared had
been American policy all along. The uproar recalled the reaction to Henry
Kissinger's remark in 1979 that Washington should not be expected to defend its
European allies with strategic nuclear weapons at the risk of exposing American
cities to attack and to ''the destruction of our civilization.''

President Reagan's statement brought a routine response from Leonid I. Brezhnev,
the Soviet leader. He challenged Mr. Reagan to reject ''the very idea of nuclear
attack as a criminal one'' - a formulation that would leave the Soviet Union
with a large advantage in troops, tanks and planes in Europe in the event of
conflict.

Attempting to reassure the allies, Mr. Reagan added later that the United States
regarded a military threat to Western Europe as ''a threat to the United States
itself'' and that ''in a nuclear war, all mankind would lose.'' Pointing to the
375,000 American servicemen in Europe as guaranteeing the commitment, Mr. Reagan
said, ''The essence of United States nuclear strategy is that no aggressor
should believe that the use of nuclear weapons in Europe could reasonably be
limited to Europe.''

But by then, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger had been outvoted at a
meeting of NATO defense ministers. They agreed to scrap plans to deploy new
theater nuclear weapons in Western Europe, if the Soviet Union withdrew its
SS-20's from Eastern Europe. Moscow rejects such an exchange, but if the vote
had little substantive importance, it was symbolically significant as a measure
of European politicians' deeply felt need to appease the antinuclear movement
that threatens many of their careers.

Some European critics contend that Ronald Reagan likes to rattle sabers and is
determined to prove that American defeats in Vietnam and Iran were an
aberration. He is not seriously interested in disarmament, they insist, and
cannot be trusted to make decisions about the use of nuclear weapons,
particularly the cruise and Pershing-2 missiles to be based in Western Europe.
Some of the critics are pacifists or neutralists. Some have economic interests
in shrinking from anything that might disrupt profitable trading patterns with
Eastern Europe. Some have a social philosophy that finds spending billions on
weapons abhorrent when they see a pressing need to finance alleviation of hunger
and suffering. Some are politically naive. And most assuredly, Soviet agents and
Moscowdominated European Communists have done all they could to stir the
cauldron.
A Shared Horror

But what is being called the European peace movement is dominated by none of
these groups. It is showing signs of developing into a mass movement that may
come to resemble 1960's-style opposition to the Vietnam war in the United
States. Mainly it is based on a shared horror at the prospect of a holocaust
that the critics consider cannot be justified by any political goal or acts.
Relatively few of them consider the Soviet Union a benign presence in Europe.
But most of them apparently believe that Moscow faces such awesome problems -
Poland, Afghanistan, food shortages, the succession to the leadership - that it
desperately needs an arms-reduction agreement. So they tend to take Soviet
appeals for negotiations far more seriously than what they regard as Mr.
Reagan's grudging agreement to talks, coupled with the insistence that the
United States must rapidly rearm.

The antinuclear campaigners draw strength from different elements.  In the
Netherlands, where a deadlock over deployment of cruise missiles has all but
paralyzed political life, Protestant and Roman Catholic churches have taken a
leading role. Churches have also been active in West Germany. In Britain,
remnants of the old Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament have helped to recommit the
Labor Party to unilateralism and to proselytize a significant segment of the
Liberal Party.

In Greece, the personal political history of Andreas Papandreou seems to have
played an important part in the foreign policy platform on which his Socialist
Party won last week. Mr. Papandreou's jousts with the Central Intelligence
Agency in the 1960's - among other things, the left charged C.I.A. involvement
in the overthrow of a government headed by his father, George - probably has
figured in his nationalist antipathy to NATO and American bases.

But in almost every country, considerable segments of the public have
demonstrated opposition to American policy. Crowd counts have obvious limits as
accurate political barometers, but West German activists turned out a quarter of
a million people not long ago for an antinuclear rally and yesterday more than
100,000 Britons marched for similar reasons. In Italy, after it became known
that cruise missiles would be stationed in Sicily, 70,000 protesters marched
across the plain between Assisi and Perugia, the terrain of Saint Francis.

Speaking in London last week, and in radio and television interviews, Mr.
Weinberger stated the American case with considerable vigor. ''There is not a
wide-enough perception either in Europe or the United States,'' he said, ''of
the growing disparity in the East-West (military) balance.'' The real risk, he
added, ''is destruction through inaction.'' In Britain, at least, he probably
undid some of the damage. But Europeans want to be listened to, not lectured to,
and there is little sense on this side of the Atlantic that the Reagan
Administration is prepared to do that. The Guardian, noting Mr. Weinberger's
fondness for quotations, editorially offered him one from Samuel Johnson: ''A
man, sir, should keep his friendships in constant repair.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Andreas Papandreou photo of Defense Secretary
Caspar W. Weinberger photo of West German anti-war demonstrators

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A BOMBER'S CONFESSIONS

BYLINE: By EDEN ROSS LIPSON; Eden Ross Lipson is an editor of The New York Times
Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1473 words


GROWING UP UNDERGROUND By Jane Alpert.  372 pp. New York: William Morrow & Co.
$13.95.

JANE ALPERT offers her confessional memoir, ''Growing Up Underground,'' ''not in
the service of any particular ideology ...but rather to set the record
straight'' about both her personal role in the bombings of buildings in New York
City in 1969 at the height of anti-Vietnam War activity and her life underground
in the early 1970's. The statute of limitations for her criminal activities has
run out, so readers still following the ins and outs of radical politics - or
the feminist circles in which Miss Alpert has subsequently been active - will
find many details about specific incidents, as well as a roster of personalities
whose names were once familiar.

But the book may reach an unintended audience far larger than those anxious for
the testimony of one of the few well-known women activists in a period
remarkable, in retrospect, for its male chauvinism. In indefatigably earnest
tones, Miss Alpert has written a classic ''bodice ripper.'' She describes
herself as the same kind of affectless young woman of low self-esteem but lusty
yearnings who is attracted to rakish but unbalanced men in mass-market romances.
Although her swashbuckling pirate speaks in revolutionary rhetoric, the plot is
familiar to every dime-store dreamer.

Jane Alpert ''wanted something cataclysmic to happen in my life.'' She tells
how, in the fall of 1968, as a nice but rebellious 2l-yearold Jewish girl from
Queens, N.Y., with an honors degree in classics from Swarthmore College, she
''met Sam Melville for the first time at the CAC (Community Action Coalition)
demonstration. ... Tall and broad-shouldered, carelessly dressed in jeans and a
work shirt with the top two buttons open. ... I was about to say, 'I've never
met a revolutionary before,' but stopped myself in time. ... If only he would
take me in his arms! ... I wanted nothing so much as to surrender completely to
his power: to lie inert beneath him as he stroked and kissed me into a frenzy.
... Sam mesmerized me that night. ... 'You're a slut,' he murmured. ... He
turned the insult into a compliment. His voice suggested helpless lust, as
though his accusation of wanton sexuality were also an admission of my power
over him.''

But ''he was not going to let me forget that he was a revolutionary - that he
had a grand commitment that made our own affair, however exciting, seem puny.''
So ''I became drawn into the world of radical politics which I had admired from
the outside for so many years. ...  If (Sam) had been the most conventional,
straitlaced businessman, I would have found his affection hard to resist. The
combination of sexual love and radical ideology was more than irresistible. It
consumed me. After a few weeks with Sam, it was obvious to me that I was going
to quit graduate school.''

They moved downtown, and Miss Alpert ''felt my pulse sing with the confidence of
living at the very heart of events, one of the places where the approaching
revolution would be felt first.'' At home ''I was glad to do whatever gave Sam
pleasure. When I found that murmuring 'Yes, Master' and 'No, Master' ...
sometimes brought him to orgasm, I invented more elaborate dialogue. ... I
believed that any game that excited him - no matter how potentially humiliating
- had to be in my interest.'' Soon, however, ''I began to suspect that some of
Sam's hostility to 'the system' was an inability to deal with himself. I tried
to quell my suspicions, but like rubber ducks in the bathtub, they kept bouncing
to the surface. Could this revolutionary I loved actually be a mere drifter,
incapable of commitment - to a job, a person, or even to his precious
revolution?'' Still, ''the threat of being left out'' of Sam's world led her to
quit her job in mid-April.

To ascribe all the convulsive changes of those brief months to her obsessive
love for Sam Melville is, judging by either the political rhetoric of the time
or contemporary standards of feminist selfrespect, a stunningly revisionist
posture. Miss Alpert brackets the events of 1969 with a long warm-up about her
misunderstood childhood and an account of her life underground, which seems to
have been largely supported, financially and philosophically, by her parents and
friends. The narrative lends disturbing new meaning to the phrase ''sexual
politics,'' and the absence of analysis will be especially distressing to those
who once saw Miss Alpert as the model of an intellectual revolutionary. But her
girlish diary continues, untroubled by perspective, reflection or insight.

''Thrillingly cut off from the world I had grown up in ... I had wanted to
sacrifice myself to a cause that was larger than my own identity.'' She says,
''I took it for granted that we (Miss Alpert and her friends) would make some
extraordinary difference to the movement.''

Then, according to Miss Alpert, Sam Melville, acting alone on impulse, left a
bomb in a Marine Midland bank, injuring 20 employees. ''His behavior had nothing
to do with the ideology we supposedly shared. He had given no thought to what
Marine Midland meant to the left or to the general public, nor had he thought of
how he might explain his action. ... Because I had threatened to abandon him,
even for one night, by sleeping with another man, he had taken revenge on a
skyscraperful of people.''

Miss Alpert's response was inspired by ''pure competitiveness.  Seeing Sam fail
inspired me to take over and do it better. Most of the tasks associated with the
bombings were extremely simple and required less coordination than preparing a
dinner party. Rather than leave the stolen dynamite in Sam's less-than-competent
care, from then on I placed myself at the head of the conspiracy.''

Have dynamite, must use. So on Sept. 18, ''I boarded a bus headed downtown. I
was wearing a white A-line dress, kid gloves (to avoid leaving fingerprints),
and a touch of makeup. ... I felt as I imagined I would on my wedding day. ... I
cushioned my purse on my lap, protecting it from the bus's sudden jolts ...
(and) felt very calm, as when the first rush of an acid trip subsides.'' She
planted the bomb at Foley Square, went home and watched the lights go out in the
Federal Building at 2 A.M. ''At that moment my joy was undiluted. I had shown
Sam that he didn't have to act alone; I had caused real injury to the work of
the U.S. Army; and I had, perhaps, brought revolution an inch or two closer.''
The order of emphasis is revealing.

It was an exciting time. Miss Alpert was working at Rat, a radical underground
newspaper, a vantage point from which it seemed that ''the bombings had made us
the toast of the movement and the talk of all New York. ... Weighed in the
balance against the fear of arrest was the anticipated thrill that we would soon
be openly celebrated as heroes.''

Jane Alpert, Sam Melville and two others were arrested in November 1969. Miss
Alpert was released on bail, and her jailhouse meetings with Melville ''were
replays of bad acid trips.  ... He would thrust his hand up my dress or pull me
onto his lap, as though a display of sexual dominance might restore his
self-esteem.'' In May 1970, Jane Alpert, on the advice of others, including
Weatherman Mark Rudd and poet Robin Morgan (a feminist and her subsequent
mentor), forfeited the $20,000 bail her parents had posted. She spent the next
four years moving around the United States, living underground, leading a
restricted and even boring life of the sort that Marge Piercy describes in her
novel ''Vida'' - but with even more sex and much less fancy food.

Sam Melville was killed in Attica prison in 1971. ''I no longer had to worry
over how much loyalty I owed him or whether I was betraying him when I said, 'I
love you,' to another man. ... I could try to feel grateful that he died in a
way he would have chosen.'' And in November 1974, anticipating the
post-Watergate easing of judicial attitudes toward radicals, Jane Alpert turned
herself in. She received and served a 27-month jail sentence for the bombing
conspiracy and for jumping bail. The radical left reviled her for a tract,
''Mother Right,'' that she had written while underground (and in which she had
repudiated Sam Melville), and for presumably informing on others, a charge that
she has always denied.

''Growing Up Underground'' is astonishing. In a generous spirit one can say that
it takes a brave woman to portray herself so weakly, with so little perspective.
Realistically, Jane Alpert should be prepared for the criticism of her account
as bizarre political revisionism. She must also by now expect the derision of
the right.  But there will be embarrassed laughter from those who didn't really
want to know that a one-time heroine was just an old-fashioned slave of desire.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET REJECTS CRITICISM OF ITS SHUNNING OF CANCUN

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 728 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Oct. 25


The Soviet Union today rejected criticism of its absence from the meeting of
leaders of industrialized and developing nations in Cancun, Mexico, and summed
up the conference as a confrontation between ''plunderers and the plundered
peoples.''

The comments carried by Tass, the Government press agency, were in a rebuttal to
statements made by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. at a news conference
yesterday in Cancun. Mr. Haig said that Soviet press attacks on the conference
testified to its success and that the Russians were smarting from criticism
directed at them by developing countries.

A Tass commentator, Vladimir Baidashin, said Mr. Haig had failed to substantiate
any of his criticism, and he declared he was ''leaving on the conscience of the
American Secretary of State his 'conjectures,' which it would be more correct to
call misinformation.''

Mr. Baidashin then repeated in detail the main themes that the Soviet press has
sounded in its reports on what has been described here as a meeting of
''capitalist and developing countries.''

Tass Stresses Soviet Aid

In an apparent attempt to refute the suggestions aired in Cancun that Moscow had
passed up the conference to avoid bringing its limited foreign aid under
scrutiny, Tass affirmed Soviet support for a ''new international economic
order'' and outlined the growth of Soviet aid to developing countries and trade
with them. ''The Soviet Union is not seeking any privileges for itself, is not
on the lookout for concessions, is not pressing for political domination and is
not soliciting military bases,'' the article declared.

By contrast, Tass asserted, the United States and other Western countries are
divided from developing countries by an ''unsurmountable chasm'' of debts,
''exhorbitant interest'' and ''unequal trade.''

''As to the Cancun conference,'' Mr. Baidashin concluded, ''it developed into a
confrontation between 'civilized' plunderers and the plundered peoples which
have never put up with such a state of affairs, and the real state of affairs is
exactly such, no matter what Mr. Haig has to say about it.''

Although the commentary stayed within common Soviet positions on relations with
the third world, diplomats here discerned a defensive tone that, they said,
suggested Moscow had been stung by criticism of its decision not to attend the
conference. The Soviet Union argued that it had no responsibility for the
discrepancy between the developed and the developing world.

Statements of Gratitude Printed

But coinciding with the Cancun meeting, Soviet newspapers and television carried
a flurry of reports on aid projects in countries like Cuba and Vietnam, along
with statements of gratitude from leaders of countries receiving Soviet
assistance. Articles in the national press also argued that the Soviet system
made the Soviet Union a ''natural ally'' of the developing world.

The Soviet press had effectively dismissed the Cancun conference before it
began. A long commentary in Pravda on the eve of the meeting set the tone of the
Soviet coverage by proclaiming that one of the three major goals of the Western
powers at Cancun would be to ''undermine the unity of the countries of Asia,
Africa and Latin America, to isolate them from friends and allies (specifically,
by speculating on the fact that the Soviet Union is not attending the Cancun
meeting, to distort and smear the Soviet Union's views on the issue of
restructuring international economic rleations and rendering assistance to the
developing states).''

The other goals of the West, Pravda said, were to ''emasculate the
anti-imperialist orientation'' of the third world and to channel discussions
between the developed and developing nations from the United Nations into narrow
groups ''which are not binding for anyone.''

Subsequent Soviet commentaries on the conference focused on criticizing the
United States. One Tass report said that the meeting had no formal agenda
because the United States delegation ''was afraid of strong criticism and
resolutions unfavorable for Washington.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CHINESE WIDENING ROLE AT THE U.N.

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 976 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y. Oct. 25


Ten years ago today, the Communists in Peking were given the seat in the United
Nations that had been held by the Nationalists in Taipei.

Over the decade, China has gradually exerted a widening influence at the United
Nations.  Yet at the same time, the Peking Government has moved cautiously in
participating in many of the activities of the world organization. In many
instances it has refrained from voting in the Security Council and it still does
not belong to many of the numerous committees that have sprung from resolutions
of the General Assembly.

''They are emerging,'' said a Western diplomat who is a 10-year veteran here.
''They were very silent, almost just observers for a few years. Now they are
willing to participate more, maybe on the level of underground. They are on the
verge of a positive contribution.''

'They Made a Slow Start'

''They made a slow start and sat along the wall for a long time,'' said another
longtime Western envoy. ''They don't really punch their weight around, but are
primarily interested in those issues of interest to them.''

An Asian diplomat who has served in Peking was more blunt in his assessment.
''Clearly they are more self-assertive, more highhanded.''

Privately, China has made it clear at the United Nations that it believes the
time has come for a third world diplomat to replace Kurt Waldheim as Secretary
General

Salim A. Salim, the envoy from Tanzania, who has already been endorsed for the
Secretary General's post by the Organization of African Unity and the countries
professing nonalignment, is widely thought to have the solid support of the
Chinese. But while China is expected to veto Mr. Waldheim's bid for a third
term, no one is certain that it will be able to prevent the deadlock that would
be created by a United States veto of Mr. Salim.

''Will the Chinese feel bound to defend Salim by persisting in vetoing Waldheim,
or will they see the fragility of those endorsements?'' a diplomat from a
country on the Security Council asked.

Active Among Developing Nations

The question goes to the heart of the Chinese presence at the United Nations. It
is generally agreed that China's closest allies here are among the developing
countries, particularly among the members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations and in Africa.  ''This is an arena in which they can make a play for the
hearts and minds of the third world,'' said one diplomat. ''They don't like to
appear a superpower. They don't like to throw their weight around.''

Nonetheless, many diplomats feel that some Chinese foreign policy actions,
notably the invasion of Vietnam in 1979, have tarnished China's reputation and
slightly impeded the effectiveness of China's diplomats at the United Nations.

''The Chinese invasion of Vietnam did their reputation some damage,'' one envoy
said. ''They showed they could resort to force against a member nation in
pursuit of their own interests. Their simon-pure image was damaged somewhat.''

Nearly every diplomat questioned pointed to China's role in the international
conference on Cambodia during the summer as an example of Chinese assertiveness.
At the conference, China managed to scuttle language drafted by the Southeast
Asia nations in the final resolution calling for a coalition government in
Cambodia until elections were held and calling upon all the involved parties to
lay down their arms.

'First Major Case of Maneuvering'

An Asian diplomat recalling those negotiations said: ''The Chinese expressed
dissatisfaction because they felt they had not been properly consulted on the
drafting of the resolution. So they took the toughest stand. It was a show of
force that was well appreciated by the Asean countries and they are consulting
more with the Chinese. It was the first major case of their manueuvering in this
way.''

''But,'' he cautioned, ''perhaps you cannot easily define the direction of
Chinese policy, so you cannot really define their role here. They announce they
are a third world country, yet unlike any third world country they have a veto
in the Security Council. They never tell you privately what they will do on
crucial issues.''

In many facets of United Nations activity, however, the Peking Government still
takes the reticent posture it adopted when it assumed its seat in 1971. China
still does not belong to many of the panels, such as the Special Committee
Against Apartheid, the Committee on Contributions and the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, that have been
created by the General Assembly.

Role in Council Usually Low-Key

In the Security Council China is known for playing almost no role in the
drafting of resolutions. ''They almost never speak during informal
consultations,'' one diplomat observed. ''They never speak on peacekeeping
issues.''

The Chinese have also refused to vote for or contribute financially to the
United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East, a refusal that under the
rules of the world organization could put their voting right in jeapordy next
year.

Now, however, senior officials in the Secretariat have been assured by the
Chinese that the constitutional crisis over their vote that would arise from
continued refusal to pay will be averted with China's decision to pay its
assessment for peacekeeping, beginning at the start of the year.

''It will mark a real change in the Chinese posture,'' a Secretariat aide said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DISARMAMENT PANEL WORRIES ABOUT REAGAN POLICY

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Oct. 25


An international panel on disarmament agreed this weekend that the increased
military spending that President Reagan is advocating to match Soviet spending
risked making the world's economy worse rather than better.

The panel, known as the Independent Commission on Disarmament and Security
Issues, was created last year under the chairmanship of former Prime Minister
Olof Palme of Sweden to act as a high-level pressure group for world
disarmanent.

It took as its model the Brandt Commission on development problems, a group
headed by former Chancellor Willy Brandt of West Germany. The commission
achieved a major success last week when 22 leaders of industrialized and
developing nations held a meeting in Cancun, Mexico. The meeting had been
organized at the Brandt Commission's suggestion.

Prominent members of the disarmament commission, which was holding its seventh
meeting, include former Secretary of State Cyrus R.  Vance; Dr. David Owen,
former Foreign Secretary of Britain; Georgi A. Arbatov, a member of the Soviet
Central Committee; Lieut. Gen.  Olusegun Obasanjo, a former Nigerian head of
state, and former Prime Minister Mustafa Khalil of Egypt.

Speaking at the end of the session, Mr. Palme said there had been ''a general
consensus that there is now a strong economic case for disarmament.'' The $500
billion a year spent on weapons, he said, is ''tying up resources and skilled
manpower that can be more profitably used in other ways.''

In addition, Mr. Palme said the commission generally agreed that ''the
beneficial effects of defense spending on employment and technological
development tend to be exaggerated and will become more so in future.''

At previous meetings, the commission has supported the creation of nuclear-free
zones as a concrete step toward more effective arms control; urged the United
States and the Soviet Union to preserve their treaty limiting deployment of
antiballistic missile systems, and called on Washington and Moscow to negotiate
reductions in their European nuclear arsenals, as they have now agreed to do at
talks that are to begin in Geneva on Nov. 30.

At closed sessions this weekend, participants said the commission examined
studies by outside experts that argued that higher arms spending was more likely
to promote inflation and unemployment today than stimulate economic recovery,
unlike the situation in World War II, when heavy military spending helped pull
the industrial world out of the Depression.

Prof. Lester C. Thurow of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology said the
American economy could safely afford any level of military spending considered
necessary for national security, provided it was financed properly.

In the Korean War, he said, the United States Government wisely raised taxes and
imposed controls on the economy to limit the inflationary impact of higher
military spending. But, Mr. Thurow said, President Johnson tried to pay for the
Vietnam War while also increasing social spending, leading to inflation and
recession.

In Professor Thurow's view, President Reagan is in danger of repeating this
mistake by combining an increase in military spending and lower taxes. Already,
the professor said, the result is high United States interest rates that are
depressing the world economy.

Prof. Emma Rothschild of M.I.T. told the commission that military spending
created ''relatively little employment'' because of the increasing
sophistication of modern weapons and that it tended to promote inflation by
creating shortages of raw materials and skilled labor.

Another study, which was written by a Soviet specialist who was not identified
and submitted by the Soviet representatives, blamed the United States and its
European allies for the arms race. But what interested Western participants was
the study's plea for disarmament on the ground that high military spending is
absorbing scarce resources badly needed by civil industry in the Soviet Union as
well as in the West.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 918 words


ONE clear message at the Cancun economic conference was Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr.'s primacy over Richard V. Allen, the President's national
security adviser, in stating, and coloring, the Reagan Administration's position
each day at news briefings.

Mr. Haig, obviously enjoying himself, strutted out in crepe-soled shoes and loud
plaid slacks of red, white and blue, and offered some arresting phrases to go
with his outfit. He praised his chief's ''personal catalyzation'' at the
meetings, and talked of having to ''definitize how the procedural aspects of the
American assumptions can be met.''

His main contribution to the diplomatic glossary, however, was to repeatedly use
the word ''intervention'' as a synonym for ''statement,'' with references to the
President's many ''interventions'' at the talks. At cocktail parties, visitors
soon were joking, ''Excuse me, may I have an intervention with you?'' By the
final briefings, even Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan used ''intervened''
when he could have said ''said.'' The Secretary's spokesman, Ann McLaughlin, was
asked about this. ''I don't know,'' she said, smiling. ''He's an English major
from Harvard. We're disappointed that he's letting himself go like this.''

THERE are cynics who feel the one appropriate monument to government in
Washington is the idle, money-consuming, leaky and sad old building called Union
Station, for which still another new salvation plan is being put forth by
Congress. The 74-year-old steel and marble cavern is as timeworn as the
railroads it once served. A decade ago, the Government spent $100 million on the
station, turning it into a National Visitors Center, but failing in the process
to properly patch the roof. The result was that all interior renovations were
flooded last spring in a storm and the building, already tomblike in its failure
to attract visitors, was closed, with the once-magnificent main waiting room a
morass of puddles and fallen plaster. The latest attempt at resurrection would
see whether gentrification can accomplish what Government has not. The
Government would try to attract private developers to turn the station into a
warren of restaurants and boutiques. The first step in this plan, which is
expected to be approved soon by the Senate, would be to start putting up fresh
money - $1 million to go back to square one and check whether, after all the
years of disuse and renovation, the building still has its structural integrity.

A move is under way to restore the National Archives to the status of an
independent agency by removing it after 32 years from under the wing of the
General Services Administration, the Federal housekeeping agency. Congressional
critics feel that the G.S.A., the custodian of the Government's office space and
furniture, is not the ideal guardian of historic records. The argument has been
made before, raising touchy questions of turf and politics, with proponents
insisting that the preservation of cultural and educational treasures is at
stake. Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska summarized the dilemma for lawmakers at a
recent hearing. He noted complaints that historical newsreels were lost in a
G.S.A. warehouse fire in 1978 and that Revolutionary and Civil War documents are
said by some experts to be endangered by bad heat and humidity controls.  On the
other hand, he noted that Congress is reluctant to set up another agency at a
time when austerity is the watchword. In the pendulum ways of Washington,
National Archives began as an independent agency in 1934, but was incorporated
into G.S.A. 15 years later on the Hoover Commission's recommendations for
streamlining the Government.

SPONSORS of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, the stark black granite listing of
that war's 57,692 dead and missing, say the memorial inscription to be announced
this week will indeed mention the word ''Vietnam.'' The monument is to be built
next year in a ground-level recess near the Lincoln Memorial, and Tom Carhart, a
former infantry lieutenant in the war, insists that the original plan was to
omit the word as part of what he terms ''this final sneer at Vietnam veterans.''
He was one of the few members of the public to criticize the memorial at a
recent hearing of the Federal Fine Arts Commission, which has approved the
design. Robert W. Doubek, director of the memorial fund, denies the ''canard''
that a proper inscription, citing the war by name and the memory of surviving
veterans as well, might be omitted because of lingering controversy from those
days.  Nevertheless, Mr. Carhart contends that the memorial was designed with
''shame'' in mind and will be perceived as ''a black trench that scars the
Mall.'' Mr. Doubek says, to the contrary, that the memorial, to be built with
public donations, will be a simple and proper statement which members of the
public can see for themselves at the scheduled opening on Nov. 11, 1982.

Francis X. Clines Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CITY AND U.S. OFFICIALS TO SEEK FOREIGN TIES TO BRINK'S HOLDUP

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 25


The chief spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that
there would be a ''major coordinated effort'' between Federal and local
authorities to investigate ties between a wide range of domestic and foreign
terrorist groups in the $1.6 million Brink's robbery in Rockland County last
week.

But the spokesman, Roger Young, said there was ''no hard evidence'' yet of
involvement of foreign terrorist groups.  ''At this point,'' he said, ''we're a
long way from knowing what we have.'' ''Why did they steal the money? How far
does the network extend?  It's obvious they were out to finance something,'' he
said, referring to the four persons charged in the incident, in which two
policemen and a guard were killed.

''When you have something as big as this, you leave all the doors open,'' Mr.
Young said. ''You look into possible foreign entanglements.''

'Domestic Operation'

A spokesman for the Central Intelligence Agency said that the C.I.A. considered
the Brink's robbery ''a domestic operation'' at this point.

But he added that if the agency gathered any information that bore on the
incident, ''we would pass it along to the State Department's Office for
Combating Terrorism.''

The possibility of links between radical organizations in the United States and
foreign terrorist groups was raised yesterday by Kenneth Walton, director of a
joint Federal-New York City Terrorism Task Force. He is the F.B.I.'s deputy
assistant director in charge of the New York office.

Mr. Walton declined to say what foreign groups might have connections to the
domestic radical organizations, which are the target of an inquiry begun after
the robbery and slayings on Tuesday.

Links to Cubans

Three of the four suspects have been identified as members of the radical group,
Weather Underground. They are Katherine Boudin, Judith A. Clark and David J.
Gilbert.

Mr. Walton noted yesterday that some links between the Weather Underground, the
Black Liberation Army and Black Panthers had been uncovered so far in the
inquiry.

Mr. Young said today that the F.B.I. has been aware for some time that the Cuban
intelligence service ''has been supportive in the past of the Weather
Underground.''

Two former F.B.I. officials, who were convicted last November of authorizing
secret break-ins of private homes in the early 1970's in search of bombing
suspects, contended during their trial that the fugitives of the Weather
Underground had foreign connections with Cuba and North Vietnam.

Unconditional Pardon

During their trial, attorneys for the former officials, W. Mark Felt and Edward
S. Miller, argued that the two men considered that they were conducting a
foreign counterintelligence operation, not just a domestic criminal
investigation.

However, Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller were convicted of conspiring to violate the
constitutional rights of American citizens by authorizing the secret searches.
They were granted unconditional pardons last April by President Reagan.

In granting the pardons, the President said that the two men had ''acted on high
principle to bring an end to the terrorism that was threatening our nation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CALIFORNIA FACING A NEW REALITY IN PLANT CLOSINGS

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1579 words

DATELINE: SALINAS, Calif., Oct. 19


California, which set a national standard for industrial expansion in most of
the past 35 years, is experiencing an unexpected shock: Industrial plants in
many communities are closing, eliminating jobs and causing serious economic
dislocations for some cities.

State officials estimate that more than 45,000 jobs have been lost in the past
two years after employers closed plants built after World War II that are now
considered obsolete. Others are closing because foreign competition or higher
transportation costs have made them unprofitable.

California is still creating more jobs than it is losing, but the accelerating
pattern of plant closings has state officials worried.  They say that
California's experience may be a warning to other Sun Belt states that, in
contrast to the older industrial regions of the Northeast, pride themselves on
having modern plant equipment and count on benign weather alone to stimulate
growth.

Outside California Expectations

''It's been a shock to everyone,'' said Gera Curry, an official of the state
Employment Development Department. ''This kind of problem happens in Detroit or
Pittsburgh, not California; we open plants, not close them, and we now have to
deal with the reality that things have changed.''

''It scares you, and it scares you for the whole state,'' said Jim Barnes, the
Mayor of this central California city made notable by the writings of John
Steinbeck. In recent months, four of the largest employers in Salinas have shut
down plants or announced plans to do so.

''The economics are such now that in California we can't manufacture things as
cheaply as they can other places,'' Mr. Barnes said.

''Our labor is higher, our utilities are higher, our housing is higher, our
taxes are higher,'' he said. ''You put it all together, and California's got a
problem.''

The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate for California last month was 7.2
percent, below the national average of 7.5 percent, but higher than some states,
such as New York, where it was 6.8 percent and New Jersey, where it was 6.6
percent.

'New Population of Unemployed'

Dr. Dennis Patino, director of the Employment Development Department, said that
a state legislator referred to the increasing number of middle-class workers
losing their jobs because of plant closings as ''a new class of poor.''

''It's not just a problem in California,'' Dr. Patino said. ''I think it's a
national issue: who is going to serve this new population of unemployed?

''As we look into the 80's and the 90's, and advanced technologies come in and
make plants obsolete, or plants are consolidated to make them more efficient,
there will be fewer people needed to do certain things, and it will become more
and more serious, not just in California but all over the nation.''

''These are mostly middle-class people who have been used to good wages and are
proud of their jobs,'' Dr. Patino continued. ''Some of them, when they lose
their jobs, just come apart.''

Many Communities Affected

The plant closings have occurred throughout the state. In Los Angeles, almost a
dozen major plants that supply the automotive industry have shut down in the
past two years. This, according to state economists, reflects the reduced demand
for American-built cars competing with smaller foreign models, and efforts by
Detroit and the tiremakers to consolidate production in newer, more efficient
plants.

In central California, the community of Santa Maria was jolted twice this year.
First Piper Aircraft Company decided to close a light aircraft plant employing
800 workers. Then CBS Records decided to close one of the city's few other
manufacturing plants.

North of here, in Berkeley, the Colgate-Palmolive Company closed a plant, and in
neighboring Hayward more than 3,000 jobs were lost when the Mack Truck Company
decided to concentrate operations in the East.

In the southern California town of Ontario, the General Electric Company in
December will begin closing a plant that employs 800 people; the factory makes
household flatirons of iron and steel. The company says it can produce less
costly irons, using synthetic materials, at another plant.

Competition and Obsolescence

Not far away, Kaiser Industries is shutting down a steel mill, blaming increased
competition from Japan and government smog control standards.

Four major food canneries are being closed near San Jose and Sacramento this
year, eliminating about 5,000 jobs. The owners cite encroachment by suburban
housing developments on farmland plus higher transportation costs.

Robert Monagan, president of the California Manufacturers Association, says the
problem is obsolescence.  ''All those plants built during the boom period after
World War II, in the 50's. are now 30 or so years old,'' he said. ''A lot of
them, like the General Electric plant, have become marginal. They have to close;
same thing with some of the older tire manufacturing plants.''

Criticism of State Administration

If it were not for what Mr. Monagan contended was ''an antibusiness attitude in
California, a lot of it connected to the so-called environmental movement,'' not
only would older plants be modernized but there would also be more new plants
built.

Like many businessmen, he criticizes Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. for fostering
taxation, regulation and energy policies, including opposition to nuclear power
plants, that he says make the state unattractive for business.

''We have a slow but steady flight of industry from the state,'' said Al Libra,
general counsel to the manufacturers' assocation. Job losses have been
especially high in industries with heavy union representation, he said, adding,
''In 25 years, we've gone from 48 or 49 percent union representation in
manufacturing to about 23 percent.''

Gains, But in Service Jobs

Despite the loss of jobs, most economists describe California's overall economic
future as bright. The Bank of America, for example, has forecast that the state
will add more than 330,000 jobs in 1982, more than 15 percent of the expected
nationwide increase.

The bank forecast said that the majority of the jobs would be in service
occupations; only about 50,000 manufacturing jobs would be created.

Dr. Patino said that many of the projected job gains would be in industries
using advanced technology, especially electronics, requiring skills that people
laid off by older manufacturing plants may lack.

To deal with the problem of plant abandoments, the Employment Development
Department has set up counseling centers in five hardhit communities. Dr. Patino
said that it was important, as soon as a factory closing was announced, for a
community to mobilize business, labor and social service leaders to ''marshal
your local resources'' to deal with the effect on the economy and on
individuals.

Families Feeling Impacts

It is also important, Dr. Patino said, to provide counseling for displaced
employes: ''We find the experience for the people who are displaced very
traumatic. You have an increase in mental heath problems, increased alcoholism,
more family problems and child abuse. It is very hard on these people.''

Here in Salinas, a town of 81,000 population that is trying to end its
dependence on agriculture, people are worrying about the loss of some 2,000
manufacturing jobs.

On Aug. 28, the city's biggest employer, the sprawling, 53-acre Firestone Tire
and Rubber Company plant, with more than 1,700 workers, closed. Two weeks ago, a
Peter Paul Mounds candy plant, with more than 200 employees, closed.

A major food packer closed recently, eliminating more than 500 jobs. Soon the
city's oldest plant, a Spreckels sugar beet refining plant, will close.

One Worker Seeks Retraining

''When they announced it, I didn't believe it,'' Pat Aledo, a Firestone worker,
said. ''I'd just bought a new house and had other payments.'' It was like
something that would happen in Ohio.'' He is attending a training program,
hoping to become an electronics technician.

Harry Gamotan, president of Local 726 of the United Rubber, Cork, Linoleum and
Plastic Workers of America, whose union hall has a ''for sale'' sign on it, said
that more than 800 of the Firestone workers, members of his union, are out of
work.

''These jobs paid $400 to $500 a week,'' he said. ''Most of them had been
working at the plant all their lives, and there aren't any jobs around here.
We've had problems with drinking, divorces and two suicides since the plant
closed.''

Mr. Gamotan complained bitterly of a Reagan Administration decision, approved by
Congress, to slash a Federal benefit for workers displaced by foreign
competition from $289 a week to $104.

''People who were going for retraining now can't afford it,'' he said. ''If
Reagan is going to do things for this country, why doesn't he help people get
jobs, that's what we need. They give all this support to the people from Vietnam
and turn their backs on us Americans.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Harry Gamotan

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW U.S. ENVOY BIDS SOVIET 'REVIEW' ITS POLICIES AND ACTIONS

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Oct. 26


Arthur A. Hartman presented his credentials today as the 17th United States
Ambassador to Moscow and in a statement prepared for the occasion urged the
Soviet Union to ''review'' its actions and policies in Afghanistan, Africa,
Southeast Asia and elsewhere.

A spokesman for the American Embassy said that Mr. Hartman, following past
practice, read only brief excerpts from the statement to Vasily V. Kuznetsov,
the First Deputy Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, but that the
entire text had been handed to the Russians in advance.

Mr. Kuznetsov, who received Mr. Hartman's credentials, ranks second behind
Leonid I. Brezhnev in the hierarchy of the Soviet state.  While listing most of
the Reagan Administration's primary criticisms of the Soviet Union, Mr. Hartman
also pledged himself ''to the task of advancing our dialogue with you.'' The
embassy spokesman described the formal ceremony at the Kremlin and a 50-minute
private meeting between Mr. Hartman and Mr. Kuznetsov as cordial and friendly.

9-Month Hiatus Is Ended

Mr. Hartman's formal installation ended a nine-month period during which the
United States had no ambassador in Moscow. Thomas J.  Watson Jr., the former
chairman of the International Business Machines Corporation appointed to Moscow
by President Carter, had resigned with the change in administration.

The long delay in sending a new envoy was seen by some diplomats here as an
expression of the Reagan Administration's critical attitude toward the Soviet
Union, but on his arrival in Moscow on Oct. 16 Mr. Hartman attributed the gap
rather to the new Administration's settling-in process.

Analysts here found Mr. Hartman's statement considerably more blunt and less
accommodating than the one made by Mr. Watson two years ago, before the Soviet
intervention in Afghanistan. The United States and the Soviet Union, the new
envoy said, are divided, ''perhaps irrevocably, by political systems which
differ in basic and immutable aspects,'' and by attitudes and actions arising
from these basic differences.

The United States is ''fully committed'' to reducing the divisions, Mr. Hartman
said, but the process can take place only if both sides act with ''restraint''
and ''in a spirit of reciprocity.''

U.S. Positions Outlined

''We Americans will do so,'' he said. ''and we urge the Soviet Union as well to
review its policies and actions in the world.'' Offering to undertake a
''searching examination'' of issues dividing Moscow and Washington, Mr. Hartman
outlined what he described as some of the United States' ''specific approaches''
to these issues.

He said that Washington was prepared to enter talks on theater nuclear forces
next month and on strategic weapons next year in a constructive spirit. But he
also accused Moscow of a ''major and unprovoked'' military buildup, which he
said gave the United States ''no choice but to respond.''

Mr. Hartman declared that the Soviet Union had a ''responsibility to deny
support to Cuba for its efforts directed against sovereign governments in Africa
and Latin America.'' He further urged that Moscow join the United States in
setting a ''common goal'' for Afghanistan - ''an Afghanistan which is
nonaligned, secure and free of outside interference, and whose people are free
to chart their own course.''

Allusion to Poland Seen

On other issues, Mr. Hartman said both sides should refrain from using or
supporting ''force, subversion or terrorism,'' and should ''leave sovereign
peoples free to determine their own future.'' The latter comment was interpreted
by diplomats as an allusion to Poland.

Elsewhere, the Ambassador urged Moscow to persuade Vietnam to join an
international conference aimed at seeking a political solution in Cambodia, a
step Moscow has rejected. And he linked a settlement in Namibia, or South-West
Africa, to a withdrawal of Soviet and Cuban troops from Angola by declaring that
the United States and the Soviet Union had ''common objectives'' - ''an
independent Namibia and an Angola free of outside involvement or threat.''

''As President Reagan's representative to your Government,'' Mr.  Hartman
concluded, ''I pledge myself to the task of advancing our dialogue with you - a
dialogue which is indispensable to progress in our bilateral relations and to
enhancement of the prospects for peace.''

There has been wide expectation among diplomats in Moscow that with the arrival
of Mr. Hartman, a career Foreign Service officer who served as Ambassador to
France until his appointment to Moscow, the American Embassy will regain an
important role in United States-Soviet relations. In recent years, some American
diplomats here have complained that the focus of diplomatic activity had shifted
largely to Washington, seat of the veteran Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly F.
Dobrynin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

VETERANS' ART: REFLECTIONS ON VIETNAM

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Oct. 23


Camouflage fabric has been stapled over the picture windows of NAME, the city's
oldest alternative gallery, renowned for exhibiting experimental and
controversial art.

What lies beyond the makeshift drapes qualifies as controversial, yet it is a
considerable departure from the avant-garde art usually seen at the gallery.

''Vietnam: Reflexes and Reflections,'' an exhibition of paintings, sketches,
collages, sculptures and photographs by 21 Vietnam veterans, was seen by a crowd
of more than 2,000 when it opened Oct.  9.

Instead of the white wine and hors d'oeuvres that usually accompany openings,
warm beer and C-rations were served. First-night visitors, many of them
veterans, nudged their way through the crowded gallery while eating cold ham and
lima beans out of cans with plastic spoons.

Works Vary in Sophistication

The works, presented by the Vietnam Veterans Arts Group, range from amateur to
professional, cartoonish to sophisticated, sentimental to bitter, starkly simple
to overpainted.

''Most of these artists do not work in the vocabulary that we're used to
exhibiting,'' said Paul Kranick, a member of NAME's board of directors. ''But
the value of an alternative space is that it does overcome ideological and
semantic differences in art, and the context forces whatever is shown here to be
viewed as art, whether it's realism or abstraction.''

Because of the exhibition's subject, he added, ''these artists had a very
difficult time showing their art anywhere.'' ''Reflexes and Reflections,'' which
runs through Saturday, is only the second exhibition of its kind in the country.
The first, sponsored by Vietnam in the Arts, took place last November in St.
Paul, Minn. The group plans to open a similar show Nov. 10, the day before
Veterans Day, at Manhattan's Arsenal Gallery, Fifth Avenue and 64th Street.

About 150 people a day have seen the Chicago exhibition since it opened, and
many have been on repeat visits.

Hits 'About Gut Level'

''This is the third or fourth time I've been back here, and I never went to
Vietnam,'' said Philip Lanier, a local commercial film producer. ''The range and
the honesty is what got to me - it hits right about gut level. It's far more
than I bargained for, and half the experience is in talking to the artists.''

''The show kind of shocked me at first,'' said Albert Yunnis, 33 years old, a
former Army medical corpsman. ''It's nothing new, but to remember how it was -
it's like a repeat of my life. It helps give me a perspective on how the other
men felt. America has seen Vietnam only through the media's eyes. I hope more
people will come see this, to see we're not monsters.''

''Probably one-third of the people who come here are vets,'' said Ned Broderick,
34, who studied at the American Academy of Art in Chicago after returning from
Vietnam in 1968.

Mr. Broderick has 40 paintings in the show, medium-sized canvases mostly done in
the last year ''from photographs and memories'' - a tilted, murky green
landscape punctuated by the sickly flames of burning foliage; a hazy, haunted
portrait of an American soldier wearing a grisly necklace of human ears, called
''Going Native.''

Many Couldn't Produce Work

One reason Mr. Broderick is so heavily represented in the exhibition is that
many artists who promised to create works for the show ''were so traumatized
they couldn't get it out,'' said Richard Aztlan, 34, the president of the
veterans' art group.

To solicit works for the exhibition, Mr. Aztlan said, advertisements were placed
in three publications, Soldier of Fortune magazine, Shotgun News and the
Illinois Art Examiner. Two of the participating artists are from Texas; the rest
are from the Chicago area.

Mr. Aztlan, a Chicago police officer and former Marine Corps field radio
operator, said he hoped to make the exhibition's scope more comprehensive and to
take it to the capital in 1982 through the Washington Project for the Arts.

''I want this to not only be an art show,'' he said, ''but also an opportunity
for those of us who aren't articulate to come here with our families, to show
them what we've been through.''

Most of the works are recent. The sketches by Joseph Fornelli, a former Army
helicopter crew chief, however, were rendered on location with C-ration coffee,
map ink and anything else available.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 28, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article yesterday on a Chicago art exhibition by Vietnam veterans
incompletely identified the site for a similar show opening on Nov. 10. It is
the Parks Department gallery at the Arsenal, in Central Park at Fifth Avenue and
64th Street.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ned Broderick

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

INDEX;
Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1290 words


For French Socialists, a puzzle over what comes next A2
Bomb blast in London restaurant kills one A3
Irish nationalists ending ''blanket protest'' at Belfast prison A3
Argentina to boycott award cere- mony for Timerman A3
French court drops charges against Le Monde A4
Around the World A5
Ceausescu cautions Soviet and U.S. on missiles A7
Egypt issues a report on police battles with Moslem terrorists A10
Israel and Egypt seek break- through in West Bank talks A12
Western nations present plan on Namibia's independence A15

Government/Politics
United States seamen's hospitals still open in many cities A23
Birmingham election pits whites vs. blacks A28
Ex-employees of CETA in New York trying to make do B1
Taxes and state budget are key issues in Jersey campaign B1
Albany lawmakers are correcting some oversights B3
Goldin's integrity again a central issue in Comptroller campaign B4
Municipal hospitals held over- crowded with mental patients B7

Washington Talk
Briefing A22
Subcommittee in spotlight on military spending A22
Embassy Row A22
Follow-Up A22

Industry/Labor
Philadelphia unions plan general strike tomorrow A18

Style
Notes on Fashion C6
Seventh Avenue spring fashions C6
Study on infant formula use C6

Science Times
On shuttle's second flight, real work will be done C1
Language patterns reveal person- ality problems C1
Science Watch C2
Reagan aides fail to mollify top scientists on U.S. aid C3
Science Q&A C3
About education: essence of cen- sorship in schools C5

General
Around the Nation A18
Judge dismisses some charges against Elvis Presley's doctor A18
Attendance off sharply at the Kennedy Library A18
Montana has fun with North Dakota jokes A18
Coast doctors reject Pentagan plan on hospital beds A19
Hinckley called rationale after Reagan shooting A20
Art exhibit in Chicago features work of Vietnam veterans A24
Idaho farmers are upset at plan to build cobalt refinery A25
Farmers tend to blame 18 percent interest rate for troubles A29
Lyndhurst store helps in hunting the elusive doohickey B3
Rockland County Prosecutor dealing with two major cases B6
The Region B7

Obituaries
Dr. Jane Perry Clark Carey, U.S.  adviser on refugees D26
Pete Reiser of Broolyn Dodgers D26
Glenn Anders, Broadway leading man of 20's and 30's D26
Mary deWitt Pletz, founder of The Opera News D26

Arts/Entertainment
City Opera in new production of ''Der Freischutz'' C8
Earl Anthony's ''Black People's Party'' is staged C8
Broadway stars salute the City Opera at gala C9
Birgit Nilsson is feted by Metro- politan Opera Guild C9
Gay Wilson Allen's biography ''Waldo Emerson'' is reviewed C11
Joffrey Ballet changes casts in ''Taming of the Shrew'' C12

Sports
John to face Hooton today as Dodgers seek to clinch Series D27
Steinbrenner is hurt in fight with two men, he says D27
An analysis of Yankees' Series problems D27
Lucas stars in debut as Knicks beat Bulls in exhibition over- time D27
Dave Anderson on the Steinbren- ner scuffle D29
Steelers beat Oilers on late scores, 26 to 13 D30
Victory over Falcons is some- thing special to Giants D30
Too many turnovers spoiled the day for Jets D31
Salazar prefers hidden payments to money put in trust D31

Features/Notes
Notes on People C12
Going Out Guide C14
People in Sports D28

News Analysis
Steven V. Roberts on the troubled farm-state coalition A29
Robin Herman discusses plight of New York's homeless B3

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A30

The final folly of Awacs After Cancun 'Yes' to the propositions Mary Cantwell:
motherhood Letters A30
Sydney H. Schanberg: a Band- Aid for crime A31
Tom Wicker: is there a ''can- cer''?  A31
Abraham Brumberg: easing Po- land's crisis A31
Daniel J. Boorstin: poor pay by the U.S.  A31

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words


CENSORSHIP of books in the public schools has become a matter of growing
concern. Though hardly a new phenomenon, attacks on books, films and other
teaching materials, have greatly increased in recent years as newly resurgent
conservative groups try to cleanse the schools, and the children's minds, of
words and ideas they find objectionable.

Last month the Association of American Publishers, together with the American
Library Association and the Association for Supervision and Curriculum
Development, issued a 40-page report, titled ''Limiting What Students Shall
Read,'' based on a nationwide survey of how the censorship issue is being
handled. It found that censorship is growing.

The report's appendix offers a partial list of 239 challenged materials,
including two major dictionaries, Nathaniel Hawthorne's ''The Scarlet Letter,''
Ernest Hemingway's ''A Farewell to Arms,'' Aldous Huxley's ''Brave New World,''
George Orwell's ''1984,'' Mark Twain's ''The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,''
and a number of magazines, including Mademoiselle and Parents.

Sporadic news reports have told of local or state censorship actions in widely
scattered areas. A spokesman for the American Library Association said that
librarians around the country are being asked to remove books, receiving an
average of three to five complaints a week.

On Long Island, the Island Trees Union Free School District in Nassau County
became involved in a fight earlier this year over the removal of nine books from
school libraries, including ''The Fixer'' by Bernard Malamud and
''Slaughterhouse Five'' by Kurt Vonnegut.

In Mississippi, a battle erupted over the rejection by state officials of a high
school textbook, ''Mississippi: Conflicts and Change.'' A Federal court held
that the rejection abridged academic freedom under the First Amendment. The
editors nevertheless revised the book, to make it less controversial.

Parent groups in many communities are purging schools of what they call
''secular humanist'' books, often as part of the battle between the ''scientific
creationists,'' who reject Darwin's theory of evolution, and those who are
fighting against the inclusion in science of books of nonscientific,
religion-based views of man and the universe.

In Illinois, the Rev. George A. Zarris, chairman of that state's Moral Majority,
was quoted as saying that he ''would think moralminded people might object to
books that are philosophically alien to what they believe'' and that ''if they
have the books and feel like burning them, fine.''

And around the country, educators who evaluate and purchase textbooks are being
urged by Mel and Norma Gabler to cleanse their schools of certain books. The
Gablers have created their own organization with mailing lists of more than
12,000 people. Among the books they want removed are American history texts
that, they feel, overemphasize Watergate and Vietnam. They do not like the story
of Robin Hood or books that, they say, erode absolute values by asking questions
to which they offer no absolute answers.

Reacting to such attempts at censorship, the new report calls the issue too
important ''to be evaluated solely on the basis of scattered reports, occasional
headlines, celebrated cases of high court litigation, or unsupported claims by
contestants in the educational or political arena.''

''At the heart of the issue,'' it says, ''lie the difficult questions of what
and how students shall learn - questions crucial to all who vie for influence
over the future direction of our pluralistic society.''

Since, in fact, such vying for influence is itself part of the way decisions are
made in a democracy, the question is how to prevent chaos and to avoid
domination by a ruthless majority or by relatively small groups which, through
shrewd public relations, create the impression that they represent the majority.
Yet, it is also clear that First Amendment protection cannot be applied in
absolute terms to the schools. Somebody, parents or educators, must determine
what is educationally sound and which books are suitable for different age
groups. The battle against censorship ought not to aim at an ''anything goes''
view of teaching materials.

For all those reasons, the three organizations that sponsored the report in 1980
undertook its nationwide survey, based on questionnaires sent to 7,572 public
elementary and secondary school principals and district superintendents in all
50 states. The questionnaires were followed up with a mail and telephone survey
of those who evaluate and purchase textbooks in the 22 states that by law rely
on statewide adoption procedures.

Approximately one-fourth of those who responded said that the number of
challenges had grown in recent years and that this had influenced and restricted
the selection of teaching materials. At the local level, by far the most
frequent challenges have to do with sex, sexuality, obscenity and profane
language. Contemporary fiction came under local fire most often.

School administrators and librarians indicated that in 95 percent of the 452
specific challenges, the opposition ''sought to limit, rather than expand, the
information and viewspoints in the materials used.''

On the state level, the more recent challenges tend to seek to expand the
information and viewpoints provided - as in the demand to add ''creationism'' to
the teaching of evolution. Other issues most often involved on the state level
include criticism of the way American history is presented, the ''undermining of
the traditional family,'' atheistic or agnostic ideas and anti-establishment
views.

Perhaps the most telling finding of the survey provides concrete evidence for
the fact that when states determine which textbooks are to be used by all public
schools, authors and publishers are exposed to strong economic pressures to give
in to various lobby groups seeking to censor books rather than to lose sales or
risk being driven out of the textbook business.

A pernicious side effect is the reduced choice of books, even for the 27 states
that allow local schools to select their own materials. Unless such large states
as California or Texas, which select textbooks for all their public schools, buy
the books it is often unprofitable to publish them.

What can be done? The process of choosing what students shall read and learn in
a pluralistic society is never easy, the report says, and challengers ''have a
legitimate function.'' What is wrong and occasionally frightening, is the
absence of effective procedures to decide what materials are to be used. This
absence exposes the schools to tactics of intimidation and encourages censorship
by quiet surrender.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PLAY: VIOLENT 60'S RELIVED IN 'BLACK PEOPLE'S PARTY'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 794 words


AS tragic coincidence would have it, the time seems terribly right for a play
like Earl Anthony's ''Black People's Party,'' now at the Henry Street
Settlement's New Federal Theater. Like last week's reallife events in Nyack,
this drama jolts us back to the revolutionary violence of the 60's. Mr.
Anthony's subject, only thinly disguised, is the Black Panther Party, and it's a
subject he can presumably speak about with authority and understanding. For a
few months in 1968 - until he departed in an ideological dispute - Mr. Anthony
served as the party's deputy minister of information in Los Angeles. He later
wrote a controversial memoir of his experiences, ''Picking Up the Gun: A Report
on the Black Panthers.''

And so we turn to Mr. Anthony's play hoping that he'll help answer some of the
questions that hang in the air, all over again, this week. When and why does a
political militant pick up a gun to pursue his goals? What is it like to live,
underground or above, as an armed enemy of the state? What, if anything, did the
most violent activists of the Vietnam era accomplish? Yet I'm afraid one must
finally look elsewhere for illumination. ''Black People's Party'' proves totally
reticent about the issues and personalities it raises, as if the author were so
fearful of sounding inflammatory that he decided it would be best not to say
anything at all.

What Mr. Anthony settles for instead is an extremely dry and episodic rehash of
some familiar headline events in Panther history.  Although the names have been
changed, ''Black People's Party'' appears to be about the 1969 murder of Alex
Rackley, a Panther who was suspected of being a police informer by his peers.
Bobby Seale and Erika Huggins, the Panthers arrested for the crime, were never
retried after their long New Haven trial ended with a deadlocked jury. In Mr.
Anthony's play, their innocence is upheld, as is the view that the entire
episode was a set-up by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Because Mr. Anthony hasn't bothered to flesh out any of the participants, he
fritters away his valuable material. His characters exist only to advance the
plot or to serve as faceless advocates for various political positions
(pro-violence, nonviolence, etc.) which are each given equal time. Though the
protagonist, an ambiguously motivated informer (Gregory Miller), is onstage
throughout, we see only the superficial anguish, not the psychological
pathology, of such a man. The Black People's Party's fire-breathing chairman
(John J.J. Cole) and his associates are so unrevealingly drawn that it's hard to
believe that Mr. Anthony ever knew any Black Panthers, let alone was one. The
malevolent F.B.I. agents (Ronald Willoughby and Hunter Cain) also seem false:
they are both more guilty about their own behavior and more sophisticated about
60's radicalism than J.  Edgar Hoover's agents have since been revealed to be.

With its fragmentary nonscenes and noncharacters, ''Black People's Party'' can't
be redeemed by its actors - many of whom, in any case, seem a shade too old to
be playing young revolutionaries. Norman Riley, the director, tries to stir
things up by providing ominous drum rolls after each blackout and by simulating
onstage shootouts.  But it takes more than incendiary events to create an
exciting play - it takes a point of view. ''Black People's Party'' is all smoke
and no fire.

The Radical 60's
BLACK PEOPLE'S PARTY, by Earl Anthony; di- rected by Norman Riley; costumes,
Judy Dear- ing; sets, Llewellyn C. Harrison; lighting, Marshall Williams; sound,
Richard Johnson; pro- duction stage manager, Dwight R.B. Cook.  Presented by the
Henry Street Settlement's New Federal Theater, Woodie King Jr. and Steven
Tennen, producers. At 466 Grand Street.  Carter
..............................Ronald Willoughby O'Ryan
....................................Hunter Cain Reggie
..............................P. Anderson Scott Chocezi
................................Gregory Miller Tee
......................................Lucy Holland Paulette
...................................Jane Scott Chairman Richard
.......................John J.J. Cole Sherman
..................................Andre Worthy Alvin
...................................Rickey Arnold

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 28, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN GOES TO VIRGINIA TO AID G.O.P. CANDIDATE

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 904 words

DATELINE: RICHMOND, Oct. 27


President Reagan campaigned in Virginia tonight for the faltering candidacy of
state Attorney General Marshall Coleman, the first Republican gubernatorial
candidate here to find himself trailing a Democrat in pre-election polls since
1969.

Mr. Coleman's opponent is Lieut. Gov. Charles S. Robb.  Although Mr. Reagan
sounded as though he was fighting a cold, he gave a rambling, 20-minute
endorsement of Mr. Coleman, and of his proposed sale of Awacs radar planes to
Saudi Arabia, which is scheduled for a vote tomorrow in the Senate.

On leaving the White House shortly before 6 o'clock tonight, Mr.  Reagan was
asked, ''Which is closer, Marshall Coleman's victory or Awacs?'' Mr. Reagan
replied, ''On both I am cautiously optimistic,''

But here in Richmond, before a packed house, he said of Mr.  Coleman, ''I am
looking forward to working closely with him once he is elected Governor of
Virginia.''

Need 'Right Kind of Officials'

''It isn't going to do us any good to clean up the mess in Washington unless the
right kind of public officials are elected at the state level,'' the President
said.

Mr. Coleman, 39 years old, also finally got a forceful, if backhanded,
endorsement from the Republican-dominated ''conservative coalition'' that has
selected, elected and shaped the course of the last three Republican
governships.

The coalition's leader, former Gov. Mills E. Godwin Jr., told about 1,000
partisans in a ballroom at the John Marshall Hotel, ''We cannot blink the way
the nation would interpret a Republican defeat in Virginia.'' Such a defeat, he
said, ''could only lend aid and comfort to the President's foes.''

The impact of a Coleman defeat here next Tuesday on the Republican
Administration in Washington was Mr. Godwin's theme.

Fears Return of 'Liberal Ways'

''Do we want to watch the chief official of our Commonwealth make common cause
with Teddy Kennedy or Walter Mondale?'' the former Governor asked. ''Do we want
to watch our Governor in Richmond assist the return of liberal ways to
Washington?''

At the end of his remarks Mr. Godwin declared, ''This election may establish the
direction of politics in Virginia for years to come.'' Of Mr. Coleman's
Republican ticket, chosen at a convention last spring over Mr. Godwin's evident
distress, the former Governor said that they were ''the better choices.''

Mr. Godwin, who first served as a Democratic Governor and then, after a term's
absence, as a Republican Governor in the late 1950's and early 1960's, was an
architect of Virginia's ''massive resistance'' strategy against school
integration orders handed down by Federal courts.

His speech tonight touched on all three of the ''racist code words'' that Robb
campaign spokesmen have attributed to the Coleman campaign. The former Governor
said that Mr. Robb favored giving the District of Columbia, which is 70 percent
black, two United States Senators. ''He would equate the sovereign state of
Virginia in the United States Senate with the city of Washington, D.C.,'' Mr.
Godwin said.

And he reminded his audience that the Democratic candidate supported ''postcard
voter registration,'' minority quotas in disbursement of state contracts and the
Federal Voting Rights Act.

Mr. Godwin's previous reluctance to strongly endorse Mr. Coleman and Mr. Robb's
strategic appeal to Democratic conservatives, many of whom financed and
supported the Republican takeover of this state in the 1970's, have been major
factors in the Republicans' unexpected difficulties in the 1981 campaign.

Lack of Sharp Differences

Some Republicans have also complained that Mr. Coleman has failed to define his
differences on the issues. Mr. Robb is 42, and, like Mr. Coleman, a former
marine who served in Vietnam. Mr. Robb is a son-in-law of the late President
Johnson. Both men have run generally conservative campaigns.

For Mr. Coleman, the President's brief visit here was the potentially crucial
redemption of a campaign pledge. An appearance by Mr. Reagan was canceled at the
last moment last month when it conflicted with a television speech on Sept. 24.

But the delay, even though the White House rejected Mr. Coleman's plans for an
itinerary that would have taken Mr. Reagan to Roanoke and Virginia Beach, may
have been fortunate for the Republican candidate because his supporters
considered the timing of the Reagan talk tonight as optimum.

Coleman Trailing in Polls

Mr. Coleman has been trailing by unexpectedly large margins in polls since
September: he drew only 38 percent to Mr. Robb's 47 percent in the latest
survey, published Sunday by The Richmond Times-Dispatch. Strategists thus
consider the last-minute benediction of Mr. Reagan unquestionably more useful
than it would have been earlier.

Mr. Coleman's public forgiveness tonight by Mr. Godwin was also a substantial
development. Mr. Godwin's own choice as the Republican nominee earlier this year
was bumped by the young, fast-rising Attorney General.

Until tonight, Mr. Godwin, Virginia's ''Mr. Republican,'' had given only an
unenthusiastic endorsement to his party's ticket as a whole, without ever
mentioning Mr. Coleman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 28, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT NEW YORK

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 982 words


In the midafternoon drizzle, there were people giving out leftist literature at
the arching gates that lead to College Walk on the Columbia University campus.
It sometimes seems that there have always been people at these gates giving out
literature - through rain and snow, gloom of night, the heat of the Vietnam War
and the lukewarm early 1960's and 1980's.

The technique never varies: the mimeographed flier, the paper passed from one
hand to another, and the ritual crumpling of the flier that is then tossed into
the trash can that has long been set just inside the gates, perhaps for this
very purpose.

Columbia is a place in which almost anything can be disseminated - and
discarded. It is a large and distinguished university, and so it is a kind of
safe house of ideas, a home to the thoughts of Lenin, Trotsky and Che Guevera as
well as Plato, Socrates and Descartes.

The area in which it sits has inevitably picked up some of this quality.
Morningside Heights is, in many ways, as eclectic and tolerant as the great
domed presence that is at its center. Its transient population moves every
couple of years in a welter of secondhand furniture, toaster ovens, textbooks
and hanging plants.

And its permanent population, the families of professors, the widows of civil
servants, the former students who have become professional hangers-on, have seen
so many schools of thought come and go that there is little to surprise them.

The student riots of 1968 are still a kind of psychic presence on the campus,
like an abandoned building that has not yet been razed.  It is no wonder to most
Heights residents that Katherine Boudin and Bernardine Dohrn settled here, that
Mark Rudd and Eve Rosahn once were students at Columbia.

''That was a terrible time, when they took over the university,'' said Anna
Peltz, who has lived for 42 years not far from the apartment on Morningside
Drive where Miss Boudin had lived until her arrest.

''The students were not nice people,'' she said. ''They were scruffy. They were
rude. They thought they knew how to run the government better than the
government did. Now things are getting back to normal. I think this young lady
is just a leftover. I've talked to some of the students and they don't see her
point at all.''

Mrs. Peltz has watched the passing parades of students, from argyle sweaters to
wool flannel suits to tie-dyed T-shirts to the current Izod Lacoste, and she
reads them correctly today. The boys' hair is short, the girls' long. Radical
politics seem a little outdated and embarrassing, like parents doing disco
dances.

Columbia, ever a place of leafleteering for any cause and event imaginable, has
fewer political placards on its walls and bulletin boards than in years past.
The notices are for ''Old-Time Square Dance,'' a special showing of the ''film
classic'' called ''The Texas Chain Saw Massacre'' and a performance by Joey
Miserable and the Worms.

In Hamilton Hall, occupied and vandalized by the demonstrators of 1968, there
were freshman class elections being held the other day.  ''People are basically
interested in themselves,'' said Brian Jones, a junior, who was manning the
ballot box. ''They're worried about grad school, law school, the future.

''They look back at '68 and say what's the use of worrying about everyone else,
what did it get them. I don't think this thing with the Weather people is going
to change anybody's mind. I can't see anybody killing a cop, but, still, I don't
think students are that concerned about it. They're pretty apolitical.''

''We're political - look at this,'' said Andrew Upton, a freshman, pointing to
the ballot box. ''Coeducation -that's the issue. Sex and drugs, social life -
the usual. I think people are pretty apathetic about the Weathermen, though.''

''You can't compare this to 10 years ago,'' said Joe Titlebaum, another
freshman. ''We can look at our brothers and sisters or cousins or whatever and
say we see their mistakes rebelling, we see what it can lead to. I don't think
people see a point to it. It's not like '68.''

It is, of course, not like '68. Mark Rudd teaches in New Mexico, and on Saturday
a small buffet party has been scheduled to celebrate the publication of Jane
Alpert's autobiography, in which all radical concerns seem reduced, in fact, to
sex and drugs and social life.  Students agitate for more and better housing.
Grass has been coaxed into growing on small quads on campus where it would never
grow before.

But some things never change. Even with the constant movement of people in and
out of the community, there are still eternal verities: the kind of polyglot
existence that enables someone to exist on the Heights without ever being seen,
the multiplicity of concerns and ideas, the people handing out leftist
literature at the gates.

''We defend the Weather Underground against the state,'' said Penny Demos, a
member of the Spartacus (''We Are the Party of the Russian Revolution'') Youth
League, speaking in a mechanical singsong as though her words were an
oft-rehearsed manifesto.

''We agree,'' she said, ''that there is something wrong with the capitalist
system. We do not advocate terrorism. We see terrorism as an act of despair. But
we support the Weather Underground. We consider their acts acts of courage.''

''That's generally our position on them,'' she added. ''You can ask the other
students, but they're pretty apathetic.'' Miss Demos turned and pushed another
leaflet into another hand. ''Commie,'' the student she had tagged said, and the
other young men with him laughed, and he threw the leaflet away.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of students at Columbia University

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 28, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTIONS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 82 words


Because of an editing error, an arti- cle yesterday on the trial of Elvis Pres-
ley's doctor incorrectly identified Bruce Jenner, the husband of a possi- ble
defense witness in the case. Mr.  Jenner won the decathlon in the 1976 Olympic
Games.
An article yesterday on a Chicago art exhibition by Vietnam veterans in-
completely identified the site for a similar show opening on Nov. 10. It is the
Parks Department gallery at the Arsenal, in Central Park at Fifth Ave- nue and
64th Street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SADAT'S DEATH TURNS SPOTLIGHT TO A SUDANESE WAR OF SORTS

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1684 words

DATELINE: GENEINA, the Sudan, Oct. 28


There is a war going on in this land where the hot, pale desert peopled by
nomads provides an inhospitable and improbable theater of confrontation between
East and West.

It is not so much a shooting conflict as a battle involving propaganda, ancient
trade routes and a surrogate army that wants the United States to support it
against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader.

Geneina lies on the indistinct border between the Sudan, a pro-Western bulwark
protecting Egypt's southern flank, and Chad, a country that the Soviet-supported
Colonel Qaddafi all but annexed 10 months ago.

Nomads Know No Boundaries

This region is known as Darfur, an area the size of France that was once a
proud, independent sultanate run by a dynasty of rulers that lasted 560 years.
From Geneina, caravans of pilgrims heading overland to Mecca make their way
east. Men of the Tuareg stock of desert nomads roam the area, dressed in long
white robes and white turbans.  With their camels and mules and trappings they
recognize no international boundaries, lines that appear on the maps but not on
the shifting sands and dry river beds they traverse. The town itself is one of
flat-roofed houses, stretched resources and economic decay.

Casualties Are Modest

The war is ostensibly between the Sudan and Libya. Libyan aircraft bombed border
villages near here 25 times between Sept. 10 and Oct.  13. It is a token of the
low level of the fighting that, among the most severe casualties listed by the
Sudan were 7 goats, 44 cows and 3 camels.

The raids hit villages, including one called Kulbus, 75 miles north of here. The
official Sudanese position is that the village is just one more of the small
settlements that lie on the border. Other authoritative informants, however, say
that Kulbus is the general headquarters of a Chadian insurgent group, numbering
about 2,500 men led by Hissen Habre, Chad's former Defense Minister, who opposes
the Libyan presence in his country. The raids, these informants maintain, were
intended to destabilize the insurgent leader's rear base and turn the local
Sudanese population against him and his mentor, President Gaafar al-Nimeiry of
the Sudan.

Earlier this month, General Nimeiry, seeking to dramatize his plight, depicted
this border confict as the forerunner of a Libyan invasion. He siad it was part
of a wider assault on the West's allies in the Middle East at a time of
vulnerability after the assassination of his ally, Anwar el-Sadat, in Egypt.

Sudanese Army officers here say such an invasion is physically possible but
unlikely at present. The terrain, they say, would be suitable for a push by
Libya's Soviet-built T-54 tanks, but the supply lines would be overextended and
the logistics difficult. For reporters who drove here from El Fasher, 220 miles
to the east, the trip took 13 hours across deep sand, indistinct tracks, dry
river beds and rocky mountain passes where locusts swarmed from thorn trees,
water was scarce and fuel yet scarcer.

How It Began

The border conflict started last December when Libyan troops moved into Chad to
support Goukouni Oueddei, the Prime Minister, against Mr. Habre, who fled to the
Sudan. It remains a conflict involving allies of convenience rather than
conviction.

Colonel Qaddafi supported Mr. Habre in an earlier insurrection in Chad. Now
Colonel Qaddafi is backing Mr. Goukouni, and Mr. Habre needs a new protector.
Both the Sudan and Egypt require a means of harassing the Libyans in Chad, so
the former friend of their enemy, has become their ally.

Tony Brauman, a French volunteer doctor who has become a confidant of Mr. Habre
in Kulbus, said the insurgents there were equipped with new Egyptian-supplied
weapons, incuding antiaircraft guns and assault rifles of both Eastern and
Western design. Egyptian military advisers have been seen in Kulbus, Mr. Brauman
said. According to other informants, four Egyptian transport aircraft landed
recently at El Fasher with fresh supplies. The insurgents led by Mr. Habre have
penetrated 70 to 130 miles into Chad but do not hold any towns.

Brig. Abbas Mohamed Abulaal, the Sudanese commander here, who describes his area
of authority as ''the western frontier,'' said Libyan troops and Chadian
Government forces held a town just across the border in Chad.

Fighting to Negotiate

Mr. Habre does not believe he can win a straight military victory unless Colonel
Qaddafi withdraws his men. ''They know they cannot win a military victory,'' Mr.
Brauman said. ''They want to keep up pressure and then be able to negotiate. If
they do not fight, they have no negotiating position.''

Several recent developments have heartened Mr. Habre's men. The Reagan
Administration's hostility toward Colonel Qaddafi, an authoritative Sudanese
source said, has encouraged a belief that Washington will support them
indirectly through Egypt. When the Libyan bombing raids ceased 10 days ago, the
source said, Mr. Habre's men attributed that to the presence of United States
Awacs aircraft monitoring the border area. In this remote zone, travellers have
noted, the Awacs have taken on a special aura, as if they provided an
impenetrable defense line.

For its part, Libya is conducting a war on several fronts, apparently in
pursuance of Colonel Qaddafi's campaign to establish a line of anti-American
governments from his borders through the Sudan to Marxist Ethiopia, Somalia and
Southern Yemen. Colonel Qaddafi already has an alliance with Ethiopia and
Southern Yemen, which is worrying the Sudan, and Sudanese officials assert that
he wants to bring down President Nimeiry to isolate Egypt and thus combat the
peace treaty with Israel.

Bombs in Cigarettes

Libyan broadcasts are beamed into this area, urging the people to turn against
President Nimeiry, and the bombing raids, Sudanese officials say, are intended
in part to make the Sudanese leader look weak in the eyes of his compatriots. At
the same time, Libya has reportedly sent sabotage and assassination squads into
this region.

Brigadier Abbas recently showed reporters an attache case packed with cartons of
Rothmans cigarettes and Courreges toilet water packed with plastic explosives.
The box of toilet water, Brigadier Abbas said, was rigged to explode when it was
opened. The explosives in the cigarette packets were connected to timing
devices. ''This was an attempt to kill me,'' Brigadier Abbas said. ''But our
security services intercepted the briefcase and arrested the Libyan agents
carrying it.''

The Libyan campaign perceived by the Sudan extends further. In the deserts north
of here, there are caravan trails where for centuries nomads have crossed the
ocher wastes on camels, trading among their kinfolk between Darfur and what is
now Libya. These days, young Sudanese go to work in Libya and return laden with
Japanese hi-fi equipment, blue jeans, perfumes and Italian shirts. ''We are
closer to Libya than we are to our own port on the Red Sea,'' a Sudanese
official said. ''Our trade has traditionally been with Libya.''

Fugitives Are a Problem

The Governor of the Darfur region, Ahmed Ibrahim Derreig, said: ''This is the
dangerous thing. The Libyans can exploit the economic situation and tell the
people their point of view without our Government telling our point of view.''
Radio Tripoli's broadcasts reach Geneina. Those of Radio Omdurman, the official
Sudanese radio, do not.

Yet a further destabilizing factor is the presence of Chadian fugitives here.
There are 8,000 registered refugees in Geneina, most of them from the ferocious
Guran tribe, whose men traditionally carry a dagger in a scabbard on the upper
arm concealed in a flowing robe.  The refugees eat from aid supplies when the
local people do not, relief workers say, and their presence taxes the town's
resources, which are barely able to meet the demands of its 60,000 people.

Mr. Habre's insurgents, too, have incurred some disfavor among Sudanese. French
medical personnel working in Kulbus said the insurgents had been confined to
their barracks after 6 P.M. because they had gotten drunk and had brawls with
the local people and there had been killings.

Reason for Attention

This small conflict with its minutiae would have been largely unnoticed by the
outside world had it not been for the assassination of President Sadat and the
sudden focusing of Western attention on the Sudan as Egypt's geographically
closest ally. The Reagan Administration has agreed to try to accelerate
deliveries of military hardware to the Sudan, apparently as a gesture of
psychological support. President Nimeiry, whose army of 60,000 is poorly
equipped, encouraged these attentions.

Now, Sudanese officials contend, the prospect of American military involvement
on a larger scale has produced its own hazards. ''We do not want to have another
Vietnam in Africa,'' Governor Derreig said.  ''If the big powers come and the
conflict becomes bigger, our people will suffer not only during the war but
afterward.''

External involvement here has its anomalies. Egypt and the Sudan, Washington's
allies, have become embroiled with Mr. Habre's forces as part of their campaign
against Libya, a fierce opponent of the Camp David accords. At the same time,
however, France has begun supporting the Chad Government of Mr. Goukouni in
Ndjamena. The Reagan Administration is supporting a French initiative to create
an African peacekeeping force to replace the Libyans in Chad, something Colonel
Qaddafi is resisting because of what he terms Sudanese aggression. Washington,
thus, seems to be indirectly involved on both sides of a conflict that shows
little sign now of easing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of Sudan (Page A14) Photoa of Col. Muammar
el-Quaddafi (Page A14)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S DAY: FORTUNES SOAR AT HOME AND ABROAD;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 28


President Reagan's startling catch-up victory in the Senate on the arms package
for Saudi Arabia will bolster his credibility and influence with the moderate
Arab countries and with European governments, though it sharpens his differences
at least temporarily with Israel.

To have come from so far behind on a crucial foreign policy issue has also given
the President a badly needed lift in the domestic political arena after a period
of discouraging economic and political developments. ''We were in the fall
doldrums,'' acknowledged Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada, a close friend of the
President. ''We needed a big one like this.''

Although most Democrats and some Republicans have seen the Saudi arms package as
a special issue with little link to the inconclusive maneuvering on budget cuts,
Mr. Laxalt and White House strategists contended that today's victory will
strengthen the President's hand with Congress on the budget and defense.

''Now we can zero in on the economic issue,'' Mr. Laxalt asserted.  ''This
demonstrates that the President is still very very effective on Capitol Hill at
a time when people were questioning whether his momentum had been arrested. Ten
days ago, you could have had 10-to-1 odds against this happening. We had only 40
votes then. We had ten target Senators and we got every one of them.''

Despite the close 52-to-48 vote margin, Mr. Reagan's first foreign policy
triumph in Congress enabled him to demonstrate both to domestic opponents and
questioning foreign powers that if he feels personally committed he can prevail
on a major foreign policy issue against powerful, organized opposition and one
of Washington's most potent groups, the Israel lobby.

Reagan's Control Questioned

As several Western ambassadors here have remarked privately, the question of Mr.
Reagan's control of foreign policy has been on the minds of European governments
as well as well as that of the Saudis and other moderate Arabs. Today, they drew
encouragement from the vote.

As both American and Israeli officials predicted today, American-Israeli
relations will bear scars from the bitter fight over the Awacs radar
surveillance planes, which Prime Minister Menachem Begin has said represent a
threat to Israel's security.

Ephraim Evron, the Israeli Ambassador, quickly suggested that Washington should
now move to heal the wounds by providing Israel with additional arms. In a
statement, he noted that President Reagan, ''whose friendship for Israel is
deeply appreciated,'' had pledged to maintain Israel's ''qualitative edge'' over
the Arabs militarily.  ''We trust that in view of the massive flow of
sophisticated weaponry to Arab countries hostile to Israel, this commitment will
be acted upon,'' he said.

Administration officials said the Israelis had raised this point privately just
24 hours before the Awacs vote, but their suggestion had been rejected. It was
more likely, officials said, that the Reagan Administration would move now to
flesh out the concept of a strategic partnership with Israel discussed during
Prime Minister Begin's visit here last month.

Jewish Republicans Alerted

Influential Jewish Republicans, privately unhappy with the Awacs deal and
fearful that the President has suffered political damage among Jewish voters,
said they would now watch to see whether the White House moved to patch up those
differences or chose to ''gloat over beating the Jewish lobby,'' as one Jewish
leader put it.

By putting his personal prestige so clearly on the line and emphasizing the need
for American credibility on foreign policy, President Reagan set up the Awacs
vote as a test of his leadership.  That proved to be vital political leverage in
the final 72 hours when he converted five opponents and lined up the support of
nine previously neutral Senators.

''Defeat would have been severely damaging to our efforts to further the peace
process and the President's effort to be an honest broker in the Middle East,''
said Senator John Tower of Texas, who voted with the Administration.

In part, Mr. Reagan fell heir to the tradition of giving Presidents their way on
foreign policy. President Carter used much the same issue - his need to control
foreign policy and maintain commitments - to win Senate approval in April 1978
for the Panama Canal Treaties and a month later for an arms package for Saudi
Arabia.

But the closeness of today's vote and other Presidential defeats on foreign
policy showed how tenuous that argument can be with the assertive post-Vietnam
mood in Congress. In 1975, President Ford was rebuffed when Congress refused to
lift the ban on arms sales to Turkey and later cut off funds for covert military
aid to Angola. And Mr. Carter had to withdraw the arms treaty with Moscow when
it faced near-certain defeat in the Senate.

For Mr. Reagan, one immediate foreign policy advantage will be the added
credibility he gains among moderate Arabs and some Europeans for having brooked
Israel's opposition and prevailed. The Administration plans to use this episode
to push for increased cooperation with the moderates against Soviet and radical
Arab penetration in the Persian Gulf and around the Arabian Peninsula, and to
try to draw other moderate Arabs into Middle East peace diplomacy. This weekend,
King Hussein of Jordan arrives for top-level talks, with both sides eager to
repair their damaged diplomatic ties. ''The Awacs deal will help,'' said one
high official.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 31, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

WASHINGTON POST SELLS TRENTON TIMES TO ALLBRITTON COMPANY

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 30, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 744 words


The Trenton Times, which has been owned by The Washington Post Company since
1974, was sold yesterday to Joe L. Allbritton, former owner of The Washington
Star. The Trenton newspaper has fought a losing circulation war with the rival
Trentonian in recent years.

The price was not disclosed, but publishing sources said it was between $10
million and $12 million.  The sale to the Allbritton Communications Company,
which owns other newspapers in New Jersey, Massachusetts and Pennsylvania as
well as radio and television stations, signaled a major change in editorial
policy for the 99-year-old Times, long regarded as one of New Jersey's most
prestigious newspapers.

Under editors and managers brought in from The Post, The Times, a broadsheet
afternoon daily, had focused on national and international news and in-depth
reporting of state and local issues.  But it had steadily lost circulation to
The Trentonian, a morning tabloid, which has featured local news, breezy writing
and many pictures of local residents.

Emphasis on Hard News

''There are going to be changes in the news operation,'' said GeorgeBeveridge, a
spokesman for Mr. Allbritton. ''We will focus on the Allbritton style of
newspapering, which means concentrating heavy emphasis on hard, breaking news as
opposed to feature or indepth, interpretative reporting.''

Mr. Beveridge said that he would not call the new approach sensational, but that
it would be ''hard hitting.'' He added: ''We're here to try to make this the
highest quality, most economically viable local newspaper we can. In terms of
The Trentonian, we're here to win.''

In the last decade, The Times's daily circulation has declined by about 15,000,
while The Trentonian's has risen about 12,000. Recent circulation figures show
the two papers nearly equal at about 68,000 daily. On Sunday, The Times sells
some 79,000 copies, while The Trentonian has a circulation of about 59,000.

The competition became fierce after The Post acquired The Times for $16 million
in 1974 and publicly resolved to turn the fading paper into the state's most
influential and polished publication. It started a Saturday edition, began
putting out morning papers and brought in a series of editors, publishers and
circulation experts from The Post.

Sensational News and Snapshots

The Trentonian, which was founded in 1945 by personnel on strike against The
Times, responded to the challenge by starting what has become a successful
Sunday paper, and with barrages of spicy and sensational local news, photographs
of children having birthday parties and vacation snapshots of anyone who sent
them in.

Carriers for each paper charged opponents with making threats and even hiding
their vending machines, and four Times circulation executives were indicted
earlier this year on charges of falsifying circulation figures.

With Times circulation slipping and profits only marginal in recent years, The
Trentonian appeared to have gained the upper hand among Trenton's largely
working-class population of 96,000. Katharine Graham, chairman of the Post
Company, referred to The Times as ''my Vietnam,'' but said earlier this year
that the paper was not for sale.

An announcement by Mr. Allbritton and Mrs. Graham yesterday said The Times's
president and publisher, Edward R. Padilla, and its executive editor, Larry
Kramer, would return to The Post.

W. Dean Singleton, executive vice president of Allbritton Communications, will
become president and chief executive officer of The Times, and Thomas Curran,
news editor of The New York Daily News, will become editor, the announcement
said. Other personnel changes on the paper, which has a 109-member news staff,
are being studied, Mr. Beveridge said.

Mr. Allbritton, who bought the now defunct Washington Star in 1974 for $65
million and sold it to Time Inc., in 1978 for a reported profit of $70 million,
is a Texan reputed to be one of the country's wealthiest men, with a net worth
of $100 million to $150 million.  His interests include chains of banks,
mortuaries and hotels as well as real estate, life insurance and communiations
enterprises.

His properties include The Paterson News and The Hudson Dispatch of Union City,
both in New Jersey; The Standard-Observer in Irwin, Pa.; four Massachusetts
papers; radio stations WCKN AM and FM in Kansas City, Kan., and three television
stations, WJLA in Washington, D.C., WCIV in Charleston, S.C., and WSET in
Lynchburg, Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 2, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article in Metropolitan Report on Saturday incorrectly described the profit
in the 1978 sale of The Washington Star to Time Inc. An estimated profit of $70
million was made on the combined sale of the paper and other units of its parent
company, Washington Star Communications Inc.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Larry Kramer, executive editor of the Trenton
Times

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. Team in Thailand

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 54 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 31


A United Nations team arrived here today to investigate allegations that
Vietnamese troops are using toxic chemicals against guerrillas in Cambodia. In
their one-week visit, they are to interview Cambodian refugees along the
Thai-Cambodian border.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PEACE CORPS SEEKS A REVIEW OF CUTS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 31


The Peace Corps, with its modest $105 million budget cut this year to $83.6
million, has appealed to the Administration for reconsideration.

Loret Miller Ruppe, the organization's director, said yesterday in her office
just before setting out on a month-long tour of volunteer outposts in North and
West Africa, that she had met with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
about the budgetary problem and had found him ''very supportive.''

''He said what we were doing was right in line with the Administration's foreign
policy,'' she said. ''But we haven't heard anything yet about our appeal.''

The Peace Corps, now 20 years old, is very different from what it was in the
1960's. The average age of volunteers is higher - about 27. There are fewer of
them - about 5,000 in 60 countries compared with 11,115 in 57 nations in 1967.

Fisheries an Important Program

Most important to the Peace Corps now is the development of programs in
agriculture and alternative sources of energy. Jody Olsen, the regional director
for North Africa, the Near East, Asia and the Pacific, said that among these
programs, training in fisheries was one of the most important.

''This is bringing protein into areas where it is almost impossible to get
meat,'' Miss Olsen said. She also described projects in teaching simple market
gardening in primary and secondary schools and the raising of rabbits for food
supply. Agriculture specialists are in great demand by the Corps.

In its training program, volunteers are taught not to expect to see changes in
their two-year period of service.  ''With rabbits, for example,'' Miss Olsen
said, ''it may be easier to raise rabbits than build fisheries, but you have to
introduce the concept of eating rabbits, and of cooking rabbits. In some places
that could take six to eight years.''

The leadership of the Corps, struggling to live within the new financial
restraints, is made up of loyal Republicans. Mrs. Ruppe, a Midwesterner, worked
on Vice President Bush's campaign for the Presidency and went on to become
cochairman of the Reagan-Bush committee in Michigan.

Virtues of Self-Help Extolled

She extols the virtues of self-help in public speeches, saying the work of the
Corps is ''right up Mr. Reagan's alley'' in teaching self-sufficiency.

Lon Randall, a graduate of Fort Wayne Bible College and the president of Malone
College in Canton, Ohio, who is now associate director for programs, prefaces
remarks about the response of the Peace Corps to budget cuts with his support
for ''the President's move toward restoring sound fiscal policy.''

In line with Administration moves in other agencies - notably the Agency for
International Development, with which the Peace Corps works closely overseas -
the Corps has created an office for liaison with the private sector. Its
director is John Calvin Williams Jr., a former Peace Corps volunteer in Morocco
and Niger who is on leave from Chase Manhattan Bank, where he directed
activities in Frenchspeaking Africa.

The Peace Corps offices are shared with several other volunteer agencies,
including Volunteers in Service to America and the Foster Grandparent Program,
all of which were combined by President Nixon in 1971 into a coordinating agency
called Action.

Moves to Restore Independence

There have been moves in Congress to restore the independence of the Peace
Corps, which many feel has lost its identity under the Action umbrella.

The movement was given new impetus in March, when President Reagan appointed
Thomas W. Pauken director of Action. Mr. Pauken had served as a military
intelligence officer in Vietnam, and the Peace Corps has a strict prohibition
against former intelligence agents within its agency. Rumors of Central
Intelligence Agency links to the Peace Corps, never proved, cost the Corps its
India program, which was terminated by New Delhi in 1976.

Senator Alan Cranston of California led a successful Democratic drive to write
Peace Corps autonomy into legislation this year. This month the full Senate
upheld that legislation. Mrs. Ruppe says that the legislation was not necessary
because she had been assured she would continue to report directly to the
executive branch.

Evaluation Is Under Way

According to Mr. Randall, the associate director, the Peace Corps is in the
process of ''global evaluation'' of its programs. Mr.  Randall, who worked with
the Agency for International Development in Thailand, said that, especially in a
period of tight budget restraint, ''the aim of the Peace Corps is to leave a
country.''

He said that as soon as a country's per capita income and quality of life had
reached an acceptable level, the Peace Corps would disengage itself, as it has
done recently in Chile, leaving the work in the hands of local officials and
allowing the Corps to concentrate its resources on the ''poorest of the poor.''

The degree to which a country contributes to a Peace Corps presence has become
important to whether the agency will agree to set up or expand programs. There
are still many more requests for Peace Corps volunteers from foreign countries
than the agency can hope to meet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE PILOTS EXPLAIN DEFECTION TO CHINA

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 597 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 31


A month ago, 10 Vietnamese squeezed into an American made Vietnamese Air Force
helicopter and flew across the border into China's Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous
Region, explaining to surprised Chinese frontier guards that they were unhappy
with life at home.

The helicopter flight on Sept. 30 was not reported here until a week later,
after there had been time for interrogation of the Vietnamese. Subsequently,
Chinese authorities produced four of them, including the helicopter pilot, at a
news conference.

The four identified themselves as Second Lieut. Khieu Than Luc, the pilot;
Warrant Officers Hoang Xuan Doan and Le Ngoc Son, and Duong Van Loi, an
architectural engineer.  They divulged only a few details of their flight.

When their craft crossed into Chinese airspace, they hung white flags from both
doors as "a sign of cooperation" so they would not be fired upon.  In plotting
the escape, they said, they did not tell their families for fear there would be
a leak.  They chose China as their destination because the airfield where they
started their flight was within range of the border and their UH-1H helicopter,
a trophy of the American involvement in Vietnam, had limited fuel capacity.

But they sidestepped questions about where they had taken off and landed, how
they had planned the operation and who were the six others with them.  Instead,
with Chinese encouragement, they talked about low morale and respression in
Vietnam and about Vietnamese atrocities in Cambodia.

China has taken in more than 250,000 refugees from Vietnam, mostly ethnic
Chinese.  They have been resettled on state farms and in fishing villages in
areas adjoining Vietnam.

At the news conference, Lieutenant Luc, the pilot, contended that most
Vietnamese wanted to leave the country because they were miserable, but did not
dare.  In late July, another Vietnamese second lieutenant tried to fly his plane
from Da Nang to China but failed, and two weeks later was condemned to death, he
said.  He said he knew of several other hijacking incidents in Vietnam since
1975.

"When we took our flight, we thought we would either get to China or die," he
said.

Mr. Doan, one of the warrant officers, said he had not finished his military
training in time to fight against the Americans in the Indochina war and that
neither he nor Lieutenant Luc nor Mr. Son, the other warrant officer, had taken
part in the Chinese-Vietnamese border war in early 1979.  But he said he had
flown medical evacuation missions in Cambodia, where he had learned of
Vietnamese atrocities against the rebels.

Cambodia Fighting Termed Fierce

On one battlefront, he said, Vietnamese officers sliced open the stomachs of
captured guerrillas.  When he visited another Vietnamese division, he said, he
saw the heads of decapitated guerrillas mounted on fences.  He contended that
the Vietnamese Army was meeting fierce resistance in some areas like Battambang
and Siem Reap Provinces.

Mr. Loi, the architectural engineer, is older than the airmen and more
emotional.  He said that he had brought letters from lawyers, journalists and
other intellectuals who had been imprisoned.  He said he wanted to give his
evidence to international agencies concerned with human rights.

While the four said they had flown to China partly because they expected a
friendly reception, Lieutenant Luc avoided saying whether they wanted to settle
in China.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Colonel Backs Barring Women From Marines

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 59, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 173 words

DATELINE: ANNAPOLIS, Md., Oct. 31


The capability of the Marine Corps to deploy units quickly in emergencies has
been undermined by the presence of women in the ranks, a marine officer contends
in an article released Thursday.

The article, ''No Place for Women,'' is to be published in the November edition
of the United States Naval Institute magazine Proceedings. In the article,
Lieut. Col. David Evans said women should be excluded from the operating forces
of the marines.

''The folk wisdom of an enlisted male Marine leaves little room for argument:
'When the platoon goes to the field, she doesn't go,' '' Colonel Evans wrote. ''
'If they go to combat, she doesn't go. If they go aboard a ship, she doesn't go.
Why is she in this platoon?' ''

Colonel Evans, a Vietnam veteran now stationed at the Pentagon, said: ''Present
policies are no guarantee that women won't come under fire. If the prospect of
female combat casualties is unacceptable, then women should be entirely
excluded.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOUDINI- THE GREATEST SHOWMAN OF ALL?

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1713 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Daniel E. Harmon is a freelance writer with a special interest in magic and
magicians.

By DANIEL E. HARMON

ALondon coroner attributed the death to ''misadventure.'' What more could he
say? On March 13, 1918, world-famous showman W. E. Robinson, alias Chung Ling
Soo, was ''catching bullets'' in a plate at the Wood Green Empire. The gun's
discharge mechanism went afoul at an unfortunate instant; the final curtain fell
on Chung Ling Soo, one of 12 persons known to have died while attempting to
catch bullets.

Harry Houdini, possibly the greatest self-promoter of all time, quickly
announced that he would perform the deadly feat at an upcoming convention of the
Society of American Magicians. His old mentor Harry Kellar got wind of it and
fired off a letter. ''Don't try the damn bullet catching trick,'' he warned,
''no matter how sure you may feel of its success. There is always the biggest
kind of risk that some dog will 'job' you. And we can't afford to lose
Houdini.''

Few men were more resolute than Houdini, but he was no fool. He knew that
Kellar, a master magician, had investigated the stunt himself. There must be
ample reason for such strong advice. Houdini quietly withdrew his plan.

At a Pittsburgh convention of the International Brotherhood of Magicians (IBM)
last July, petite magician Dorothy Dietrich was scheduled to receive a bullet,
fired through a glass pane, in a specially coated cup in her mouth. She, too,
had warnings. ''Andrew is afraid you will not be here for his sixth birthday to
make the rabbit disappear,'' her attorney wrote, not at all in jest. Her
marksman, a Vietnam veteran, was not told until the evening before that he would
be shooting directly at a friendly American woman. He had trouble sleeping. He
was dripping wet as he took aim. But the stunt went precisely as planned.

Miss Dietrich, who repeated the test before ''You Asked for It'' television
cameras, has become the first woman to catch a bullet in her mouth. There have
been several men, including Milbourne Christopher, a Houdini biographer and
noted escapologist. Meanwhile, numerous artists have repeated Houdini's famed
Milk Can Escape, his extrication from the Chinese Water Torture Cell, and his
exploits while submerged and suspended - often with the added suspense of a
burning rope, which The Escape King avoided.

Could it be the great Houdini now is routinely bested by his followers? The
reply from those in authority is always the same: Yes - and no.

Yesterday - Halloween - was the 55th anniversary of Houdini's death. (It also
was the birthday of Dorothy Dietrich, who does not consider the connection
irrelevant.) He succumbed, at 52, to peritonitis ignited by the abdominal
punches of an admiring student at McGill University in Montreal. The student
wished to confirm the showman's fabled physique. Houdini, perusing mail in his
dressing room, absentmindedly consented. This occurred Oct. 22, 1926, and
Houdini, also suffering a broken ankle, agonized through three last shows in
Montreal and Detroit before allowing himself to be hospitalized.

Typical. This man, identified variously by his awed watchers as a mystic,
medium, athlete par excellence, contortionist and unshacklable escapologist,
nurtured throughout his career a reputation for enduring the impossible. In
reality he came very close, so close that his lasting fame easily is justified.
How many entertainers today, it may be asked, would perform three shows with a
broken ankle and a terminal case of peritonitis?

Yet the question of Houdini's all-time superiority in his chosen profession is
open. His greatest escapes have been duplicated many times over and occasionally
taken a step further. The successors are well-tried, for today's public is more
critical than that of the early century, when much of society acutally believed
in magic.  ''Today we've done the magic of sending men to the moon. It's not
such a big thing anymore,'' says Howard Bamman, executive editor of ''The
Linking Ring,'' the IBM's official magazine.

On the other hand, performers today have the advantage of access to media
exposure unheard of in 1926. Millions of television viewers have seen The
Amazing Randi (James Randall Zwinge) writhe straitjacketed while dangling upside
down over Niagara Falls, suspended by a crane. Cable television has filmed Miss
Dietrich escaping from a straitjacket while hanging from a burning rope, 15
stories high.

Mr. Bamman, like most others in this realm of the entertainment industry,
refuses to name an escape champion, past or present.  ''It's like comparing
apples and oranges,'' he says. ''Everything is different. Houdini had freedom of
movement, for one thing. He could go to different countries and challenge the
native constabulary.  Today it's unheard of. You may be able to get yourself
into a jail in Russia, as he did, but you're not going to get out. Escape
artists don't need to make challenges anymore, and local gendarmes won't go
along with it.''

Houdini's famous boast was that he could escape from any restraining device
made. He invariably was victorious. Physically equipped for the task - he could
manipulate muscles at will and regurgitate swallowed picks when needed - he also
acquired an encyclopedic knowledge of locks. How he would fare today against
electronically operated jails and unpickable locks is a valid fantasy. Would he
develop his own space-age technology to effect escapes, or ignore escapology in
lieu of another phase of showmanship? Few doubt he would be a modern-day
success, for what he lacked in human ability he compensated for with sheer
charisma.

''All will agree that Houdini was a master showman,'' Mr. Bamman says. ''That
was what made him: a sense for the public eye and an aura that made him seem
invincible.''

''Houdini had an unusual act,'' says 82-year-old Walter Gibson, one of Houdini's
last living associates and a prolific writer on illusions and escapes. ''A lot
of people believed that he was either supernatural or had some amazing secrets.
Actually, other magicians had bigger tricks, but no one had his style.''

The closest performer to a Houdini personality today probably is The Amazing
Randi, in the opinion of Bill Larsen, publisher of the Los Angeles-based
conjurer's magazine ''Genii.'' Randi also received the endorsement of author
William Lindsay Gresham in the dedication of the biography ''Houdini: The Man
Who Walked Through Walls.'' ''Randi is that kind of showman, reaching out,
garnering publicity,'' Mr. Larsen says. ''He's become known as a challenger of
other performers. Sometimes he gets himself in hot water but he gets away with
it, he's such a character.''

Miss Dietrich, on the strength of her televised stunts, could claim preeminence,
although she pays deference to Houdini. She essentially is a magician,
distinguished as the first woman to saw a man in half; Garry Moore was one
victim. But she is an ever more serious stunt artist as well, researching some
projects for as long as a year.

We may consider Doug Henning, the celebrated magician who also performs such
escapes as the water torture; and Norm Bigelow, a ''reincarnation'' of Houdini
who is carried onstage in a coffin.  There are so many other noteworthy escape
artists one cannot begin to list them.

''There are probably a couple of thousand enthusiastic, dedicated escapologists
in the United States,'' reckons Joe Tanner, who does a worldwide mail-order
business in escape equipment from his Great Falls, Mont., home. ''I would add a
minimum of 15,000 more who do mostly magic and have at least one escape trick in
their act.''

No longer are handcuffs, leg irons and straitjackets the stocks in trade, Mr.
Tanner notes. A current best seller is the constrictor, a strap-and-chain
contrivance that pins your arms to your sides, binds your hands behind you and
connects your wrists to your knees. He intones, ''You're standing there like
you're a mummy, right? And you escape from it. They come in various colors.''
Constrictors were never in official use that he knows of.

Mr. Tanner has considerable respect for Houdini's work, but he suspects ''a lot
of people today are equal to, or even better than, Houdini in effecting
escapes.'' Mr. Gibson believes that from the technical standpoint Houdini indeed
was matched, and in his own lifetime. The rival was none other than Houdini's
brother and onetime partner Theo, who performed under the pseudonym ''Hardeen.''

''Everybody's overlooked Hardeen,'' Mr. Gibson says. ''But he did a duplicate
act, except for the water torture. He probably did the overboard stunt, in which
he was thrown into the water locked in a trunk, more times than Houdini did.
Every secret that Houdini had belonged to Hardeen, too. But you can't rate them.
In stunts you either do it or you don't. Aside from that, and personality,
there's really nothing to compare.''

Houdini and Hardeen at one time toured opposite each other, no one realizing
they were brothers. ''I remember once while Houdini was up there getting out of
the straitjacket, hanging in mid-air, Hardeen had kids handing out Hardeen
pamphlets to the crowd,'' Mr. Gibson says. ''That was one time Houdini really
got mad at him.''

The question remains: Was - and is - Harry Houdini the escape doyen he claimed
to be?  Mr. Gibson gives a final yes-and-no. ''A great many have surpassed him
in certain ways,'' he observes. ''But the thing about Houdini was that he was
unique. He was very dynamic. He did things his own way.  As a showman he was the
equal of Barnum - and he did his own pitch.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Harry Houdini preparing an escape

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOW TO FIT THE AWACS INTO WIDER DIPLOMACY

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 946 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In the tense days after the assassination of Anwar el-Sadat and during the
debate that led last week to approval of the sale of Awacs planes to Saudi
Arabia, the Reagan Administration has, in effect, proclaimed a new, wide-ranging
commitment to protect all friendly states in the Middle East against outside
aggression.

The commitment, as yet, is not legally binding or specific.  Congress has not
authorized it but may have implicitly endorsed the policy by raising virtually
no objections to pledges issued by President Reagan, Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. and Richard V. Allen, the national security adviser. They
promised to protect Israel, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and, Mr. Allen said, ''any of
the other states in the region.'' (Representative Henry S. Reuss, chairman of
the Joint Economic Committee, did view the commitments as cause for ''bipartisan
citizen and Congressional concern.'')

The lack of controversy underscored the changing national mood.  After the
Vietnam war, Congress and the public were wary of Presidentially proclaimed
military commitments. A Congressional resolution in 1968 barred any commitment
without the consent of Congress. The War Powers Act of 1973 forbade the
President to involve troops overseas without explicit Congressional approval.
But President Jimmy Carter, after the Soviet move into Afghanistan, announced in
January, 1980, that the United States was ready to use force if necessary to
prevent Russian control of the Persian Gulf area. The declaration was not
challenged and the Reagan Administration has defended its own subsequent
statements as logical elaborations. Mr. Reagan said that he would not permit
Saudi Arabia to become ''another Iran'' and Mr. Haig assessed sustaining the
status quo in Egypt as a national interest. After the Awacs vote, the

President reaffirmed the security ''commitment'' to Israel. Vague promises of
protection were even extended to the Sudan.  Perhaps the closest precedent was
the Eisenhower Doctrine of 1957, warning Moscow not to take advantage of
declining British and French influence after the Suez debacle. Washington was
also worried about rising radical movements fanned by Gamal Abdel Nasser of
Egypt.  Seeking broad public backing, that administration obtained a
Congressional joint resolution that said, ''the United States regards as vital
to the national interest and world peace the preservation of the independence
and integrity of the nations of the Middle East.  To this end, if the President
determines the necessity thereof, the United States is prepared to use armed
force to assist any nation or group of such nations requesting assistance
against armed aggression from any country controlled by international
communism.''

Putting Out 'Fires' Is Distracting

The doctrine was invoked to send emergency aid to King Hussein of Jordan as he
faced down an uprising. But it failed to prevent the leftist coup in Iraq, then
the most pro-Western Arab country. Worried that Iraqi radicalism might spread to
Lebanon, where President Camille Chamoun had warmly endorsed the Eisenhower
Doctrine, the Administration sent in Marines in 1958. They helped calm Lebanon
but later were blamed for President Chamoun's own (nonviolent) downfall.

Some historians believe that the Eisenhower Doctrine experience showed that
deterrence strategy cannot be expected to make up for poorly conceived foreign
policy. Washington's emphasis on security commitments in the 1950's put moderate
Arabs in difficulties in dealing with nationalist forces, they say, thereby
increasing instability. The Reagan Administration faces similar dilemmas. It
concedes that the stress on ''strategic consensus'' and commitments does not
remove the need for regional diplomacy. But it has not produced a diplomatic
approach to match its strategic emphasis. For months, Washington has been
preoccupied with putting out Middle East fires - arranging the Lebanon
cease-fire; averting Syrian-Israeli war; reacting to Israel's nuclear raid on
Iraq, and to Mr. Sadat's murder.

Now the region seems momentarily calm, perhaps offering an opening for
thoughtful diplomacy. The Saudis, pleased that Israel's friends were defeated on
Awacs, are pushing their first peace plan.  Washington last week welcomed parts
of it. Israel protested, affirming its rejection of the proposals, which include
withdrawal from the West Bank. Yasir Arafat endorsed the plan's call for
Israel-Arab ''coexistence,'' although a spokesman said later that his ever-wary
boss had been misquoted. Meanwhile, King Hussein is arriving in Washington this
week to discuss enlarging the peace process.

The Reagan Administration, anxious to buttress Israeli confidence after the
Awacs sale, must decide on a carrot-and-stick policy to reassure Israel while
keeping it engaged in diplomatic efforts. The Administration also must help end
Egypt's isolation among Arabs - a Saudi newspaper said last week that Egyptian
President Hosni Mubarak ''has a clean Arab record'' - and eventually it must
draw Palestinians into negotiations. The Saudis, who help finance them,
undoubtedly will again be asked to seek P.L.O. recognition of Israel. That would
open the way for Washington to deal with the P.L.O, but that issue is thorny.
The Israelis, after the Awacs defeat, fear Washington may be downgrading
interests that Jerusalem sees as vital.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of U.S. marines in Lebanon in 1958 photo of Yasir
Arafat and King Khalid

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEFIANT YOUTH OF EUROPE MAINLY DEFY STEREOTYPE

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1094 words

DATELINE: BONN


It was impossible to talk about youth in general terms, the professor insisted,
because there were too many currents, too many contradictions. He tried anyway.
When he finished, what little youth there was at the seminar in Essen on young
people's problems said they barely understood what he had in mind.

The analysis was not theirs and neither was the mood: place cards and a luncheon
menu that announced the wines would be an Ayler Kupp Riesling, demi-sec, and a
Valckenberg Falkenkrone, both 1979. The Frankfurter Rundschau reported that
Joachim Muller, aged 20, looked around, sniffed the scene and said, ''The whole
thing makes about as much sense as a board meeting of Daimler Benz at a hotdog
stand in a railway station.''

The generation gap lives in Europe, reinforced by every foundation, seminar,
polltaker and newspaper story. From their accounts - and a late summer and fall
of every variety of demonstration - it would be easy to assume that European
youth is terribly political, pessimistic and dissatisfied and deeply committed
to nonviolence. But every assumption is contradicted by another poll or seminar.

Take the no-war, no-nukes, no-defense demonstrations, most recently last
weekend. There were particularly thick crowds in Britain, where ban-the-bombing
has been a traditional preoccupation of youth. A deep commitment to peace? Well,
in a way. A poll commissioned by The Sunday Times of London last month looked
into the attitudes of unemployed young people and found that 42 percent thought
violence is sometimes justified to bring about political change. It was a jump
by a quarter in two years.

The same acceptance was found in a study by the Social Affairs Ministry in
North-Rhine Westphalia, West Germany's largest state.  Some 55 percent of a
group between 17 and 23 considered that ''regrettably, violence must be used to
draw attention to justified demands.''

The marching this fall has triggered the idea that the generation of 1981 are
the true younger brothers and sisters of 1968. But in Italy, the modish word to
describe the current mood is ''riflusso'' or backlash - which means serious
studying, a depassionalization of politics and consideration for Mama. Above
all, the polls show 18-year-olds believe in family ties and abhor promiscuity. A
composite of French youth made up by a left-wing magazine showed that if young
people considered getting involved in anything, only 4 percent would pick a
political party, while 48 percent would choose a group protecting nature.

The pattern wasn't that much different in West Germany. About 35 percent of the
Westphalian poll group was involved in organized sports and recreation, but only
2 percent in a political party or youth organization. Carried along with this
was a suggestion of contempt for the political establishment: 67 percent thought
parties were not interested in what people think, only in getting votes.

Further contradictions appear in Sweden, which still seems to be three or four
years ahead of the sociological curve in the rest of Europe. The dominant force
in campus politics is the Moderate Party, the country's most conservative
mainstream political group. Last weekend, when the rest of Europe seemed to be
out demonstrating against nukes, less than 5,000 were on the streets in
Stockholm, a city that 10 years ago could be described as a permanent anti-
Vietnam march.

As for pessimism about the world, 69 percent of the group of unemployed youth in
Britain described themselves as happy or fairly happy. In West Germany, a
majority of the under-23's said they were optimistic. In France, a majority
believes there will be no world war in their lifetime.

Schmidt Blames the Media

If anything unites French, German, and British youth, it is concern about
getting a job. In France, more than 90 percent of girls leaving school want to
work, but 82 percent believe they'll be unemployed.  In Britain, most young
people think unemployment caused the summer riots, and they have no confidence
that conditions will improve.  When West Germans of all ages were asked to
characterize the situation of today's youth with a single phrase, the answer in
77 percent of the cases was: ''They won't find it easy to get a good job.''

If the poll results pass for objectivity, then the convinced tone of the
subjective comments about young people are curious in their harshness.
L'Express, a French news magazine, suggested it did not much like youth these
days. They have lost ''the taste of risk and adventure,'' it said. Chancellor
Helmut Schmidt of West Germany has come very close to describing young people as
immature and whiney.  ''By law, they've reached their majority,'' he commented,
''but the fact is that the mature years'' come much later. Youth lasts and
lasts, he said, and there's never been a generation so ''informed, disinformed
and deformed'' by the mass media, he said. ''They live in great material
well-being. They have contempt for this, but they also claim it as being very
much due them.''

Willy Pieczyk, the 33-year-old chairman of the Social Democratic Party's very
far left-wing youth organization, did not want to call young people confused,
but he did say values were changing. ''You get kids without jobs coming in,'' he
said, ''and asking if they should feel guilty about it. Kids want to have
satisfying activities, but values are moving and you can't always define the
satisfying activities they have in mind as work.''

Conclusions are extraordinarily difficult. Mr. Pieczyk says British youth seems
more deeply hopeless than German youth, but Mr.  Schmidt's daughter, who lives
in London, has told her father that the British seem much more capable of coping
with imperfection and hard times. A Dutch journalist, talking at a seminar in
Brussels, said there were indeed similarities in youth involvement in the peace
movements in Holland and West Germany; then he added that the communality would
tear apart if the nationalist overtones in the German situation become more
pronounced.

The safest generality about European young people seems to be that they are
cautious in their assessments, undecided about their passions and, like youth
has always been, not especially troubled by their own contradictions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of West German environmentalists protesting

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Washington;
ECHOES OF THE 1930'S?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 31


In the last few weeks, there have been massive demonstrations in Europe against
the emplacement of U.S. nuclear arms in the NATO countries to counter the Soviet
SS-20 missiles, now targeted on every Western European capital.

The pessimistic view of these demonstrations is that we are seeing a repetition
of the neutralist and pacifist sentiment of the 1930's, which for a time helped
paralyze the West and encouraged Hitler to start World War II.

The optimistic view, favored by the Reagan Administration, is that this is
merely a troubling but a passing phase, organized by the young in Europe, and
encouraged by the Communists to divide the Western allies, but opposed by the
allied Governments.

The guess here is that these demonstrations are more complicated than that. They
are supported not only by the Communists, but by the churches; not only by the
young but by the old, who have memories of both world wars; not merely by the
longing for peace but by the elemental fear that uncontrolled atomic weapons now
threaten the human family and are too dangerous to be left to the play of
national politics.

The Reagan Administration deplores these demonstrations against its nuclear
weapons policy in Europe, but it is partly to blame. Ever since it took over the
White House, it has emphasized military solutions to political problems, from El
Salvador, to Egypt, Israel and Saudi Arabia, to Pakistan and Japan.

The Administration had its own reasons for moving in this direction. The balance
of military power in the world was shifting from Washington to Moscow. Therefore
it proposed that $50 billion should be transferred from the social services to
the Pentagon; that Federal budgets and taxes should be cut to encourage more
savings, investment, production and jobs.

But these assumptions are now obviously in doubt. At home, the Administration is
now talking, not about tax cuts but about $60 billion in tax increases over the
next three years. The Secretary of the Treasury, Donald T. Regan, is
acknowledging that a ''balanced budget'' by 1984 is no longer ''probable,'' and
the President himself has said that the nation is in an economic ''recession.''

Accordingly, the President is now in economic trouble here, and in even more
serious trouble abroad. Thinking primarily in military and free-enterprise
terms, he wants everybody to finance more arms, and is scattering sophisticated
military weapons all over the world, while reducing foreign economic aid below
the G.N.P. level of most industrial countries. He's also telling the poor
nations to rely on free-enterprise, to pull themselves up by their own
bootstraps, when they have no boots and no straps.

So, not surprisingly, there are demonstrations in the streets in Berlin, Bonn,
Rome, and other European capitals against the militaristic emphasis of American
foreign policy on nuclear weapons, and if Mr. Reagan is not careful, there may
very well be demonstrations in our own streets against the consequences of his
economic policies.

There is, therefore, a potential crisis brewing, because Europe is misjudging
American public opinion, as the Reagan Administration is misjudging European
public opinion. Europe is drifting toward neutralism and isolation in the belief
that it can leave the military conflict to Washington and Moscow. But America,
with an army in Europe for over two generations, is not likely to accept the
demonstrations against its aid, without reverting to its own instinct for
nationalism and isolation, which is always just under the surface in the
American mind.

The Reagan Administration has not been sensitive to the fundamental tend-encies
in public opinion on the two continents. It came into Washington with the
conviction that after the defeat in Vietnam and the disgrace of Watergate, the
nation and the alliance had gone slack, and had to ''shape up'' to the challenge
of Soviet power abroad and social welfare corruption at home.

So Mr. Reagan has been very bold and in some ways successful. He got his budget
through the Congress, only to find that his budget cuts and tax cuts didn't
balance his defense expenditures. He won the Awacs battle in the Congress, and
can now send sophisticated missiles to Saudi Arabia. But every ''victory'' seems
to leave a drop of poison.

The Reagan team was spectacularly successful, in winning votes for the Awacs
deal. But, for example, they called on all the financial contributors to Senator
Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, in the hope of persuading him to change his vote. He
didn't switch, and he's not likely to forget the pressure.

So the Reagan Administration is now celebrating its latest ''victory,'' but the
problems obviously remain. It is winning for the moment, but losing the
confidence of the Congress and the country and the world, particularly on the
question of atomic weapons. The President may be a ''great communicator,'' but
he is communicating mainly a military confrontation with the Russians, and this
is what has brought the opposition into the streets of Europe.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OUR REDS, AND THEIRS

BYLINE: By I.F. Stone

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 844 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Devotees of yoga recommend standing on one's head a f ew minutes every day. They
say it provides a refreshing new view of t he world. One way to defuse the
holy-war spirit welling up around usi s to stand on our heads and take an
upside-down view of the s ocalled East-West struggle.

If we look freshly, we can see that there are now not one but two Communist
blocs. One is led by Moscow, the other by Washington.  There are now five
Communist countries that look to us for protection: China, Poland, Pol Pot's
Cambodia, Somalia, and Yugoslavia. Moscow governs more than twice as many
Communist states.  But we, thanks to China, of course, have more than twice as
many of the world's Communists under our wing.

The United States has more than a billion Communists climbing onto its payroll.
Moscow has less than half a billion. So, well over twothirds of the world's
Communists are now in our camp.

The edges of these two blocs tend to be unstable. The latest switches were in
the Horn of Africa. There, the Ethiopian and the Somalian Marxist-Leninists are
engaged in a game of musical chairs.  The Ethiopians have switched their fealty
to Moscow and the Somalians to Washington, but both remain ''peoples'
republics.''

In the Far East, where Vietnam used to be Communist China's buffer against
United States power, China is now the United States' biggest buffer against the
Soviet Union, and Vietnam is the Soviet Union's buffer against China, but none
of them has changed ideologically.  It's hard to make holy war with any real
passion when Communism and capitalism are both so flexible and faithless in
switching their bedfellows.

Our Communist bloc is what investment counselors call a diversified portfolio.
The five Communist regimes in our bloc range from the world's most admirable, in
Poland, to the world's most bloodthirsty, the followers of Cambodia's Pol Pot -
the Idi Amin of world Communism. They survive only along the Thai border but
they sit ensconced as Kampuchea, with our full diplomatic support, in the United
Nations.

Joining the United States' Communist bloc is not like joining the Roman Catholic
Church. No conversion is required. Yugoslavia, the first rebel against the
Soviet bloc, has been under America's wing for three decades. It is still a
one-party Communist dictatorship.

We are more tolerant in our Communist bloc than we are in our Free World bloc.
If Poland were in Latin America, we would be nudging it toward a military
dictatorship and a trade-union crackdown as in Argentina and Chile. We would be
pleading the need to enforce ''austerity'' on a country that had been living
beyond its means thanks to somewhere between 24 and 27 billions in hard-currency
loans.

Except for the Soviet Union, no other Soviet country has been allowed to pile up
a comparable debt to capitalism. As for Solidarity's right to strike against the
Government, how United States air controllers must wish they were in Poland!
There, Ronald Reagan would be on the picket line with them.

China, the biggest Communist country in our lap, remains as hostile to freedom
of expression as were Mao's China and Stalin's Russia. The only difference is
that its harder to find samizdat literature in China.

United States treatment of the Communists in Moscow's bloc is equally resistant
to logical analysis. We have harsh trade embargos against Cuba and Vietnam while
we give substantial trade and credit advantages to the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

On the other hand, we grant most-favored-nation treatment to Rumania and
Hungary, along with Poland and China. Just why Rumania and Hungary are thus
honored is not clear. Rumania internally is the most Stalinist Muscovite
satellite while Hungary is the most ''liberal.''

The biggest anomaly is in our relations with our No. 1 enemy. The rationale for
the stepped-up arms race is that it will starve out the Soviet regime. Its
people, so Ronald Reagan said the other day, are already ''eating sawdust.'' Mr.
Reagan forgot to mention that the sawdust was liberally enriched with American
wheat and corn.

Perhaps this has a hidden logic. Perhaps we keep the enemy alive because if the
Soviet Union ever dropped dead of hunger, there would also be starvation here,
though of another kind, in our militaryindustrial complex. General Dynamics
would fall clear out of the bottom of the stock-market tables. What would the
Pentagon do without Moscow?

Our little fable, like Aesops', has its moral. If we can get along so readily
with so many varieties and million of Communists, do we have to fight -and spend
ourselves - to death in a crazy arms race with the rest of them?

Copyright c 1981 I.F. Stone
---------------------------------------------------------------------
I.F. Stone has been writing from Washington since 1940.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A TASTE OF CHINA IN AMMAN

SECTION: Section 10; Page 12, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1627 words


CHRISTOPHER S. WREN is chief of the Times bureau in Peking.

By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

O ne of life's underrated serendipities is discovering a first-rate restaurant
where it logically doesn't belong. As a reporter in Vietnam, I drove out to a
small fishing village near Nhatrang, where a grizzled Frenchman cast adrift in
the colonial wars presided over a rustic cafe in his shorts and rubber sandals.
The meal of lobster and shrimp from the local fishing junks, was exquisite in
its simplicity, worth the harrowing evening's jeep ride back along a road
nicknamed ''Ambush Alley.''

The most rewarding Russian restaurant I have come across, the Bellevue, was in
Helsinki, not Moscow. The best meal I had during a four-year tour in the Soviet
Union was actually in the sleepy town of Osh in Soviet Central Asia, where I had
a fluffy rice pilaf and delectable Kirghiz meat dumplings at the airport
restaurant. My most memorable Italian food was prepared in Mogadishu, Somalia,
at the Croce del Sud Hotel, which was run by an Italian expatriate couple.

So why shouldn't my favorite Chinese restaurant be in the Jordanian desert
capital of Amman? Friends smile skeptically when I tell them I have dined better
there than at fancier Chinese restaurants in New York or even Hong Kong.

The Restaurant China occupies a traditional stone house in a quiet neighborhood
of Amman. It takes a taxi ride to find it, but the unassuming restaurant
provides what is arguably the best Chinese cuisine in the Middle East. It has
become a particular favorite among journalists who, after previous tours in
Asia, find themselves shuttling about the Arab world with a yen for something
more exotic than the local shish-kebab or leathery mock-Western steak.

The restaurant is tidy, well-run and, by the inflationary standards of the Arab
world, surprisingly inexpensive. A filling dinner for one can run as little as
$7, including beer - about what an undistinguished cheeseburger costs at Amman's
Jordan Inter-Continental Hotel.

The credit for creating a first-rate restaurant in a part of the world where
Chinese food of any standard is as rare as a monsoon rain belongs to a
quiet-spoken former jet pilot and diplomat named Peter Kwai. He was a
Nationalist air force cadet at Anwei, in central China, when the Communists took
over in 1949 and his unit was evacuated to Taiwan. He rose to the rank of
lieutenant colonel while flying F-100 jet fighters and went on to spend nine
years in Amman as assistant to the Nationalist Chinese ambassador there until
the Jordanian Government severed diplomatic ties with Taipei and recognized
Peking instead.

Mr. Kwai went home to Taiwan with little idea of what he would do next. Then, as
he tells it, he recalled that Jordan's Crown Prince Hassan had wondered once why
Amman did not have a Chinese restaurant like other world capitals. Mr. Kwai, who
had been discussing with his bishop whether to embark on studies to become an
Episcopal priest, decided instead to take his family back to Jordan and open a
restaurant.

His lack of restaurant experience did not deter him. ''In any kind of business
you must take a risk. I calculated it and my risk was low. I had confidence
because I had so many friends here,'' Mr. Kwai explained. ''I feel that for
Chinese people who want to make a new career outside our country, the easiest
way is to open a Chinese restaurant. It is hard to compete with other people,
but in restaurants, the others cannot compete with us.''

Mr. Kwai readily concedes that ''I don't know how to cook, but I know how to
eat. I know how to taste.'' Cannily, he invited Shu Chao Chi, the chef at the
former Nationalist Chinese embassy in Amman, to return with him as his partner.
Mr. Shu, who like Mr. Kwai is now in his early 50's, started out as a
traditional apprentice in Shanghai at the age of 13.

''My idea was to make the restaurant good by making the chef its part owner,''
Mr. Kwai said. ''He offers the best he can because it is his business, too.''

When Mr. Kwai opened the restaurant in 1975, the first cautious customers were
Western diplomats and businessmen in Amman. Now about half the clientele is
Arab. King Hussein and his American wife, Queen Noor, once popped in without a
reservation and Mr. Kwai had to scramble to find them a table. Crown Prince
Hassan dines there more often.

Most of the Western and Arab customers invariably head for several tables out on
the small side porch, where the first welcome breezes of evening can be enjoyed
over a drink. Thereafter, the dozen tables in the two small downstairs dining
rooms fill up, often with regulars who banter back and forth between tables. A
more secluded dining room is reserved upstairs for private parties. Mr. Kwai
circulates amid the conviviality, chatting with diners and prompting his eager
young Egyptian waiters.

The secret of the restaurant's success lies in the tasting. A favorite dish of
mine is diced chicken and peanuts sauteed Szechuanstyle with hot peppers. In too
many Chinese restaurants, the true flavor of this fiery concoction is lost in
the overuse of hot peppers. Consequently, I regard gong bao ji ding, as it is
properly called, a good test of a Chinese restaurant's serious intentions, much
as a proper chocolate mousse at a French restaurant. The diced chicken that Mr.
Shu serves up in Amman is tender but not overcooked while the accompanying
peppers are singed crisp until they fairly crackle in the mouth. The inevitable
afterburn hits only as one is instinctively reaching for the ice-cold Amstel
beer expertly brewed in Jordan under local license. Such a dish at the
Restaurant China costs less than $3.

If there is a specialty, it is probably the restaurant's deep fried Arabian Gulf
shrimp. Because the shrimp are shipped in frozen from Kuwait, the dish is among
the most expensive on the menu at $10 but well worth a try. Mercifully, the
shrimp are not smothered in heavy batter and they emerge so tender as to seem
lightly sauteed. The spiciness is offset by a delicate mixture of herbs and
greens that seemed dominated by coriander; the chef doesn't say.

T he restaurant caters to its generally uninquisitive customers with a sensible
Shanghai-style menu that only occasionally ventures into the hotter dishes. Most
diners tend to stick to the reliable egg rolls prepared daily ($1.25 a portion),
sweet and sour beef ($2) and chicken with cashew nuts ($2.90).

''But these are not popular in China,'' Mr. Kwai said. ''Here we cannot serve
turtles because we cannot buy turtle. The Chinese consider bird's nest soup
popular, but here we cannot prepare bird's nest soup and I don't think the
customer would like it.''

Still, I have had no complaints about Mr. Shu's excellent hot and sour soup
($1.15) or his creamy chicken and corn soup ($1.50). The fried wonton ($1.90)
are neither doughy nor greasy, as is often the case elsewhere, and they retain
their crispness even after being dipped into the accompanying bowl of delicate
tomato sauce.

Traditionally, Chinese do not really eat desserts in the Western sense. But the
Restaurant China accommodates Western palates with creditable fried bananas
($2.30) as well as canned lichee fruit ($1.20) imported from Hong Kong or
Taiwan.

It has taken some effort for Mr. Kwai to provide Mr. Shu with the proper
ingredients. Pork, which is the staple meat of Chinese cooking, is usually
eschewed as taboo in the Moslem world. For a while, Mr. Kwai had to buy imported
pork from the Netherlands or Denmark but he has found a butcher near Jerusalem
who can supply it.

On the other hand, Mr. Kwai has had no trouble finding good chickens in Jordan
or even bringing in shrimp from Kuwait. He says that the sunny climate makes the
vegetables from the Jordan River Valley better than those back in Taiwan. Every
six months or so, Mr.  Kwai places an order in Taiwan for a shipment of black
mushrooms, bamboo shoots, shark's fin, soy sauce and sundry spices to be shipped
through the port of Aqaba. Several customers once brought in some sharks that
they had caught in the Gulf of Aqaba but Mr. Shu, for all his effort, could not
brew the fins into a proper soup.

One evening after I finished dinner, Mr. Kwai invited me to join him and his
wife, Margaret, and two of their children. They were entertaining some Jordanian
friends at another table with a large sea bass cooked Shanghai-style, succulent
stuffed mushrooms and crisp wedges of Chinese bacon that a relative had sent
from Taiwan. As I tucked into my second Chinese dinner in an hour, Mr. Kwai
apologized that he could not offer such delicacies on the menu because the
ingredients were usually unobtainable.

The Restaurant China has introduced its Arab customers to real Chinese cuisine
without disappointing more experienced Westerners.  ''I tell my cooks, keep the
food authentic,'' Mr. Kwai said. ''We don't want to follow people's tastes. We
want them to follow our cooking.''

If you go

The Restaurant China is off Abu Bakr Siddiq Street near the first traffic
circle. It is open every day: noon to 3:30 P.M., 6:30 P.M. to midnight;
reservations suggested. Prices range from $1 for a vegetable dish to $10 for
shrimp or abalone. Alcoholic beverages may not be served on some Moslem
holidays. Telephone: 38968. C.S.W.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Peter Kwai in front of his restaurants map of
Amman area

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOMAGE TO A LEGEND CALLED ASPEN

SECTION: Section 10; Page 19, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1737 words


JAMES SALTER is a writer who lived in Aspen for 10 years. His novels include ''A
Sport and a Pastime'' and ''Light Years.'' He also wrote the script for the film
''Downhill Racer.'' His latest novel is ''Solo Faces.''

By JAMES SALTER

T here were clouds to the west, a certain chill in the air, and now the snow is
beginning to fall in Aspen, the thick, blanketing snow that will stay until
spring. The horses standing in the fields begin to vanish as if in a mist, the
trees, the lights of neighboring houses, and soon we are in the heart of the
blizzard, the snow swirling as it does in glass paperweights. The fire is
crackling, the beds are warm, Christmas a week or two off, nothing can touch us.

In Denver the airport has become like the floor of the stock exchange. People
are arriving from all over the country, from Europe and South America as well,
headed for the mountains, Vail, Steamboat Springs, Crested Butte, an adventurous
few for Telluride, and of course for Aspen. When the weather is bad the crowds
pile up at the reservation counters with their baggage and it is the fall of
Saigon, every man for himself.

Denver is the starting point for Colorado skiing. Every place is reached from
there. If you are a veteran you have stayed over a number of times at one of the
big motels on the perimeter road - Stouffer's, the Sheraton, the Ramada - hoping
to get out in the morning or even, as a friend of mine once did, bought a used
car - it had four good tires -for $40 and driven to Aspen.

Skiing in Colorado is exceptional because of the weather, the plentiful snow,
and because of the scale of it all, the blue mountains stretching out without
number, the immense sky. Vail is just a two-hour drive by good road from Denver
and gets a lot of day and weekend visitors. It's huge, new and well-run. The
great bowls on the back of the mountain are unique and provide superb,
untrammeled skiing. Steamboat Springs and Crested Butte are farther and most
conveniently reached by air, as is the best loved of them all, Aspen, probably
the best ski town in North America.

It possesses, in addition to great skiing, the things Boswell loved about
London, brightly lit rooms, lively talk, women, drink. Like London, it is no
longer cheap. Lift tickets are $22 a day now, and rooms $70 to $100. A few can
be found that are cheaper. Among these, my own preference is the old Hotel
Jerome, which cannot be called luxurious but is usually warm. Parlors B and C
are the best rooms, both facing the mountain and the sun. There are also many
condominiums that can be rented by the week - I am always being asked which ones
are near the lifts and desirable, and I usually recommend the Alps, Aspen
Square, the Gant or Lift One. All are downtown and within a few steps of the
shops, restaurants, movie theaters and galleries. The busy streets are filled
with distractions. There are even windows of books - Aspen has five bookstores,
one of them, Explore, in a restored house that is dazzling.

In memory, no town could be more beautiful than Aspen when I first saw it almost
25 years ago in the winter dusk. Suddenly the road made a couple of turns and
became a wide, faded street lined with old houses and trees. At the end of it
stood a solid relic of a hotel, its windows blazing with light. It was the
Jerome. We dined there that night in the darkness of the Rockies surrounded by
an unseen wilderness I could not even imagine. The room was filled with people.
In the center of the buffet, a chef in a white hat behind it, gleamed a great
swan carved out of ice.

Above the roofs at dawn, smoke was rising from chimneys.  Overshadowing
everything was the mountain, Ajax; in those days it seemed mythic. What was
visible, in fact, was less than half - its top is hidden by the lower slopes.
The sun was shining as we went up on the lift and I was thinking, oh, oh. I was
losing my nerve. It was steep. The steepest runs, oddly, are near the bottom. I
stood with the town straight down beneath my feet. It was like looking down on
Villefranche in the 20's or Capri - it was small, incomparable, almost unknown.

Aspen had been one of the richest towns in America, built on silver mining, and
in its glory in the 1880's had two railroads, streetcars, the first electric
lights in the state, an opera house and grand hotels. It went broke in 1893 with
the collapse of silver and lay forgotten for 50 years until it was rediscovered
and brought back to life in 1945. In the early days it was a hauntingly
beautiful place with Victorian remnants, some fairly distinguished, and many
trees.  The streets for the most part were unpaved.

A kind of avant-garde arrived, and for a decade socialites, cowboys, ski bums
and miners mingled. There were eccentrics and black sheep. A famous early couple
were mad about dancing. They would appear at dinner parties in tights and tutu.
For years the only switchboard was at the Jerome. If there was a fire, the fire
truck came to the hotel, where a deaf bellman named Harry ran out with a note
from the telephone operator telling where it was. At the end of the day everyone
crowded into the bar at the Jerome, a custom that hasn't changed.

Champions and near champions were great early figures. To see Stein Erickson or
Andre Molterer on the mountain, skiing gracefully but with the hidden power of
medal winners, filled one with awe. I have never skied with them but I did ski
once with a former member of the Austrian national team. She was past 50 and out
of shape. She went like the wind. We followed her down the steepest and
narrowest runs that day trying desperately to hang on. At the very end her
husband took a terrific fall. He tumbled a long way, his body flopping like a
rag, came to a stop and lay still. As we climbed back toward him he stirred and
sat up. Finally he got to his feet. She began to laugh.  She laughed as if he
had done the funniest thing in the world. She was still laughing as he slowly
made his way down to us.  ''Schadenfreude ist die schonste Freude'' -''The
greatest happiness is someone else's misfortune,'' she explained. He was
brushing off the snow.

''Ja,'' he said.  Winter lasts forever, a postcard I got last year from Aspen
complained. It seems to, and the pace never flags. Skiing begins in late
November and continues until mid-April. Frequently it would be possible to ski
longer, but the lifts traditionally shut down at Easter and everyone disappears.
During the final weeks there is a worshipping of the sun. Tan faces are raised
to it and a lassitude, as of the South Seas, takes hold. It is a prelude to the
beaches of Mexico and Hawaii where many of the locals, worked-out, will go.

Despite its eminence and chic, Aspen is still a friendly town. In the evening
everyone goes to the same restaurants or, rather, waits at them since only a
few, like the Golden Horn, take reservations and one quickly learns which are
the best for waiting in. I would choose the Mother Lode, despite its indifferent
food, or the Chart House, and sit by the fire with a drink in hand, surrounded
by faces and the helpless laughter about misadventures of the day that is the
staple of ski resorts. The outdoors has filled one with a ravenous appetite and
a bath has managed to reaffirm the existence of one's legs.

T here are four separate mountains to provide skiing, each with its own
characteristics. Ajax, also called Aspen Mountain and rising above the town
itself, is probably the most challenging although there are many easy runs,
especially on top. Highlands, three or four miles away, is a little less
extensive, has more teaching on it and is sometimes less crowded. Buttermilk is
a beginner's area. Separated from these, and larger than any of them with its
own village, is Snowmass, with mainly intermediate terrain.

There are, altogether, more than 300 miles of trails, and in addition to these
there is something even larger: all of outdoors.  Cross-country skiing has
become very popular. More appealing in some ways than downhill skiing, it can be
done by anyone regardless of age, learned in just a few hours, and has no lifts,
tickets or lines. Furthermore, it has an esthetic superiority - one is part of
the country, the great evergreen forests, the icy streams.

Endless opportunities for cross-country lie in and around Aspen: the abandoned
railroad tracks along the river, Hunter Creek with its chain of remote meadows,
Difficult Campground, one can ski the ridge between Aspen and Snowmass or, for
that matter, farther, on overnight trips to Crested Butte or Vail. These last
are for fit, experienced skiers, but there is also a network of isolated
mountain cabins that can be reserved for the night, some a few miles out, some
farther.  The cabins have fireplaces, bunks, cooking utensils and wood stoves.
They have something more, a priceless isolation where one feels beyond
civilization and its illnesses and in touch with the simplicity that skiing once
had.

One of the best places to learn cross-country and get in a little practice is at
Ashcroft, an old mining town about 10 miles up Castle Creek where there are
miles of trails and an excellent, inexpensive restaurant, the Pine Creek
Cookhouse, which features Hungarian dishes and has a deck where one can eat
outside when the weather is good.

The winter lasts forever. In the morning when the streets are blue it is the
steep upper meadows that catch the light. The town lies in darkness until
suddenly the sun, a piece of it like a brilliant point, breaks over the
mountains and begins to flood the roofs. At about 8 o'clock the members of the
ski patrol are standing at the bottom of the lift, their breath visible, joking
and horsing around.  Two by two they board the chairlift and mount toward the
light.  People are having breakfast and stretching their limbs. A day of skiing.
A day of sheer happiness. In Colorado it is always there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of skier

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 3, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET-CHINA TALK STILL IN DEADLOCK

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Nov. 2


Within the walls of the large Soviet Embassy compound in northeast Peking, a
skeleton staff of negotiators has been waiting for the opportunity to resume
talks with China on disputed boundaries .

According to other diplomats, the Soviet staff has been here in one form or
another since 1969, when the two countries agreed to discuss the border
situation after military clashes on their 4,500-mile frontier.

China said last month that it was studying a new proposal from the Soviet Union
to renew the talks, which were last held in 1979. The signs so far are that
China views the offer as little more than a propaganda ploy, although one that
could be employed to make the United States uncomfortable.

Peking has made no secret that the Russians' chance to improve ties was
curtailed by their military intervention in Afghanistan.

Chinese Doubt Invasion by Soviet

Chinese officials have expressed less concern lately about the Soviet military
buildup to the north than about Soviet actions in other parts of Asia, notably
Afghanistan and Indochina, two regions where Peking feels its interests now
coincide with Washington's.

''The Russians are not likely to try to invade us,'' a Chinese official said.
''But they are likely to look for opportunities in more vulnerable areas like
the Persian Gulf and the Middle East.''

In the view of some Western and Asian diplomats, the Chinese regime of Deng
Xiaoping may adopt a less adamant attitude toward Moscow if Washington goes
ahead with its plans to sell new weapons to Taiwan.  This, the diplomats
believe, would expose Mr. Deng's pro-American realignment to criticism from
radicals in the army and party and compel him to respond, however coolly, to
Soviet overtures.

After Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig's visit here in June, an article in
People's Daily, the Chinese party newspaper, proposed new talks on the border
issue. Partly because the proposal included China's longstanding demand that
both sides start by pulling back their troops from the disputed frontier areas,
the offer was not taken up by Moscow.

Argument Continues in the Press

Instead, the argument over the border, while less strident than in the 1960's,
has continued in the Soviet and Chinese press.  An article in the Soviet foreign
affairs magazine International Life, evidently linked to the Soviet note, told
readers that ''the Soviet side, consistently favoring normalizationn of
relations with China, is always ready to continue the talks on the border
issue.''

For its part, People's Daily printed on Oct. 9 an article by Yu Shingwu, a
historian, saying that czarist Russia sabotaged the 1911 Revolution in China by
taking advantage of the instability to ''engage in seizing territory north of
the Great Wall.'' The implication was that the Soviet Union had not yet
repudiated the expansionist policies of its czarist predecessor.

China appears particularly upset by the Soviet Union's support of Vietnamese
expansion in Indochina.

Lao-Language Broadcast Quoted

In a Lao-language broadcast several weeks ago, the Peking radio accused the
''Soviet-Vietnamese hegemonists'' of perpetuating colonial rule in Laos. The
Chinese press also carries frequent accounts of Soviet naval movements off
Vietnam and of reports by Cambodian guerrillas about damage inflicted on the
Vietnamese occupation forces in Cambodia.

China has given up, at least publicly, fretting about the likelihood of a Soviet
invasion. The Peking Institute for International Strategic Studies, in a report
made public last summer, said the Soviet Union would need four million to five
million soldiers to invade China. It added that, by mobilizing China's manpower,
''we will be fully capable of defeating well-equipped enemies with our inferior
weapons.''

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown, after having visited military units in
Xinjiang and Liaoning, told reporters later that the Chinese had worked hard on
repelling any invasion.

''They don't see this as a security problem that is going to go away in a few
years,'' Mr. Brown said.

Soviet Border Force Estimated

Western military specialists say China is confronting 44 to 47 Soviet divisions
along the border with the Soviet Union and Mongolia. On the southern border, the
Chinese have tied down nearly two-thirds of the Vietnamese Army, according to
Western intelligence estimates, including elite units that might otherwise be in
Cambodia.

If the Chinese ever do decide to resume border talks with the Russians, their
positions appear so far apart as to make foreseeable progress unlikely.

China contends that it is not demanding the return of large areas seized by
Czarist Russia by treaties in the 19th and early 20th centuries. But it does
want the Soviet Union to concede that those treaties had been unfair and that
disagreement exists and to discuss the local alignment of boundaries still in
dispute, in the Pamir region of Central Asia and along the Amur and Ussuri
rivers in the Far East.

The Soviet Union has blurred this distinction by contending that China wants all
the lost territory back. A Chinese Foreign Ministry statement said in August
that the Russians were ''resorting to misrepresentation, denial and inventing
historical facts'' by portraying the Chinese position as expansionist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 4, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

WASHINGTON TALK;
YOUNG DEMOCRATS ON RISE IN HOUSE

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


They are hardly household names beyond the beltway, but on Capitol Hill in this
session of Congress a new generation of Democratic leaders has begun to emerge.

These House members in their 30's and early 40's have sharply different
reference points from their predecessors. They are the children of the Vietnam
War, not World War II; of John F. Kennedy, not Franklin D. Roosevelt; of
television, not the print media. They have arrived on the scene at a time when
the Democratic leadership often looks tired, sometimes appears out of touch, and
is under continuous Republican assault.

The new leaders are less patient, more pragmatic, and take greater risks than
their counterparts of a decade or two ago. They are the beneficiaries of a 1974
rules change that curbed the sometimes tyrannical power of committee chairmen,
and allowed relative newcomers to become subcommittee chairmen. Although far
more politically independent than predecessors, they have proven adept at
fashioning compromises, and working within the system.

They have reached prominence by developing expertise in one area, and by doing
the heavy legislative lifting, tackling the onerous, time-consuming tasks. They
follow the action - many serve on the budget, tax-writing and energy committees
- rather than sit back and wait for the action to come to them.

'Kids With the Right Answers'

''Every time we want something done, we go to one of these guys,'' said an aide
to the House Democratic leadership. ''It's like the teacher always knows the
kids with the right answers, and they're the same kids every time.''

At the top of the class, in just about everyone's opinion, are Representatives
Leon E. Panetta of California and Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri. Both arrived
here in 1977, and neither has so much as a subcommittee chairmanship. But both
are listened to with great respect both on and off the floor, and have served
the leadership in sensitive posts.

Mr. Panetta, 43 years old, formerly worked in the Nixon Administration as
director of the Office of Civil Rights and in John V. Lindsay's City Hall. He is
one of the best-liked men in Congress.  He gained the esteem of his House
colleagues whom he cajoled, wheedled and occasionally bullied last spring as
chairman of a budget task force responsible for making the House committees
comply with the budget cuts ordered by Congress.

''Everybody hated those cuts and the whole idea of cuts and what they had to do,
but nobody hated Leon,'' Mr. Gephardt recalled. ''He was the midwife. He got
them to do something that had never been done before.''

An Economic Philosopher

Mr. Gephardt, 40, a former city councilman in St. Louis, is best known for
leading the successful fight against President Carter's plan to contain hospital
costs. The economic philospher of the group, he is chairman of the economic task
force of the Democratic caucus, and with Representative Ken Holland of South
Carolina, another young leader, gave the party's response to President Reagan's
proposal for a new round of budget cuts.

Mr. Gephardt also was the young leadership group's candidate for the whip post
that finally was given, last January, to Representative Tom Foley of Washington.
Many of his colleagues regard him as a possible future Speaker.

''We came to Washington at a time when the reaction to the failures of
government were being manifested,'' Mr. Gephardt said of the young leadership
group. ''All of us understood the failure that came in the translation of some
of the Federal programs. At the same time, all of us are believers in the
necessity of government to do certain things. We want to re-examine the role of
Government, move it out of some things and improve its effectiveness in other
areas.''

Mr. Gephardt and four other highly regarded young Democrats on the Ways and
Means Committee had unsuccessfully argued for a distinct Democratic position on
the tax cut. They were Thomas J. Downey of Suffolk, William M. Brodhead of
Michigan, James M. Shannon of Massachusetts and Wyche Fowler Jr. of Georgia.
Today, many colleagues believe their position has been vindicated.

Areas of Expertise

House Democrats have increasingly turned to members of the group for guidance on
specific legislative issues. On weaponry, they have consulted Mr. Downey, 32; on
health, Henry Waxman of California, 42, who jumped over two senior members to
win a subcommittee chairmanship; on agriculture, Charles Rose of North Carolina,
42; on foreign affairs, Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn, 41. Mr. Rose and Mr.
Solarz also are subcommittee chairmen.

''One of the things that strikes me about this group,'' Representative Toby
Moffett of Connecticut said, ''is the number of people who have pictures of
Bobby Kennedy on their office walls. He was a guy who a lot of us feel learned
and grew as he went along.''

Others in the informal group of young leaders include Representatives Albert
Gore Jr. of Tennessee, Norman Y. Mineta and Tony Coelho of California, Timothy
E. Wirth of Colorado, David R.  Obey of Wisconsin and Matthew McHugh of upstate
New York.

''They have an ability to relate to their colleagues, and to broker and
accommodate conflicting concerns,'' said Representative Solarz. ''They're more
interested in achieving results than in generating ideological purity,''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 17, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article on the Washington Talk page Nov. 4 about emerging Democratic leaders
incorrectly stated the positions of two Representatives on oil deregulation. Tim
Wirth of Colorado opposes deregulation; Toby Moffett of Connecticut supports it.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of young Democrats

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 5, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Vietnam Veteran Takes 6 Captive at Newspaper

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 207 words

DATELINE: MUNCIE, Ind., Nov. 4


A Vietnam War veteran took six newspaper employees hostage at gunpoint today,
saying he was angry over continued news media attention to the former American
hostages in Iran while his fellow veterans were ignored.

No one was injured in the incident at Muncie Newspapers Inc., which occurred on
the second anniversary of the seizing of the United States Embassy in Iran. The
concern publishes The Muncie Star and The Muncie Evening Press.

Jay Stader, 32 years old, of Muncie, surrendered about an hour after the
incident began. He was arrested on a charge of criminal confinement and held in
the Delaware County Jail on $40,000 bond. No arraignment date was set.

''He was frustrated and angry that the media had been giving attention to the
Iranian hostages and not to Vietnam veterans,'' said Lieut. Charles Hittson, a
police hostage negotiator.

''He feels like the news media have turned their backs on Vietnam vets,''
Lieutenant Hittson added, saying Mr. Stader was unemployed.  A Star reporter,
Bill Jackson, said that a series of articles on Vietnam veterans from the area
was scheduled for publication later this week, leading up to Veterans Day on
Nov. 11.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICAL 'BUDDY SYSTEM' LIVES IN NIXON-HAIG TIES

BYLINE: By LYNN ROSELLINI, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 5


When Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  telephones ''Mr. President'' to
discuss foreign affairs these days, the man on the other end of the line is not
always Ronald Reagan.

Frequently, it's Richard M. Nixon.  The two men share what a friend of both
calls an ''extremely warm and extremely close'' relationship. Like most good
friends, Mr. Haig and Mr. Nixon often talk to each other by telephone. Many
times when Mr. Haig is in New York, he drops by to see his former chief. And
when the subject turns to foreign policy, Mr. Nixon does not hesitate to offer
advice to his friend.

''They both have a lot to offer each other,'' said Nicholas Ruwe, an aide to Mr.
Nixon.  Their relationship offers a tiny glimpse of how the political ''buddy
system'' works in Washington. In a tie that has endured for a dozen years, the
two men, each accustomed to power, have helped each other, both in and out of
office.

How Each Benefits

Mr. Haig benefits in two ways. Associates of both men say he gets advice from a
man whose opinions on foreign policy he respects, and he gets a staunch
political ally who defends him in conversations with President Reagan and his
men.

What does Mr. Nixon get? Access to power, these associates say.  ''We don't talk
all the time at all,'' Mr. Haig said, when asked about Mr. Nixon as coffee was
served following a state dinner at the White House earlier this week. ''I talk
to him about the same amount I talk to President Ford. I talk to another former
President, too - President Carter.''

Mr. Haig said that sometimes he went for a long time without talking to Mr.
Nixon, and other times talked to him twice a month.  ''If I know he wants to
talk to me, I'll talk to him,'' he said. ''Or if I want to talk to him, I'll
call him.''

Mr. Ruwe, however, said that the two men talked frequently by telephone and had
met alone twice in recent months, once in September at the Manhattan apartment
of Tricia Nixon Cox and again in Mr.  Haig's private compartment aboard an Air
Force jet on the way to the funeral of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt.

Mr. Nixon is said, by current and former aides, to offer Mr. Haig in these
exchanges a broad geopolitical view of world events based on his personal
diplomatic experience and his politician's past. ''Al Haig appreciates Mr.
Nixon's expertise and experience in foreign affairs,'' said William F. Simon,
Mr. Nixon's former Treasury Secretary, who is a friend of both men.

Bonds Go Back to 1969

The Nixon-Haig relationship goes back to 1969, when Henry Kissinger, President
Nixon's newly appointed national security adviser, selected Mr. Haig, then a
colonel, as his No. 1 deputy.

Mr. Nixon sent Mr. Haig as his personal envoy to Vietnam nine times, and
eventually awarded him four general's stars. When he chose Mr. Haig as Army Vice
Chief of Staff in 1973, he passed over 240 other generals.

Mr. Haig is credited with orchestrating Mr. Nixon's resignation from the
Presidency and also, according to some accounts including Gerald R. Ford's
memoirs, with mentioning the possibility to Vice President Ford that, if he
became President, he could issue an unconditional pardon to Mr. Nixon.

When Mr. Nixon left office, he recommended that Mr. Ford retain Mr. Haig as
chief of staff. Mr. Ford did so briefly, then awarded him the job of supreme
commander of American and NATO forces in Europe.

Nixon Praises Haig as Loyal

After they both left the White House, Mr. Haig visited Mr. Nixon in San
Clemente, Calif., where the former President was writing his memoirs. Mr. Nixon
praised his ex-aide highly in the book, writing that he ''was always loyal to
the commander he served.''

A few years later, when Mr. Haig was under consideration by President-elect
Reagan for Secretary of State, Mr. Nixon was on the telephone with Mr. Reagan
and his top aides, lobbying hard for his friend. Associates say that Mr. Nixon
argued that Mr. Haig was a man who could take orders, whereas another contender
for the job, George P. Shultz, was too independent.

And as Mr. Haig has embroiled himself in bureaucratic infighting in Washington,
perceiving Richard V. Allen, President Reagan's national security adviser, as a
key rival, Mr. Nixon has remained his ally, telling others that he has little
regard for Mr. Allen, according to a former Nixon aide.

Not surprisingly Mr. Nixon, telephoned his old friend shortly before departing
for the Sadat funeral last month. At Mr. Nixon's request, Mr. Haig's office
helped arrange a Middle East diplomatic tour for the former President.

As he traveled through the Middle East, Mr. Nixon did not forget Mr. Haig,
reassuring leaders in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Tunisia and Morocco that they could
rely on the Secretary of State. And when, at the conclusion of his trip, Mr.
Nixon issued a series of recommendations on foreign policy, he had a few kind
words for an old friend.

''I have had the privilege in the past week to meet with leaders of foreign
nations who are personal friends and friends of the U.S.,'' said Mr. Nixon in a
statement released in Paris. ''They have high hopes and great confidence in the
leadership of President Reagan and Secretary Haig.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Nixon with Alexander M. Haig Jr.

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

KEY AIDE TO WILSON IN LIBYA DESCRIBED

BYLINE: By EDWARD T. POUND, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 838 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 5


The American pilots and mechanics who are maintaining helicopters for the Libyan
Air Force and training Libyan airmen are being directed by a former covert
employee of the Central Intelligence Agency, according to intelligence officials
and Americans who worked in Libya.

Because of his knowledge of aviation and aircraft, the former C.I.A. employee,
Robert W. Hitchman, has become indispensable to Edwin P. Wilson, pilots and
mechanics who worked for Mr. Wilson said.

Mr. Wilson is a former C.I.A. agent who has had a contract to provide pilots and
mechanics to the Libyan Government. He was indicted last year on charges of
shipping explosives to Libya and currently lives there as a fugitive.

When Mr. Wilson obtained a contract in late 1979 to maintain 20 Chinook
transport helicopters for the Libyan Air Force, Mr. Hitchman was one of the
first men he hired, the sources said.

North Vietnam Rescue Missions

Mr. Hitchman, who is in his early 50's, worked for the intelligence agency
during the war in Southeast Asia, according to American intelligence officials.
Associates at the time said his duties included flying rescue missions for
American pilots shot down over North Vietnam, according to the sources.

He is a Californian with 30 years' experience flying fixed-wing aircraft and
helicopters, often under dangerous conditions. He originally signed on with Mr.
Wilson as a test pilot and instructor, the sources said, but was running the
Chinook project within a year.

Last week, a man who identified himself as Mr. Hitchman answered Mr. Wilson's
telephone in Tripoli, cursed a reporter, accused The New York Times of
''printing lies'' and refused to answer questions.

Repeated calls to Mr. Hitchman this week went unanswered. His wife, June, who
lives in San Bernardino, Calif., declined to be interviewed and said she did not
know her husband's whereabouts.

Complaints by Former Employees

Mr. Hitchman, who has a reputation for ruggedness and occasional flamboyance,
did not endear himself to many of his employees, and some of them returned home
recently complaining that he failed to pay them as much as he had promised when
they were recruited.

The Chinook maintenance program, along with Mr. Wilson's employment of British
pilots and mechanics to fly and maintain Libyan-owned C-130 Hercules cargo
planes, is vital to the Libyan military, according to those who have worked
there. Both aircraft were heavily used by Libya during its intervention in Chad
last year.

Mr. Hitchman, who is known within the Wilson organization as ''China Blue,''
seemingly has become indispensable in the last year.  Mr. Wilson is not a pilot
and knows little about aircraft, according to former employees. Associates of
both men said they did not know each other until Mr. Hitchman arrived in Libya
in November 1979.

Fighter Pilot in Korea

It is not precisely clear when Mr. Hitchman joined the intelligence agency. He
was a Marine Corps fighter pilot in Korea, according to accounts he has given
associates, and he went to work in 1961 as a pilot for Air America, a commercial
airline that was owned by the C.I.A.

American intelligence officials said that Mr. Hitchman was a C.I.A. employee
when he worked for Air America. He left the airline in the mid-1970's and is no
longer associated with the intelligence agency, the officials said.

Air America pilots were engaged in the risky job of supplying remote refugee
camps and transporting troops in Southeast Asia in the 1960's and 1970's.

Mr. Hitchman was initially based in northern Thailand. In 1965, according to
associates in Air America, he flew search and rescue missions in North Vietnam
for American bomber pilots who were shot down.

Billy L. Pearson, a South Carolina pilot who flew for Air America, said that the
rescue missions were often dangerous and that Mr.  Hitchman opted out after a
particularly harrowing helicopter flight and ''ended up in Saigon as the chief
pilot of helicopters, basically sitting at a desk.''

Evacuation From Saigon

Nonetheless, Mr. Hitchman distinguished himself in 1975, according to Mr.
Pearson and others, when he and other helicopter pilots helped evacuate
Americans from the roof of the United States Embassy in Saigon when Americans
pulled out of Vietnam.

In Libya, Americans who worked for Mr. Hitchman said he seemed willing, even
eager, to take on tough assignments.  Some Americans who worked in Libya said
that Mr. Hitchman did menial work for Mr. Wilson, in addition to his other
duties.  Lloyd D. Jones, who was chief of maintenance on the Chinook program,
said that Mr. Hitchman had said he was a millionaire and owned an apartment
complex in San Bernardino.

Mr. Hitchman may soon be out of a job if Mr. Wilson fails to get his Chinook
contract renewed. The contract expired Oct. 1 and, according to several
Americans, has not yet been renewed by the Libyan Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A LIFE OF SHARING WITH WOMEN OF THIRD WORLD

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words


Picture the scene. Perdita Huston, a strapping, stunning, greeneyed woman from
Maine, is sitting in the back room of a rural health clinic on a dusty road
north of Cairo. Gazing back at Miss Huston from over a black veil is another
beautiful woman, Zohila. Her eyes are dull with malnutrition and overwork. She
is only 20 years old, and has come to the clinic with her fifth child, who is
sick.  The two women talk in country Arabic.

Cut to the Grand Hyatt Hotel on 42d Street in Manhattan, a place of glittering
steel and glass, with a fountain that splashes down a lobby wall. Miss Huston is
speaking angrily about the Zohilas of the world and how the men are still trying
to keep them in their place with more babies. Then she adds, ''But half the
human species -the women - now have the possibility of controlling the one thing
that was used to keep them in an inferior status: birthing.

''My theory about Egypt, Iran, the Moral Majority in this country is that the
past generation or two has changed so rapidly that the establishment is
threatened and they're putting on the brakes,'' she says. ''You don't have to be
a virgin any more, either. Available contraception methods change all human
relationships and perceptions, here and in places where most of the legends and
taboos revolve around virginity and reproduction. Men are scared to death.''

Miss Huston has been traveling the world all her adult life, most recently as
the first woman to direct one of the three regions of the Peace Corps, with
2,300 volunteers. That region was a huge part of the globe, comprising North
Africa, the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific. When she talked with Zohila and
almost 200 other poor, illiterate, rural women in Egypt, Tunisia, Sudan, Kenya,
Sri Lanka and Mexico five years ago, she was on an earlier fact-finding mission
for the United Nations Fund for Population Activities.

Her Egyptian tour ended in 1976. The book that resulted was ''Third World Women
Speak Out,'' published in 1979.  Zohila haunts Miss Huston, not because she is
different but because she is so typical of women everywhere in developing
nations. ''The central fact of her life is the lack of self-esteem and choice,''
Miss Huston said. ''Her four brothers went to school, but not Zohila and her
sister. The girls were considered useful only for marriage.  She was 13 when her
first child was born. Her husband had to leave Egypt to work as a laborer in the
Persian Gulf states because the tiny plot of land he inherited from his father
was too small to feed the family. He comes home once a year and Zohila gets
pregnant again. Then he goes to the village and boasts of the proof that he is
manly.''

Zohila told Miss Huston that education would have freed her. She said that what
she would have liked to have learned, at a school denied to her and women like
her, was the proper care and feeding of her own and other village children. She
said she wished that her daughters, as well as her sons, could go to school.

This reminded Miss Huston of a Tunisian wife who told her: ''There is a saying
in Arabic about us women. We go from one prison to another. Our first prison is
our father's house. We go to our next prison - our husband's house. We don't
become free until we go to our third prison - the grave.''

Neither two marriages and two divorces nor three children have kept Miss Huston
down. She flew the nest in 1953, ''as far as I could,'' from her conventional
family in Portland, Me., to the University of Colorado in Boulder. ''The campus
was stifled in the atmosphere of Senator Joe McCarthy and bigotry,'' she said,
her eyes blazing. ''My Japanese roommate and I were ostracized.'' She left the
university, spent a year learning French at Grenoble and then went to Paris,
where, in 1958, she was graduated with a journalism degree from the Ecole
Superieure de Journalisme. But her role as a journalist - essentially that of an
observer - was quickly infused with her desire to be a participant.

She was married to a French doctor at the age of 21. Miss Huston became a
medical social worker in a Moslem Algerian village in 1960 and 1961, teaching
basic nutrition, hygiene and child care to peasant refugees while her husband
was serving as an Army conscript there. Her report from the village, published
in The New York Times Magazine in 1961, described the tragedy of uprooted
families during years of civil war.

During the 1960's she was a freelance reporter in Europe and a Life Magazine
reporter in Paris.

A Cause in Vietnam

Her second husband was also a French physician. At his hospital in Saigon, she
raised money for yet another cause. ''There were 200,000 polio victims in
Vietnam because of the mobile population and the lack of immunization,'' she
said. ''My husband and I set up a little foundation, and collected
polio-stricken children off the streets.  Many of them were the children of
American soldiers and Vietnamese women. They were abandoned and became
beggars.''

Miss Huston returned to the United States in the early 1970's. From 1978 until
this year, she was a regional director in the Peace Corps.  Now she has started
''a year of serenity'' as scholar-in-residence at Wheaton College in Norton,
Mass. Her son, Pierre, 8 years old, has already become the ''little cheri'' of
the all-woman campus, she said. Her daughter Fran,coise, 23, is studying at the
Sorbonne in Paris. Jenny, 20, is at Mills College in California.

Miss Huston is not easy on American women. She says most other women around the
world with whom she has talked, be they poor peasants or educated city wives,
view American women as pampered and wasteful.

But she sees hope in a rising generation of women leaders at home and abroad.
She thinks also of the spirit of Sophia, 35, a Zapotec Indian in the far south
of Mexico. While Sophia rolled tortillas for the family dinner, the two women
talked about change, Sophia's life and aspirations. She asked Sophia whom she
would prefer to send to school - her sons or her daughters.

''My daughters, of course,'' Sophia answered. ''Why?'' asked Miss Huston.
''Because women bear the children - and thus prepare the future,'' Sophia said.
''If women are ignorant, how can the future be good?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Perdita Huston

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 420 words


PRESS GROUPS IN 19 COUNTRIES JOIN TO SET UP AN ASIAN NEWS NETWORK

KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Nov. 6 (AP) - Twenty-three news agencies from 19
countries joined forces today to begin the Asia-Pacific News Network. The
network immediately recommended that major international news agencies be
allowed to distribute reports only through the national news agencies.

''The developing countries have been made victims of grossly distorted
reporting, particularly by the Western mass media,'' Malaysia's Information
Minister, Mohammad Rahmat, told delegates at the meeting of the Organization of
Asia-Pacific News Agencies, which established the new network.

''To my mind there is need to insulate the Asian readership from the distorted
news circulated especially by the Western media which, if taken at face value,
imply that developing countries are continuously plagued by diseases, disasters,
murders and all manner of woes.''

The new network, to be known as ANN, is to begin operating on Jan.  1. When
completed, it will have relay points in India, Indonesia, Mongolia, the
Philippines, Sri Lanka and Vietnam. Each of the 23 agencies is to offer a
15-minute daily report in English. The dispatches would not be edited at the
relay points.

Support for Unesco Efforts

''The exchange is noncommercial and on a self-financing basis, each news agency
meeting its own reception and transmission costs,'' a statement issued at the
conference said.

Mr. Rahmat said the news agencies of the region should also support efforts by
Unesco and third world countries to establish a ''new international
communication and information order.'' Many in the West fear that the Unesco
effort would encourage governments to control and censor news reports.

As originally drafted, the conference recommendation required ''transn@ational
news agencies to distribute their services only through national news
agencies.''

Conference sources said that at the insistence of delegates representing the
Japanese news agency Kyodo the wording was altered to say that such a method of
distribution would ''be encouraged in the countries of member news agencies.''

The agencies usually identified as transnational news services are The
Associated Press, United Press International, Reuters and Agence France-Presse.
None were mentioned by name at today's closing session of the conference.

A conference statement said the new network ''did not seek to dislodge or
confront the transnational news agencies but to supplement their efforts.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
LIBERAL ACTIVIST AND PREACHER

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: CLEVELAND, Nov. 6


Bishop James Armstrong of Indiana, the newly elected president of the National
Council of Churches, has touched off considerable controversy with his outspoken
liberal social views. At the same time, he has shown remarkable ability to
retain the support of a broad spectrum of church people.

One reason often cited for this unusual success is that Bishop Armstrong does
his biblical and theological homework and excels as an inspirational preacher.

This balance of social activism and scriptural preaching, combined with a
forceful and engaging personality, is expected to be of great benefit to the
57-year-old United Methodist Bishop in his new role as head of the nation's
largest ecumenical organization.

This week the council has been in the process of celebrating its three decades
of interfaith work and probing some troubling questions about the malaise that
has caused it to lose some of its focus and effectiveness in recent years.

Emphasis on Spiritual Matters

Bishop Armstrong, like many in the council, senses a need to give greater
emphasis to spiritual matters in the decade ahead as a means of adding depth and
breadth to its continuing efforts on behalf of social justice. Implicitly, this
emphasis is also a response to increasing criticism of the council as paying too
little attention to the religious issues that appear to be promoting a revival
among conservative evangelical churches outside it.

''I regard the spiritual life and the nurture of the inner world essential if
we're to be what we have been called to be in the world,'' Bishop Armstrong
said. ''We must insist on this balance.''

He also pledges to press for a variety of social causes. Over the years, he has
taken part in campaigns for civil rights, peace in Vietnam, disarmament and
hunger relief, among many others.

While he was Bishop of the Dakotas, he represented the National Council of
Churches at the crisis at Wounded Knee. As an opponent of the death penalty, he
stood in the vigil at the Utah State Prison that protested the execution of Gary
Gilmore.

Biblical Foundation to His Stands

A hallmark of his activism is his insistence on giving his stands a Biblical
foundation.  ''I try not to separate my world into neat compartments, drawing
false distinctions between the 'secular' and the 'sacred,' '' he wrote in a 1975
book, ''The Nation Yet to Be: Christian Mission and the New Patriotism.'' He
said his social stands were taken ''on the basis of deep ethical and religious
conviction.''

As president of the council for the next three years, Bishop Armstrong must face
its difficulties while maintaining his role as Bishop of Indiana, one of the
most demanding and active regions of the United Methodist Church.

He says he will not neglect his episcopal duties and whimsically adds that he
expects to ''run up an astronomical phone bill'' between his home in
Indianapolis and the council's headquarters at 475 Riverside Drive in New York.

Attack on Moral Majority

A clue to his leadership style can be found in a recent message attacking the
policies and views of the Rev. Jerry Falwell, the television evangelist. In a
letter sent to the 1,500 Methodist clergy in Indiana, the Bishop raised two
''strenuous objections'' to Mr.  Falwell and his organization, Moral Majority.

''One,'' the Bishop wrote of Mr. Falwell, ''he is not Biblical.  Two, his sexism
and rigid legalism dehumanize the very persons for whom Christ lived and died.''

He says he believes strongly that the mainstream Protestant and orthodox
churches that form the council must go beyond simply assailing the
fundamentalist activist movement; they must respond to many of the same moral
issues raised by Moral Majority, but from their own perspective.

James Armstrong (he has no middle name) was born Sept. 17, 1924, in Marion,
Ind., and was educated at Florida Southern College, Candler School of Theology
and Emory University.

He was a pastor in Indianapolis before being elected a bishop in 1968. He is
married and the father of five.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of James Armstrong

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY RESUMES BAYONET TRAINING

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 597 words

DATELINE: FORT BENNING, Ga., Nov. 6


After a lapse of nearly a decade, the Army is again teaching bayonet fighting to
infantry recruits.  Today the first of two new bayonet training courses,
constructed at a cost of $50,000, was opened at this sprawling Army post in
westcentral Georgia. Over the next year about 33,000 infantry soldiers are
expected to be trained to use the weapon.

In the era of computerized tanks and intercontinental missiles, the bayonet, a
detachable blade on the muzzle end of a rifle for handto-hand fighting, may seem
outmoded. But the Army hopes the training will improve morale and physical
fitness, and sees the revival of the bayonet as part of a return to the basics
of warfare.

''No matter how far along the technology gets, the soldier has got to stay there
in that foxhole,'' said Maj. Fenley D. Stafford Jr., a 37-year-old officer at
the Infantry School here. ''That's what the bayonet is all about.''

Infantry Training Extended

Along with bayonet training, the Army is again teaching hand-tohand fighting,
devoting more time and effort to marksmanship and putting more emphasis on
physical training, especially running.  It has extended all basic training by 97
hours, and specialized infantry training by 140.

The bayonet revival apparently came about after Fort Benning's former commander,
Lieut. Gen. David E. Grange Jr., took notice of an improvised course on the use
of the bayonet that was being operated by the Rangers at the post.

Major Stafford, who has 18 years in the Army and is a Vietnam veteran, can
testify to the effectiveness of the bayonet. In December 1968, he said, a
battalion that he was serving with northwest of Saigon came under a bayonet
attack by a North Vietnamese regiment.

''We were just about overrun,'' the major recalled, adding that his top sergeant
was killed by a bayonet.  The Army stopped bayonet training at different times
and at different posts in the early 1970's for several reasons. M-16 rifles, for
example, do not stand up under the shock of repeated thrusts and parries. But a
mock training rifle could solve that problem.

6 Hours for Basic Moves

When training money and time was cut as the Vietnam War wound down, the skills
regarded as least needed, such as prowess with the bayonet, were the first to
go.

Under the new bayonet training program, recruits will spend six hours learning
basic moves and three hours on a 400-meter assault course, tilting at rubber
targets with marked zones for the head, chest and groin.

It should be less formal than the 1940's and 50's style of bayonet fighting,
Major Stafford said, and ''more of an instinctive thing.'' In addition to
improving morale and physical fitness, some officers and drill sergeants said
the revival of bayonet training reflected the Army's improving image of itself.

Citing the Army's recruiting advertisements, one officer said it no longer
suggested that ''we want to join you,'' but rather, it challenged young people
to ''be all that you can be'' and boasted that ''we do more before 9 o'clock in
the morning than most people do all day.''

The Army's effort to enhance its self-image are part of what it calls
''soldierizations,'' which Major Stafford defined as those qualities that
characterize a professional soldier.

''I think the spirit of killing that you develop with the bayonet is going to
pay off,'' he added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of bayonet training

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY LIAISONS: HELPING HANDS FOR CONGRESSMEN

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 5


Senator Barry Goldwater, a Republican, returning to his home state of Arizona
for an operation on his hip, wanted to stop in Fort Worth first to test-fly a
new tilt-rotor helicopter.

Senator Dennis DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona, wanted help in securing a
''compassionate reassignment'' for a young Army recruit stationed in South Korea
whose father was suddenly paralyzed.

Senator John Tower, Republican of Texas, who is chairman of the Armed Services
Committee, needed transportation and a military escort for himself and three
committee members who participated in a sevenday ''exchange program'' last
weekend in London with the Defense Committee of the House of Commons.

All found a sympathetic ear and ready assistance, as have so many of their
colleagues, from the armed forces liaison offices on Capitol Hill.

$4,156 Per Flying Hour

Senator Tower, for example, was provided with an Air Force C-135, the military
equivalent of a 707, and a Navy escort officer to accompany him, three
colleagues and a few Administration officials on the London jaunt, a trip that
in air fare alone cost the taxpayers about $48,000, or $4,156 per flying hour.

''We have to be prepared for anything,'' said Capt. Ingolf N.  Kiland Jr., 44
years old, director of the Navy's Senate Liaison Office.

The Army, Navy, Air Force and now even the Coast Guard, which recently opened a
broom closet of an office in the basement of a Senate building, perform a number
of valuable, rarely publicized tasks for Congress.

They handle thousands of problems with the military for citizens referred by
their legislators, arrange domestic and international travel for senators and
representatives, and lobby for military budgets and pet programs, although they
say they only ''provide information.''

'Available for Schmoozing'

''They're always available for schmoozing,'' said Representative Les Aspin,
Democrat of Wisconsin, a vocal critic of Pentagon waste who serves on the Armed
Services Committee and is an unabashed fan of the liaison offices.

Mr. Aspin has reason to be grateful. Last spring, said one of his aides, the
Army liaison office provided, on less than 24 hours' notice, a helicopter for a
civic club's outing for children.

Captain Kiland doesn't assert that his office performs miracles, but the Navy
has collected statistics that demonstrate the productivity of the 60 individuals
who work in Navy legislative liaison in the House, Senate and Pentagon. The
House and Senate Navy offices answer approximately 2,000 written requests a
month, and respond to 120,000 verbal inquiries a year.

According to Captain Kiland, the turn-around time for written requests, which
require from three to eight telephone calls each, is five working days. But
Senate and House aides say that the Navy usually responds even faster.

The liaison officers work out of a cramped four-room suite in the Russell Senate
Office Building.

Closer Than Ship's Quarters

''It's closer quarters than a ship,'' said Captain Kiland, who has served on 10
kinds of vessels in his 22-year Navy career. ''But of course, we don't have to
sleep here.''

Legislative aides tell another story. They cite ''all-nighters'' endured by
liaison officers asked to respond to Congressional inquiries.

The close quarters occasionally become even more crowded when the Navy brings
additional officers to the Hill to work on what Captain Kiland calls
''notification drops,'' the announcement of the award of new major contracts.

All the services select their Hill staff carefully. ''They're picked to be
personable, good-looking and effective,'' said Ronald L. Tammen, a military aide
to Senator William Proxmire, Democrat of Wisconsin.

Former P.O.W. Called Influential

Personality is the key, Senate aides agree, to how effective a liaison officer
will become. Many cite John McCain, who was a prisoner of war in Vietnam for
eight years and later served three years in the Navy office, as one of the most
influential liaison officers because he joined the confidence and trust of
powerful senators.

Mr. McCain, whose father once had the same job and even the same desk, left the
Navy last March and is contemplating running for the Congress from Arizona.
''Youthfulness, combat experience, which helps your credibility, and as
unmilitary a manner as possible,'' he said, are requisites of success in the
liaison job.

Trips Get Most Attention

While constituent work takes the bulk of the liaison officer's time, arranging
House and Senate trips has received the most publicity.

''Gone are the days of the unvouchered Pentagon slush funds to ensure that
senators are well entertained on their trips,'' said Mr.  Tammen, who helped end
the practice.

Now, Mr. Tammen added, some of the pocket money for House and Senate junkets
comes from a little-known account in the Pentagon's budget designated for
''Emergencies and Extraordinary Affairs,'' which totals about $1 million a year.

''Somehow, they all manage to get along on that,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Capt. Ingolf N. Kiland

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN MOSAIC OF SOUTHEAST ASIA, WAR, POVERTY AND PROSPERITY

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to The New York Times; The writer of the
following dispatch has just completed a tour of duty as chief Asian diplomatic
correspondent of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2792 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 31


Southeast Asia has been a focus of war, of violent changes of regime and of
direct and indirect involvement of outside powers. Yet despite the convulsions
that followed the temporary end of the Indochina wars in 1975, a correspondent
who has spent most of the last 12 years in this region leaves impressed with a
constant amid the turmoil.

What has not changed is the continuing rise, however uneven in many aspects, of
the standard of living and the state of peace in the countries of the region
that reject Communism, while the three Communist countries are mired in war,
social upheaval and economic stagnation or decline.

Economic Floors and Ceilings Rise

Foreigners visiting this city, Manila or Jakarta, Indonesia, for the first time
will be impressed with the prevalence of luxury cars in settings of poverty.
Those who have known Southeast Asia over a longer period, however, will note
that in addition to the economic injustice evidenced by this conspicuous
consumption in the midst of penury, there is ample proof that the floor has
risen for the many while the ceiling has gone higher for the few.

What clogs traffic in Bangkok and Jakarta are not only the sedans of the elite
but also the motorbikes of the average man and, increasingly, woman. There is
also the rising prevalence, particularly in Singapore and Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, of modest family cars, which bespeaks the creation of a middle class.
People are markedly better dressed, and cassette recorders and cameras have
become everyday articles.

Cycles and Sewing Machines

In villages, in which a decade ago few mechanical devices were in use, bicycles,
the occasional moped or even motorcycle, and frequent sewing machines, tell of a
gradual, if uneven, amelioration in the standard of life.

Sadly, visits in recent years to Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos showed a
considerably reduced quality of life. The people were badly fed and dressed and
in settings of deprivation, with motorized transport reserved for high
Government and Communist Party officials and bicycles the most modern transport
for the working classes.

In the countryside, even working animals are rare, and men, women and children
do the work done elsewhere by machines or beasts of burden. It is not only in
Cambodia, which suffered disastrous famine in the years after 1975, where
malnutrition is a painfully visible fact in drawn faces and lean frames. A
distinguished Vietnamese physician from the north, interviewed in Hanoi in 1979,
said that generations of Vietnamese would bear the ''stigmata'' of the
malnutrition of the present period.

Non-Communist Southeast Asia may be niggardly and grudging in giving at best
temporary hospitality to the continuing flow of refugees from Vietnam, Cambodia
and Laos. But it owes to these exiles that it barely tolerates, even
temporarily, a large measure of the confidence that it has gained after an
initial period of trepidation after the Communist triumph in 1975. The
testimony, both spoken and implicit, of this one-way flow of hundreds of
thousands from the Communist to the non-Communist world has registered deeply in
the receiving countries.

In the early years after the establishment of Communist governments in all of
Vietnam, in Cambodia and in Laos, the six non-Communist countries of the region
worried that they might become the next ''dominoes'' to fall. At the same time,
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos presented an image of ''brotherly'' nations, united
in the crucible of victorious battle against the United States.

Feeling in danger of desertion by the West, particularly the United States,
whose war they had openly or tacitly approved, Indonesia, the Philippines,
Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore, and to a lesser extent Burma in its
hermit-like isolation, strive for positions of greater balance between the West,
which they favor, and the Communist powers, which they fear.

A Shift in Views

This did not come easily to America's most uncritical supporters during its
Indochina war. There was a contrast in the conversation of Government ministers
trying, with little evidence of conviction, to find good things to say about
Communist countries - while continuing naturally to speak in the cliches of an
earlier era, using such phrases as ''Red China'' or ''the free world.''

The shift in views is no more radical than that of the Western countries,
notably the United States, in their attitudes toward Cambodia. Until the
Vietnamese conquest of its neighbor in 1979, the regime of Prime Minister Pol
Pot was denounced, in former President Carter's view, as the worst violator of
human rights; a regime without legitimacy put into power in the 1970 to 1975 war
largely through the force of Communist Vietnamese armies. Since its overthrow by
those same armies, it is regarded, and voted for in the United Nations, as
representing legitimacy against the Vietnamese-created regime of President Heng
Samrin.

Changes Apparent After '78

The year 1978 appears in retrospect to be the year that changed non-Communist
Southeast Asia's perception of its position vis-a-vis its Communist neighbors
and their senior partners, China and the Soviet Union. On the last day of 1977,
Cambodia made public its bitter dispute with Vietnam, disclosing what Western
intelligence had been reporting for some time - its border war with its
supposedly brotherly neighbor.

In the months that followed, Vietbam's break with China became a fact, as Hanoi
moved ever closer into alliance with Moscow at the expense of the delicately
poised relations that it had maintained during the war, when it played off the
common enemy, the United States, to obtain what it needed from both Communist
powers.

China broke off all aid to Vietnam, and Vietnam retaliated with harshly
discriminatory actions against its ethnic Chinese minority.  Chinese from
northern Vietnam who, like all people of the region, possessed no riches, were
simply urged to cross the land border to China. The prosperous minority from the
recently capitalist south were made to pay dearly for the right to be crammed
onto unseaworthy craft to proceed to far-off shores, where hostility awaited
them.

Vietnamese Take Phnom Penh

At the end of the year, Vietnam set off the first all-out war by one Communist
country against another, and by the end of the first week of 1979, its troops
had conquered the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh. Before the first month of the
year was over, Vietnam had occupied almost all of the country, leaving the
troops remaining loyal to the Pol Pot regime backed into unproductive jungle
enclaves on the Thai border, where they continue to subsist, nourished through
food relief provided by the international community.

China reacted with a punitive military expedition into Vietnam, which found most
of Southeast Asia cheering both sides in the hope of maximum mutual damage.
Surveying the dramatically altered situation, and not underestimating the import
of the proven willingness of both China and Vietnam to resort to war, the
non-Communist countries reassessed their view of the Communist threat and saw
ground for hope.

Their confidence was bolstered by China's public admission of its economic
miseries and the evident shambles of the economies of the three Indochinese
nations. ''They are the dominoes that have fallen, not we,'' was a thought
expressed throughout the five countries grouped in the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations - Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.

Vietnam's Goals at Issue

This point of view still prevails throughout the region, although it is
beclouded by considerable protestations that Vietnam's aggression against
Cambodia is but a steppingstone toward annexationist designs on the
non-Communist nations, particularly Thailand, which borders on Laos and Cambodia
and faces Vietnamese troops on both frontiers.

Given the martial character of the Vietnamese regime and its historic attachment
to solving issues by military means, this is not a fear to be scoffed at.
However, last April, when the Thai military staged one of its periodic coups -
it failed - the putsch leaders ordered the bulk of Thai troops facing the
Vietnamese Army in Cambodia to move toward Bangkok to secure their officers'
power ambitions.

Had the Vietnamese Army wanted to, it could have rolled down the unprotected
road to Bangkok, but it did not budge. The nonevent weakened the case for the
imminent danger to Thailand as well as Thailand's image as a reliable defender
of regional security against the Communist threat.

Bangkok Supported Publicly

The event was not commented on publicly, because of a Southeast Asian
disinclination to criticize friends. But the nations in the non-Communist group
that do not share Thailand's implacably hard-line views on Vietnam found
encouragement for their private belief that the group's policy serves China's
interest more than its own and that Thailand is more amenable to Peking's view
than the five nations ought to be. Thailand's recognition as a so-called
front-line nation has obliged the four other members of the group to support
Bangkok's stand publicly, while leaving them free to question it in council and
in private conversations.

While the five members of the group share an anti-Communist position that in its
harshness would be qualified as a remnant of the cold war in the West, they
differ in their perceptions of whether Peking or Moscow is the archenemy.
Indonesia and Malaysia consider the Moscow threat via Hanoi remote and Peking's
oppressively near.  Thailand adheres to what is the historic position of
countries to the south of China that if a smaller nation pays tribute to the
Chinese, China will be its protector.

Vietnam Seen as a Bulwark

This runs against the grain of Indonesia and Malaysia, who harbor traditional
fears of China, perhaps based on race. The two countries tend to see Vietnam, if
not with favor, at least as a useful bulwark against long-term Chinese
objectives, which they suspect. Singapore, because of its leaders' high degree
of articulateness in English coupled with a Chinese lack of reticence that is
alien to its Asean partners, appears to believe that non-Communist Southeast
Asia's survival depends on keeping the Communist blocs at odds. Singapore does
what it can to urge China and Vietnam and the Soviet Union against each other.

The fifth member of the non-Communist Southeast Asian group, the Philippines,
feels sufficiently secure in its insularity to minimize its political
involvement. The only non-Communist nonmember, Burma, showed its truly neutral
colors last year when it walked out of the conference of nations professing
nonalignment after its effective alignment with Soviet interests became patent.

Rivalry Enhances Standing

The open break and the introduction of Soviet-Chinese rivalry into Southeast
Asia has enhanced the standing of the non-Communist Southeast Asian group, which
was founded in 1967. Since its creation, the group had looked for a political
reason for being and finally found it as a focus for the attention of all major
powers. In the last three years, because of its active role as sponsor of the
anti-Vietnamese resolutions on Cambodia in the United Nations, the bloc has
benefited by the tender attention of both the United States and China, united in
their hostility to the Soviet Union's and its allies' military adventures.

Vietnamese actions - the aggression against Cambodia and Hanoi's responsibility
for the refugee outflow - have provided for the United States the boon of once
more becoming a vital factor for Southeast Asian nations. It has helped the
United States to overcome the legacy of what is still considered throughout the
region, by the Governments and people of the non-Communist countries and by many
of the people of Indochina, as its abandonment of the nations that it encouraged
to make war against the Communists in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

Looking to U.S. for Aid

Southeast Asian countries once again look toward the United States for support -
diplomatic, economic and military. No one is clamoring for the return of
American troops, although the presence of United States forces in the
Philippines, Japan and South Korea is considered a positive factor. Speedier
deliveries of more modern American arms and military equipment on advantageous
financial terms are desired by Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines. Burma
has accepted American helicopters and planes for its armed forces, earmarked for
narcotics suppression but used in the fight against insurgents whether they deal
in narcotics or not.

Although four of the Asean members are genuinely developing nations rather than
just classed in that category, and the fifth, Singapore, is clearly beyond that
level, Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines and, to a far lesser extent, Burma,
are recipients of American economic assistance and would like more.

No Desire to Be a 'Player'

In view of America's reduced interest in a region in which only recently it
conducted a long and losing war, and its seeming lack of desire to become once
again what an ambassador in the region called ''a player,'' the United States
appears inclined largely to entertain requests to become a more important
logistical supplier to Southeast Asian countries, to encourage private American
investment and to use its strong voice in international lending agencies on
behalf of the six regional nations.

Beyond this, the United States is perceived by its Southeast Asian friends to be
prepared to do no more than follow Chinese and Asean policies on regional
matters, which means mainly the Cambodian conflict. The United States is seen by
leaders and political analysts and commentators in this region to be fully
preoccupied with its global confrontation with the Soviet Union and the
conflicts in the Middle East and in Latin America.

The question that is most insistently raised in private discussions with foreign
ministers and their associates in regional capitals is whether the United States
is too ready to follow Chinese rather than Southeast Asian inclinations when the
two do not coincide. Malaysian, Indonesian and Singaporean officials were keenly
disappointed by the American stand at last summer's United Nations conference on
Cambodia.

Support for Pol Pot at Issue

Asean had prepared a resolution supporting the anti-Vietnamese resistance forces
but designed to dilute the strength of China's ally, the deposed Pol Pot regime,
by giving greater weight to non-Communist guerrillas and political groupings.
China presented a draft clearly intended to enhance the dominance of the Pol Pot
remnants among opponents of the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

The non-Communist Southeast Asian nations felt let down when the United States,
instead of putting its full support behind their resolution and using its
influence on China to make Peking back down, urged a compromise, which was
adopted.

Similarly, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. gave no cheer to the five
Asean foreign ministers in Manila last June when, arriving directly from Peking,
he announced that the United States had decided to make China eligible for the
purchase of American arms. Although in public statements the ministers raised no
objections, they expressed deep concern among each other and in conversations
with outsiders.

''The United States is comfortable in global terms with China, but from the
regional viewpoint China is dangerous to us,'' Foreign Minister Mohammad Ghazali
Shafie of Malaysia said in an interview, summing up a prevalent fear among
Southeast Asian policy makers and a caution addressed to the Reagan
Administration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a Thai soldier carrying a Cambodian refugee

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AUSTRALIA AID TO ABORIGINES MISSING MARK

BYLINE: By PAMELA G. HOLLIE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: MOUNT NANCY, Australia


No one knows just how many people live in the two dozen houses that make up
Mount Nancy, a camp established for aborigines on a slight rise in the red
desert of central Australia.

The houses are open, some without windows or doors. Visitors come and go, and
dogs and cats wander in and out freely.  Rita Scobie sits on the ground
flattening aluminum beer cans with a rock. When she has a burlap bag full, she
can get about $20 for it.  As fast as she pounds, the morning visitors to the
nearby concrete house where she sleeps toss empty beer cans her way.

''People misunderstand what they see in the camps,'' said Geoff Shaw, a Vietnam
War veteran who lives in Mount Nancy. ''What they fail to understand is that
aborigines brought their tribal customs and their lifestyle with them. Whites
are too quick to condemn us.''

One of Many Small Camps

Mount Nancy, a few miles north of Alice Springs in the center of the continent,
is one of many small camps established by the Australian Government for
aborigines who have come to towns and cities from the outback. Mr. Shaw works
for one of the aboriginal councils that handle liaison between the camps and
local governments.

Camps like Mount Nancy were intended to aid in the transition from bush to urban
life. But a recent report by the Government's Department of Aboriginal Affairs
says the tendency of the aborigines - the word means ''earliest known
inhabitants'' - to cling to their old ways is likely to make their assimilation
unattainable.

There are 170,000 aborigines in Australia, 1.2 percent of the total population.
They are scattered all over the country in 600 tribes speaking 200 languages.

''Sixty-five percent of the aborigines have moved into the urban areas,'' said
Charles Perkins, chairman of the Aboriginal Development Commission, which serves
as one of the channels through which Australian Government money reaches the
tribes. In its first year the commission lent $50 million to aborigines to buy
land and housing.

$350 Million for Housing

The Government has spent more than $350 million in the last six years providing
housing for aborigines on land they once owned.  ''The Government is helping us
to buy back what is ours,'' Mr.  Perkins said. ''It's guilt. But no other
government that I know of has ever done that.''

Using housing as the key to its program, the Government has been able to make
some progress in aboriginal health, education and welfare. But it has not been
able to reduce unemployment among the aborigines to much below 50 percent.

Communities like Mount Nancy, on the fringes of towns, are what the Government
acknowledges to be part of a growing ''fringe problem.''

''There doesn't seem to be much that we can do about it,'' Peter Baume, Minister
for Aboriginal Affairs, said in a recent interview.  ''The fringe problem is the
toughest problem we face.''

Sanctuary From Rural Hardship

In camps like Mount Nancy, aborigines have found sanctuary from the hardship of
the bush. The attractions of concrete houses and welfare benefits, which can
amount to $300 a week for a family of six, have encouraged aborigines to leave
their rural tribes for urban areas.

Mr. Perkins, who was born near Mount Nancy, said aborigines ''are caught between
two worlds'' in such settlements, with little to do and no skills.

''They are not independent,'' he said. ''They are not productive.  They are not
confident.'' There is no vocational training at the camps, and there are no
programs to teach housekeeping. Instead of providing an incentive for aborigines
to adopt the ways of nonaboriginal inhabitants in nearby towns, the camps have
become permanent fenced compounds that are just places to live.

To many of the aborigines, Mount Nancy, although littered with beer cans, wine
bottles and trash, is a comfortable place. They apparently do not mind living
several to a room. There is no need to forage for food, to keep up the weaving,
art or musci of the outback. Some of the inhabitants do have jobs, but most of
those work for the Government in programs for the aborigines.

'This Is a Nice Place'

The men here wear western-style shirts with fringes and cowboy hats and boots.
The women wear T-shirts and jeans.  ''This is a nice place,'' said Agnes
Mathews, Mrs. Scobie's sister, comparing her lot with that of aborigines who
sleep in makeshift shelters on the rocky soil along the road or in the dry
riverbed of the Todd River in Alice Springs.

She has three television sets in her concrete three-bedroom house.  She has no
broom and no dishes, and most of the furniture that came with the house has
disappeared. But there is food around -canned beans and not-too-fresh sausage.

Every day, she says, neighbors stop by to visit, play cards and drink.  ''They
broke brother's leg last night,'' Mrs. Mathews said with a show of disgust,
tossing another beer can to her sister. ''Two of them in a big fight, drunk.
They took brother to the hospital for a plaster.''

''And that one,'' she said, pointing across the littered roadway to the next
house, where a dozen men were drinking sherry and beer.  ''That one, still
drunk. He broke brother's leg.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW TO READ THE ECONOMY

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FUERBRINGER

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2714 words


WASHINGTON P EOPLE might feel it in their paychecks and the supermarket. But
there's only one way most folks really know how the economy is doing, and that's
by watching the reports that the Government's statisticians keep cranking out,
month by month, quarter by quarter.  These indicators produce more than a
picture of the economy. They also form the basis for economic policy decisions
and signal whether policies then in effect are working.

These major indicators, and the many others that receive less public attention,
have their own pecularities and problems. Some are better than others. Some are
being changed. And some could be changed, but the improvement might not make a
major difference. In addition, there are complaints that the Reagan
Administration's budget cuts could eventually hurt the quality of the
statistics. Here is a primer on some of the economic indicators.
GROWTH

The gross national product is the broadest measure of the nation's economy. The
G.N.P., which is reported quarterly, can have a strong effect on government
policy - because it shows whether the economy is in a recession and whether
inflation is out of line.

The gross national product measures the output of all the nation's goods and
services, divided into four categories: personal consumption expenditures, which
is essentially consumer spending; gross private domestic investment, which
includes business investment in equipment and structures and housing; net
exports of goods and services, which is the balance of exports and imports, and
government purchases, which is the net purchase of goods and services by the
Federal, state and local governments.

The G.N.P. measures only sales of final products. This means that the value of
flour in bread or the steel in a car is assumed to be counted in the sale of the
final product.

The Bureau of Economic Analysis in the Department of Commerce assembles the
G.N.P. The first report of the G.N.P., about two weeks after the end of the
quarter, is based on incomplete data for the quarter and is revised as later
information is gathered.

The G.N.P. is reported in two forms: nominal G.N.P., which is the total for the
quarter and real G.N.P., which is the G.N.P. for the quarter after the effects
of inflation are removed.

Key criticisms center on the revisions, some of the data-gathering techniques
and the reliability of the data. Any quarterly G.N.P.  figure is eventually
subject to seven revisions, the first two coming in the two months after the
first release.

In 1965, mid-year G.N.P. figures showed an annual growth rate of 5.5 percent.
But the number was later revised to 8 percent. The late Arthur Okun, a member of
the Council of Economic Advisers in the Johnson Administration, later complained
that if the first number had been more accurate, the Administration would have
forseen the inflationary impact of the defense buildup for the Vietnam War.

Prof. Geoffrey H. Moore of Rutgers University contends that the current method
for deflating net exports should be changed. His alternative would produce a
major change in the G.N.P. picture this year. For example, instead of a decline
of six-tenths of a percent in real G.N.P. in the third quarter - the second
quarterly decline in a row - his revised figure would show a small increase,
which might have affected the current talk of a recession.
INFLATION

The Consumer Price Index measures changes in prices based on a fixed market
basket of goods and services, including food, housing, fuel, transportation,
medical care, entertainment, apparel, personal care and other goods and
services. Most of the prices of some 385 major items are collected by agents in
85 urban areas either in interviews or from secondary sources. Rental data comes
from 18,000 rent payers, and property-tax data covers 18,000 housing units.
Other prices are collected from 24,000 grocery stores, department stores,
hospitals, gas stations and other establishments.

The C.P.I. has set weights for the items in the index, establishing the relative
importance of each. Based on 1980 figures, housing is the heaviest weighted
component at 45.5 percent. Transportation is 19 percent and food and beverages
18.3 percent.

Actually, there are two Consumer Price Indexes. The one most often discussed is
the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (the C.P.I.-U.), which was
introduced in 1978 in an effort to broaden the population covered by the index.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics added people on welfare, those with high incomes,
the unemployed, the retired and professionals. The other index is the Consumer
Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (the C.P.I.-W.), which
tracks the C.P.I.-U. fairly closely.

The C.P.I.-W records only the prices paid by wage and salary workers. It now
covers about 40 percent of the population, while the C.P.I.-U. covers about 80
percent, based on the 1970 Census.

The C.P.I.-W. is significant because it is the basis for automatic
cost-of-living increases for approximately 90 million Americans, including those
on Social Security, Federal pensions and workers whose labor contracts allow for
such raises.

Although it is often referred to as a cost-of-living index, the C.P.I. does not
accurately measure how much people actually spend.  In addition, the market
basket represents the average quantities bought by people and does not
necessarily reflect what any one family or individual consumer would purchase.

The key problem with the Consumer Price Index, however, is the housing
component. In tracking mortgage interest rates and house prices, it has tended
to overstate the rate of inflation when interest rates are rising - and
understate it when rates are falling. Furthermore, the weight given housing
magnifies these trends.

The weighting of the other components in the market basket is also a problem.
The weights are now based on the 1972-74 Consumer Expenditure Survey, and habits
have changed and people are not consuming the same items they did then. Some
analysts contend, for example, that the weighting for energy, which makes up
10.8 percent of the index, should be a much lower portion now because of moves
toward conservation.

The Bureau of Labor Statistics plans to shift the emphasis on housing in the
C.P.I.-U. from the cost of ownership to a rental equivalent - but not until
1983.

The Producer Price Index includes many of the components of the old Wholesale
Price Index. It gets more complex from there. When people talk about the
Producer Price Index they usually mean the Producer Price Index for Finished
Goods. That measures price changes of goods that are completely processed and
ready for sale to the ultimate user, either individuals or a business concern.
These goods include trucks, farm equipment and machinery that would be sold to
businesses, and consumer goods like food, clothing, appliances and autos that
would be purchased by retailers for eventual sale to consumers.

There is an index for intermediate goods, which, for example, include the flour
used for bread, auto parts, steel mill products, paperboxes and cotton yarns -
generally things that are one processing step removed from finished goods. And a
third index shows price changes in crude materials, including wheat, iron and
steel scrap, livestock, raw cotton and crude petroleum.

The indexes are compiled in much the same way as the C.P.I., but the information
on some 2,800 commodities comes in by mail. Forms go to about 7,000 businesses,
which provide the price information. The indexes are also weighted.

The index for finished goods is not comparable directly to the C.P.I. because it
does not include services, housing or used cars.  The increases or decreases for
finished goods also don't always translate directly into rises in consumer
prices, especially over the short term, because retailers can vary the markups
they charge on what they buy. This means the index is not a good short-term
measure of future increases in the C.P.I.

Many economists, however, find the index a good measure of inflation trends,
especially when the C.P.I. is being distorted by rising or falling interest
rates and housing prices.

Critics of the C.P.I. and P.P.I. often look instead at two other gauges of
inflation - the G.N.P. deflator and the G.N.P. fixed-weight price index. Both
are derived from the special indexes used to adjust the gross national product
for inflation.

The deflator is not directly comparable to the C.P.I. or the P.P.I., however,
because it measures both changes in prices and changes in consumption. This
means the deflator can decline as consumers shift from high-priced items whose
prices are still increasing to items with relatively lower prices and slower
increases. This also means that the deflator, at times, can understate
inflation.

The fixed-weight index is based on a market basket. One component of the
fixed-weight index - personal consumption expenditures - is very close to the
C.P.I., except that it uses a measure for housing costs that is like the rental
equivalent the C.P.I. will eventually use. Economists generally agree that both
these quarterly numbers - which have tended to be lower than the C.P.I. - are
better measures of inflation.
JOBS

The unemployment rate, which usually is issued the first Friday of the month, is
compiled in a Household Survey, which reports the size of the civilian labor
force, plus the numbers of people who are working and not working. The Household
Survey canvasses 60,000 households, with interviewers trying to determine the
employment status of all people in the household 16 years old and over. The
survey is conducted during the calendar week that contains the 12th day of the
month.

The unemployed are those who did not work during the survey week but made
efforts during the prior four weeks to find a job by registering with
unemployment agencies or writing job applications.  People are also counted as
unemployed if they are temporarily laid off or are waiting to report to a job
within 30 days. They are employed if they performed work as paid civilians for
one or more hours during the survey week. Those employed 35 or more hours a week
are recorded as full-time workers, and those employed 1 to 34 hours,
part-timers. Unpaid workers are counted if they worked 15 or more hours in a
family business. Also counted are people with jobs who were temporarily absent
for various reasons, including a strike.  Discouraged workers, who are not
seeking jobs because they feel they aren't available, are not counted among the
unemployed.

The employment and unemployment numbers have undergone two major outside reviews
in the last 20 years. The last was completed in 1979 and Labor Secretary Raymond
Donovan made final recommendations on the last review at the end of October.

The unemployment rate is important because it cuts across the entire economy. It
is criticized, however, for overstating or understating actual joblessness. Some
people work part time only because they can't find full-time work. If all
discouraged workers plus those part-timers were included among the unemployed,
the unemployment rate for the third quarter of this year would have been 10.2
percent instead of 7.2 percent, according to an experimental measure published
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
PRODUCTION

The Index of Industrial Production measures changes in output of the nation's
factories, mines and electric and gas utilities. The index, issued monthly by
the Federal Reserve Board, reflects what is happening to the production of
durable goods, such as cars and appliances, nondurables, such as food or
clothing, and construction supplies, business equipment and the production of
the parts used in the manufacturing of these products. It also gives a detailed
reading of production by a particular industry, such as transportation
equipment, chemicals or lumber.

Like most other gauges of this type, the industrial production index is
seasonally adjusted to smooth out regular fluctuations in production during the
year. The index is also subject to revision.

The index is well respected. Because it covers manufacturing, which is
especially sensitive to downturns in the economy, it is a key indicator. It was
the report in October of decline of eight-tenths of a percent in output that
confirmed for many economists that the economy had finally fallen into a
recession.

But because the index covers sensitive industries that are usually the hardest
hit in a recession, downturns in the index can overstate what the decline in the
economy over all will be in a recession. In the first six recessions since World
War II, the average decline in industrial production was about five times larger
than the overall drop in the gross national product.
HOUSING

Housing starts, reported monthly, measure the annual rate of starts of privately
owned housing units. The monthly figures are broken down into an annual rate for
single-family housing starts, starts for buildings with two units, three and
four units and five or more units. Housing starts do not include mobile homes. A
start is counted when the ground is broken for the unit or units; the completion
of the project can take months or years.

In addition to housing-start figures, the monthly report, prepared by the Bureau
of the Census, also gives figures for new building permits.

The housing industry is a key leading indicator because it usually is the first
sector to decline as the economy slows. Economists in the housing industry
sometimes complain that the housing-start figures overstate the pace in the
industry. There are times, when the economy is in a decline, that a project can
be recorded as having started. But construction can then stop.
THE FORECAST

The Government's index of leading economic indicators is designed to forecast
swings in the economy -whether the nation is growing or falling into a
recession. Its 12 components have been chosen because they historically tend to
move either downward or upward before the economy swings in those directions.

The 12 components are the average manufacturing work week, the layoff rate for
manufacturing workers, inflation-adjusted new orders for consumer goods and
materials, the speed of delivery of new goods, the rate of net business
formation; contracts for plants and equipment, change in inventories on hand,
change in crude material prices, stock prices, change in total liquid assets and
changes in the M-2 money supply figure, which includes funds in checking
accounts, currency in circulation and assets of money market funds.

The index is probably the most often misinterpreted of the monthly indexes. One
problem is that it isn't always right. Since World War II, it has declined
significantly (3 percent or more) nine times. But only six times did recessions
follow. And in 1973 - before the onset of the worst recession since World War II
- the index fell only 1.7 percent. Only after the recession was under way did
the index take a big dip.

In addition, the index has a timing problem and is subject to monthly revisions.
There is no set period of months of decline that means a recession is on the
way. Sometimes, as is the case this year, the steep drops in the index - like
the 2.7 percent decline for September - were not reported until after the
Administration and many other economists had already declared that a recession
had begun.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph of Gross National Product from 1979 to 1981 graph
of Prices from 4th quarter 1979 to present graph of Unemployment from 10 79 to
10 81 graph of Industrial Production from 10 79 to 9 81 graph of Housing Starts
from 10

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GETTING DOWN TO BASICS ON WHAT AILS THE U.S. ECONOMY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 3475 words


EVEN Pollyanna would have been daunted by last week's economic statistics. The
nation's unemployment rate leapt to 8 percent in October, the highest level in
almost six years; for blacks, it hit a record. One million more people are out
of work now than in July, and the recession that put them there - the second in
as many years - is only expected to grow deeper. Not only were orders for new
manufacturing goods down 0.9 percent in September; the biggest month-to-month
rise in inventories since February was reported. In American industry's crippled
bellwether, autos, sales were down 27.2 percent, for the lowest October since
1958.

The Week in Review asked Barry P. Bosworth, the former director of President
Carter's Council on Wage and Price Stability who is now at the Brookings
Institution, and Martin S. Feldstein, a Harvard University professor and
president of the National Bureau of Economic Research, to talk about the economy
and its future. Excerpts of their discussion with Edward Cowan, a reporter in
the Washington bureau of The New York Times, and Caroline Rand Herron, an editor
of The Review, follow.

Question. Sometimes it seems that our economy just isn't working any more. Not
only do we have persistent problems - inflation, recession, international
competition - that don't get solved. We just find more. Do we need to redefine
our economy and the way we deal with it?

Mr. Bosworth. The problems certainly have become more complex. But I don't think
the economy has changed so drastically.  If the 1960's was a period where we
could have a fairly singleminded focus on unemployment, the 70's became a period
of conflict between reducing unemployment and trying to restrain inflation. The
80's is even more of a mess, so to speak, because we now have decline in
productivity growth. The difficulty is that the policies to deal with one run
into conflict with the other goals.

Q. If you put the difficulties together, would you come up with what is called
stagflation?

Mr. Bosworth. The first two are certainly stagflation. But the decline in
productivity growth and in real standards of living are going to require the
invention of a third term. I would call it economic deterioration.
Unemployment and Expansion

Q. Mr. Feldstein, are we experiencing a recurrence of random confluences rather
than basic change?

Mr. Feldstein. The problems we are seeing are not random. They are the results
of the policies we pursued in the 1960's and 1970's - putting all the emphasis
on lowering unemployment. That led us time after time to overexpansionary
policies, which created the kind of inflation that we've come to have. For
rather complex reasons, that inflation reduced and distorted investment. And
that contributed to our slowdown in productivity.

Mr. Bosworth. I don't think the problem can be described so simply. I would go
so far as to say that I don't think it is possible within the existing structure
of the United States economy to come up with a reasonable degree of price
stability at anywhere near an acceptable level of unemployment. In other words,
we will have to consider sharp changes in the structure of the economy.

Mr. Feldstein. You're right. We disagree. I do believe that we can bring the
inflation rate down again. It is going to require higher rates of unemployment
along the way. But I think that policy is already in process and happening in
the (Administrations's) combination of tight money, cutbacks in Government
spending and tax cuts.

Q. But isn't it true that the economy has been under restraint for two or three
years in just that way?

Mr. Feldstein. We have not pursued a policy designed to convince businesses and
employees that they're going to face (markets) in the year ahead that are going
to be soft. That kind of situation would put pressure on firms to keep down
their price increases and to be tougher in their wage negotiations, and will
begin to turn things around.

Mr. Bosworth. I think economists talk too much in terms of euphemisms. What we
really mean is that in the face of inflation the Federal Reserve does not expand
the money supply. The increased demand for credit will throw a few million
people out of work. And the notion is that if somehow pursued for a couple of
years, people will see the policy is credible. I see no historical evidence for
that. At that point everybody says, 'My God, I'm about to lose my job and
something's got to be done about it.'

In that sense Marty is right. We flip-flop too much. But I would argue that
fundamentally what lies behind that is the fact that there is a conflict in the
costs imposed on different groups in the society.

In addition, if we're concerned about capital formation and productivity, you
are not going to get (it) in this type of an economy. We have to have a work
force that is willing to accept innovation, introduction of robots. And when
people are afraid for their jobs, they don't accept technological change that
leads to improvements in productivity growth.
Technological Change

Mr. Feldstein. Let me say something about change and robots and all that.
Fortunately we have foreign competition. We have domestic competition. Employees
who say 'No, we will not have robots' will soon find that their employers have
no markets because somebody who is more flexible will be asked to provide those
products on a cheaper, more efficient basis.

Mr. Bosworth. That's exactly what will happen.

Mr. Feldstein. You mean they'll never learn...

Mr. Bosworth. Without some guidance and assistance by Government to help people
make transitions, the United States economy will look like the automobile
industry. And to suggest that the economy would go through that magnitude of
decline - it has gotten to the point that even if the industry now did come up
with a major reduction in the rate of wage increase, the companies lack the
financial resources to ever be able to catch up.

Q. In talking about autos, are we whipping the wrong horse on toward the finish
line? Is that industry indicative of an important change in the American
economy, a shift away from the traditional manufacturing?

Mr. Feldstein. We don't have to think about it. It'll happen anyway. The notion
that we're becoming a service economy is a major structural change. The idea
that there are important new industries with deep potential payoffs - one on the
top of everybody's list is genetic engineering - is obvious to the investors and
the scientists who are going to make all that dough. I can't imagine any reason
why the Government should do anything other than keep its hands off and allow it
to flower naturally.

Q. Senator Bensten, through the Joint Economic Committee, and others, are
beginning to question whether the United States has the public education system
to turn out the labor force that high-speed communications and sophisticated
electronics in the 1980's and 1990's will require.

Mr. Feldstein. It's probably true that we've just gotten sloppy in the last
couple of decades. But (it's also) a problem of a failure to provide the kind of
mechanism for on-the-job training that the European economies have provided. In
part, and particularly for the low skilled, that is due to the way the minimum
wage operates.

Q. What would such a mechanism look like?

Mr. Feldstein. Well there are two ways to go.

One is to say until you're 18 or 19 there is no minimum wage. Relax that on an
age basis or on a one-year basis. The alternative is for Government to provide
explicit subsidies for on-the-job training - voucher credits, for which we've
had some minor experience.

The other end of the problem is that we probably induce too many people to go on
to college. They acquire no particularly useful technical skills, but they think
of themselves as not in the technician class but in the more status-carrying
management, sales group. I don't think 15 years ago I would ever have thought
that I would be saying there's too much higher education. Yet look at what has
actually happened as a result of Government subsidies.

Mr. Bosworth. Well, I would be reluctant to conclude that in some way the United
States is overinvesting in education. Instead, I would think that most of these
drives of people to try to get the highprestige white-collar jobs are a natural
product of the economy.  It is simply true that in a world of high unemployment,
who bears most of the risk of that unemployment? Not white-collar workers.

They need to go to college. If I was a high school senior today, I would decide
to go on to college. Because if I look at the labor market, it's an opportunity
cost -Mr. Feldstein. It costs the state about $40,000 for you to go to
university -Mr. Bosworth. But what does it cost you? One answer to the problem
is to say we should force...

Mr. Feldstein. But that's exactly the point.

Mr. Bosworth....the high school graduate to go out into that labor market. But
there is no job for him.

Q. Let's synthesize the question. Where is the economy going? Where are
companies going? Where are unions going? And is anybody providing guidance?

Some commentators - the economist Robert L. Heilbroner, for example - suggest we
can't afford entrepreneurship any more, that only through a more coordinated
tripartite approach will we get our act together and forge an economy for the
21st century.

Mr. Feldstein. That's not a look into the future; that's just a description of
the postwar American economy.  I thought we had talked about the problems of
getting the Government in the middle of it. The Government is political rather
than economic, it is short-sighted, it has all too often shown that its horizon
is the next election -
International Competition

Q. And Government can't be retrained?

Mr. Feldstein. That's an inherent fact about the political process. It's a good
one, that people have to stand for re-election. So we have to learn to cope.
That means that you don't assign to the Government jobs that require a
longer-term view. And the economy is such a problem that ought to be left to the
marketplace where people do take, can take, a longer-term view.

The third issue, the international economy and our competitiveness in the world,
I think, is a real issue. But one mustn't lose sight of the fact that in general
we're doing very well. Our manufacturing exports have done very well; if we
weren't paying the kind of price for oil that we're paying now to the OPEC
countries, we wouldn't be talking about balance-of-payments deficits.

Mr. Bosworth. The United States economic deterioration doesn't show up in terms
of declining exports. It shows up in the fall of the value of the dollar.

It's hard to overstate how badly our economy has done in the 1970's. Because of
the productivity decline (real) income today is about 25 percent lower than it
would have been if we had managed to continue to grow the way we did in the
early 60's. What is the barrier? It's the fear of inflation. We know how to
create more jobs.

Mr. Feldstein. Didn't you change subjects in the middle? You said that we've had
low growth of productivity and income. Correct. And we know how to create
employment, by easier money and fiscal stimulants. Also correct. But that
doesn't raise the growth of productivity.

Mr. Bosworth. An economy which is growing rapidly and has high utilization of
existing capacity and relatively low interest rates is precisely the type of
economy that promotes capital formation.

Mr. Feldstein. No, that's exactly how we got it wrong in the last two decades.
We thought that telling the Fed to promote low interest rates by rapid growth of
the money supply would somehow be helpful for investment. In fact what we did
was create inflation, and that inflation interacted with the tax law to reduce
the amount of investment.

I think that the new approach to macroeconomic policy - a combination of tight
money but strong fiscal incentives for business investment - will produce
investment. The tight money will curtail housing, consumer durable spending, and
will induce people to save more. But business, although it's facing a higher
cost of funds, will have an added incentive to invest because of the very rapid
acceleration of depreciation Congress has enacted.

Q. But unemployment is an unacceptable way to many of combating inflation. Is
some kind of incomes policy -such as James Tobin, the Nobel laureate, and others
have been talking about - a workable approach?

Mr. Bosworth. One of the major differences I have with Marty's prescription
comes in this area. We have a lot of savings in our economy already. The
difficulty is that most of (it is) going to finance Government deficits.

Mr. Feldstein. No, no, no, no. Let's at least keep the facts reasonable. We have
a very low savings rate and the Government is taking a large share of it.

Mr. Bosworth. If we want to get the total amount of savings up to make it
available for business investment, the fastest and most direct way that I know
to do that is to cut back on Government borrowing and to shift to a more
restrictive fiscal policy.

Mr. Feldstein. We agree completely that getting rid of the Government deficit
would be a good thing. I wouldn't stop there. We want to increase private
savings as well or we would still end up with a low amount of funds available
for private investment.

Mr. Bosworth. But there is a difference in what you place first.  The real
problem is not that we have too low a level of savings.  With high levels of
underutilization of existing capacity, there's no reason for business to invest.

The United States has to give business the expectation of a strong economy where
funds (will be) at reasonable cost. The barrier is that we try to hold down on
demand, to fight inflation. That gets us incomes policies, to encourage wage and
price restraint other than through high levels of unemployment.
Incomes Policy Record

The historical record of those (means) is not good. But there are a couple of
lessons we have learned. One of the big errors was that the advocates of incomes
policy looked upon it as a substitute for fiscal and monetary restraint.

The real issue is whether there's not a role for incomes policy to play in the
middle area: Can we have a moderate level of demand, not the extremely high
unemployment rate we have today, but something more in the range of 5 or 6
percent, and an effective incomes policy?

Mr. Feldstein. Barry has just explained why incomes policy would be so terrible.
Because once you had it you would then define full employment as 5 or 6 percent
unemployment and that would probably represent substantial excess demand and you
would not know it.

I don't think that one can say, let's put in the wage and price controls in some
form - incomes policy, to give it a more polite name - and then run a mildly
slack economy. I think the political system won't allow that.

Mr. Bosworth. I look at it as basically a problem of trying to enunciate that
the policies we're going to have to undertake are going to be costly in the
short run, but they are of a magnitude that offer some long-term hope. And
second, whatever the restraint is going to be, and the sacrifices, everybody's
going to bear it equally - that it's going to be spread across the population.
You can get political support to sustain such a policy for a couple of years.

Mr. Feldstein. What has changed since the early 1960's, when we had no
inflation?  Unions have gotten weaker, so it can't be the unions. The economy
has become much more open to competition from abroad, so it can't be that we
have protected monopolies. I can't think of what there is that should make it
impossible for us to return to the low levels of inflation that we enjoyed for
quite a while before things got out of hand during the Vietnam War.

Mr. Bosworth. We could return to low levels of inflation in the early 1960's by
a decade of major recessions.
Vulnerability to Inflation

Mr. Feldstein. Sorry, the issue was if we got (inflation) down.  You and I agree
that there is a transition problem, that substantial slack would get it down.
You then said when we got it down we need an incomes policy.

Mr. Bosworth. That's right.

Mr. Feldstein. I don't see why. There's nothing that has made the economy more
inflation prone, and if we don't repeat mistakes in monetary and fiscal policy
-Mr. Bosworth. But there are things that have changed. In the 50's and the 60's,
the United States almost never faced the magnitude of international disruptions
to major commodity markets that we had in the 70's. Our vulnerability to
external events that can touch off a severe inflation is much greater than in
the past.

I don't think we can continue to allow labor contracts to be negotiated on a
three-year basis with a cost-of-living escalator.  The automobile industry got
into trouble not because the workers suddenly negotiated large wage increases.
They negotiated a formula that unexpectedly, and by accident, produced large
increases that neither of the two parties had perceived at negotiation. That
pushed them into a noncompetitive position.

Mr. Feldstein. Would the Government have conceived it differently?  Is there so
much wisdom here?  Mr. Bosworth. That's not the issue. The issue is whether or
not Government can restructure the economy by moving away from long-term
indexing of labor contracts, so that private markets are more in a position to
respond more quickly to changing economic circumstances.

Mr. Feldstein. I don't think we know enough to say outlawing that kind of
contract will be anti-inflationary.  Mr. Bosworth. Or alternatively we go to
year-by-year contracting, as has been done in some European countries. such as
Germany. My position would be that you simply can't anticipate these things
anymore, and it is a mistake for both labor and management to enter into these
sorts of long-term agreements, which are risky, as Marty says.

Mr. Feldstein. Then they'll discover it.

Q. Mr. Bosworth, is that a sufficient inhibition?

Mr. Bosworth. The question is the speed with which we adjust. Could we go to a
system, for example, where it's one-year negotiations for individual industries,
preceded at the beginning of the year by some meeting with Government, labor and
business officials to talk about the economic situation, and they can have a
time to assess?

Mr. Feldstein. If industry and labor sat down with (Administration) forecasters
in the summer, they would have been told one outlook - very high growth of
demand. And if they went across town to the Fed, they would have been given a
lower and less expansionary story. If they went up to (the Hill), they would
have had a different story.  Which (are) they supposed to act on?

Q. Mr. Bosworth, you're talking about more than information conveying, aren't
you?

Mr. Bosworth. It can often be helpful between two private parties with a history
of conflict to have a third party come in and look at it differently. It's
easier for labor, I think, to accept the fact that the situation has changed
when they have some discussion of their position in the economy from an outside
factor than from hearing it from management that says it's an inevitable -Mr.
Feldstein. I think the last outside factor they ought to get is the Government.
The Government isn't a neutral expert. If they want to get an outside
consultant, they ought to go to somebody who is not a party.

Mr. Bosworth. On whether or not it ought to be just the Government, maybe it is
too political. You could think of setting up a third group that tries to warn
the parties about economic situations, discuss some of the issues they face.
They've got to get out of the historical situation of just conflict between
management and the workers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Martin S. Feldstein photo of Barry P. Bosworth
graph of inflation from 1960 to 1981 graph of productivity from 1960 through
1981 graph of unemployment rate from 1960 through 1981 graph of wages from 1960
through 1981 photo of a worker grinding engine block at a Buick foundry

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE RE-EDUCATION OF WALTER MONDALE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 67, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4072 words


Walter F. Mondale, former Vice President of the United States, is of counsel to
the law firm of Winston & Strawn and a visiting professor at three universities
in Minnesota. By Walter F. Mondale It's been about a year now since my previous
employer informed me that my contract would not be renewed. In that year, I've
had the opportunity to do a number of things that nationally elected leaders too
rarely have the chance to do: to engage in extended discussions with people who
are not regular visitors to the White House, to read extensively, to explore
long-term issues without the pressures of day-to-day crisis management. This
year has meant more to me than simply moving from the West Wing of the White
House to a law office on Washington's M Street and new teaching positions in my
state of Minnesota. It's meant a chance to refresh myself spiritually and
restock the shelves intellectually. And I'm eagerly taking advantage of this
opportunity.

Of course, there has been plenty of opportunity to reflect on the changes
occurring in my personal life and in our national life.  Perhaps the moment when
the election results first really hit home was during a trip to San Francisco
last winter. After four years of fairly regular television appearances on the
network news and weekend public-affairs programs, I found myself booked onto a
local television talk show. And as I waited to go on, I found I was to be
interviewed along with a gentleman who performed high dives into a bathtub full
of snakes, another gentleman whose claim was that he had placed a personal
advertisement for a wife in the local newspapers, and other
not-ready-for-prime-time personalities.

There have clearly been many major changes in my life since leaving the Vice
Presidency. But while the motorcades and state visits, the Air Force jets and
constant press entourage are gone, most of that formed a kind of gilded cage
that I don't miss. It's true that on election night my wife Joan said I awoke in
a sweat at 3 A.M.  muttering, ''How will I get to the airport?'' But I've found
I can handle that on my own after all. Remarkably, I'm also capable of dialing
my own phone and driving my own car.

In many ways, I welcome the privacy possible now that I no longer have a
squadron of Secret Service agents and a bus load of reporters as constant
companions. I can drive through Washington and Minneapolis without looking like
a part of a funeral cortege. And I can carry on a conversation without every
nuance being dissected for political and policy implications.

To be sure, there can be too much of these good things. I have been and intend
to remain a force in American politics. And as a once and future political
leader, I find that people are eager to meet with me and share their ideas. The
personal relationships I have developed with foreign heads of state, top
businessmen, labor leaders and public officials facilitate continued frank
discussion.

Moreover, I would not trade the experience of the last four years for anything.
As Hubert Humphrey predicted, as Vice President I learned more about our
country, more about the world in which we live, more about the machinery of
government - when it works well and when it bogs down - than during my previous
16 years in public life. I have seen, firsthand, the burdens a President must be
willing to shoulder, the complexities of the issues he must confront, the
challenges he must accept - and they are formidable. These are things I would
never have understood as fully had I not served four years as Vice President.
Today one of the first questions I am asked is whether I plan to run for
President in 1984. Given the volatility of American political life for the last
two decades, it's pointless to make any definitive statements regarding my
candidacy for any public office. But I regard public service as a high calling,
and I'm not turning in my Holiday Inn charge card.

Fortunately, many of the things I would need to do if I were a candidate for
national office are things I'm disposed to do anyway after 20 years of public
life. I feel both a desire and an obligation to speak out on important issues. I
also feel a responsibility to offer aid and counsel to candidates and
organizations supporting progressive goals. And I feel my experience can be
helpful in shaping the solutions to the critical problems this country faces at
home and abroad.

Thus I've been very busy during the last few months not only meeting with people
and making speeches around the country but also reading and thinking. It
provides a rare chance for spiritual renewal and intellectual replenishment.

After four years of working in the White House, I came away deeply troubled by
the way this country's political leaders are forced to live off their
intellectual capital, with little hope of adding to it. The pressures of the
executive branch of Government require that every issue be summarized and
categorized and filtered through intermediaries so that decisions can be made on
a timely basis. The epitome of good staff work in Washington too often comes
down to a three-page decision memo. Read it, choose an option, and on to the
next subject. Often there's too little room or not enough time for subtlety or
complexity. And there's little opportunity to see things firsthand.

After four years of that, I have welcomed a chance to read, to reflect, to have
an open exchange of views. Recently I read extensively on energy before
attending a conference in California, and there I talked to a wide range of
people on the most critical energy issues in the 1980's. Before a trip to study
NATO in June, I arranged a series of substantive briefings, dug into the best
articles and books available, and, I believe, had a very effective trip. In my
international travel I find I can draw on the personal relationships I built
with foreign leaders during 14 international missions as Vice President. I also
made a point of talking to leaders of opposition parties. For example, in Israel
I had very fruitful meetings with both Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Shimon
Peres, the opposition leader, when I was there in June to receive an honorary
degree from Hebrew University.

I've very consciously set out to widen the voices and viewpoints that I hear.
I've sought out individuals associated with new ideas in economic and social
policy. I've deliberately spent a lot of time in the South and West. And I've
done a lot of talking with business people who haven't been automatically drawn
to the kind of progressive traditions that are my roots. The study and lecturing
I've done with Minnesota students under the auspices of the Hubert H. Humphrey
Institute of Public Affairs, Macalester College, and the College of St. Thomas
have not only helped me focus my thoughts, they've also enabled me to learn what
the next generation of Americans is thinking about. I welcome the chances I get
to meet and talk with people outside a political gathering or fund-raiser.  This
process of reaching out is not prompted by idle curiosity. It strikes at the
central challenge facing the Democratic Party today.  In an era of heightened
and proper concern about efficiency and economy in government, we must search
for better ways to achieve those objectives without abandoning the values of
fairness and compassion. We cannot turn deaf ears to those concerns, or pretend
they will soon pass away. We must carefully sift through the desires and demands
of Americans who never attend meetings of either political party, who have felt
shut out and who must be a part of any successful progressive coalition.

Progressives shouldn't simply say ''me too.'' But we must be willing to
re-examine old priorities and shibboleths. Liberal and progressive leaders, for
example, must concede we have stumbled on the issue of crime. We are recognizing
that it is not simply a code word for racism or a form of urban paranoia. There
is a deeply felt and widely shared concern in this country that the peaceable
life many expected seems threatened.

And when a progressive response to this concern is not forthcoming, the ground
has been seized by the lock-em-up-and-throw-away-the-key school of thought. It's
clear progressive forces need to offer something more substantial in this area,
and I've begun working on this issue. I've met with Patrick Murphy, the former
Police Commissioner of New York City and Detroit, with former District of
Columbia police chief Maurice J. Cullinane, and with various United States
Attorneys and others to learn what they think. I've been reading and looking for
ideas that go beyond the cliches of crime in the streets. Progressives must find
an approach that provides justice and compassion but still makes sure that
criminals will be punished.  Ultimately the success of everything we do as a
nation depends on a healthy and growing economy. The problems of inflation, high
unemployment, and low economic growth touch everyone in this country and were
central to the 1980 election results. Ironically, progressives have ended up
labeled soft on inflation even though inflation strikes hardest at those whom
progressives have traditionally been concerned about. The poor, the elderly, the
middle-income wage earners - these are the people who have no portfolios of
floatingrate notes nor rapidly appreciating real estate to help them ride the
inflationary wave.

Progressive forces have not been oblivious to inflation. I helped slow the
growth of the Federal budget in my last two years in office. Indeed, the Carter
Administration began talk of budget cutting as an anti-inflationary measure
early on. But it is clear we were not vigorous enough in making our concerns
felt.

At this point, there is a broad national consensus in favor of restraining the
Federal budget and getting inflation under control.  It is a goal we can all
accept, for inflation is destructive not only of a nation's currency and economy
but of its integrity, unity and compassion as well.

Yet firm opposition to inflation and swollen deficits should not be transformed
into a rejection of the last 50 years of social progress. No one has been given
a mandate to do that, and no one has been given a mandate to be cruel. The
American people have not abandoned their traditional values. There is an
enhanced interest in effective government, but not at the expense of compassion
and fairness. Wherever I go in this country, when the talk turns to welfare
frauds and swollen bureaucracies, people get angry. But talk of cutting out
minimum Social Security benefits makes them truly livid. In the current economic
environment, the American people have a perfectly legitimate desire to get their
money's worth out of their tax payments. But they still want and deserve a
secure retirement.  They're not so selfish that they are unwilling to help those
who need help.

We have achieved much as a people because we have listened to our conscience.
The history of America has not consisted of closing doors, but of opening doors
of opportunity. Our efforts to ensure voting rights and provide legal services,
quality elementary and secondary education, fair housing, job training, school
lunches and a range of other basic services, all helped promote equal
opportunity for all Americans. Because of these actions, millions of people have
been able to contribute to and share in the abundance and richness of this
country. As we respond to new challenges, we must remain true to our history,
and continue to open up opportunities for every citizen and family.

We must be wary of putting too much faith in catchy but simplistic economic
theories. In West Germany, government spending is greater than in the United
States in terms of relative Gross National Product; moreover, the Germans' tax
burdens are higher, their government regulations are at least as extensive, and
their dependence on imported energy is much greater. Yet their economy has been
growing more rapidly and with less inflation than ours. There aren't any fast,
easy solutions, and this country's economy needs more than an injection of
supply or demand. We must revive American productivity and ingenuity in order to
assure our ability to compete successfully in the rapidly emerging global
economic system.

Economic success in the world now depends as heavily on brainpower and
technology as earlier economic systems once relied on coal and the steam engine.
We need all the scientific and managerial and entrepreneurial skills we can
develop in this country. If we are to rekindle the creative genius of American
technology, however, we need to invest heavily in the development of our people
as well as our capital equipment. Over the years, education has been the best
investment this country has made, and we shouldn't shortchange it now. If we
continue to provide our young people with opportunity and decent education, then
this nation will achieve its full potential as well.

Beyond making a commitment to develop our vital human resources, a sound
economic policy must also encourage American industry to look to the future.
Americans often have short time horizons. Just as political leaders find it
difficult to look beyond the next election, today's business leaders have a hard
time looking beyond the next quarterly earnings statement and labor leaders find
it tough to think beyond the next contract negotiations. But we need an economic
framework that assures the business and financial community that the Government
is not gambling with the economy and that the nation is on a sure and steady
economic course. We must offer incentives for looking to the future, for making
long-term investments, for reducing unemployment, for developing new
technologies and new forms of industrial organization. We need economic policies
that understand the particularly dire effects of inflation and high interest
rates on small-business owners and farmers.

And they must be policies which address the long-term challenges of managing our
natural resources. Becoming self-sufficient in energy; providing certain and
abundant water supplies for our communities, farms and industries; assuring the
continuous flow of raw and strategic materials to our industries, and making
certain that our abundant natural resources are wisely developed and carefully
used - these are fundamental challenges we face. We must make certain that
business, labor and government cooperate and agree on specific goals to insure
that our industries, farms and cities have the energy, water and raw materials
they need to produce and grow.

I am concerned that progressives have sometimes failed to come to grips with the
role of American business. Many progressives have not really been at odds with
business so much as uninterested in it.  Business seemed eminently capable of
taking care of itself. But progressives haven't thought enough about the
constraints and problems facing small-business owners and corporate executives.
As a new member of the boards of directors of two companies, Control Data
Corporation and Columbia Pictures Industries Inc., I've seen why business
leaders often feel government has gone overboard on regulation, clogging their
desks with mountains of paper work and overly detailed regulations.

A responsiveness to the needs and concerns of business is important not only to
formulate successful economic policies but also to achieve progressive social
goals. Over the last few years it has become clear that a growing,
non-inflationary economy may be the most essential element of a program for
advancing social justice. When the economic pie is growing, it's much easier to
cut a slice for new members of the community. When people believe their own
economic situation is secure, they can be more compassionate toward others.
Equal opportunity is more easily shared when there is an abundance of
opportunities for everybody.

Thus, the starting point for progressive economic and social policies is the
provision of a proper framework for promoting sustainable economic growth and
price stability. But this is unlikely to be achieved with untested theories
grounded largely in faith, hope or charity for the rich. We must be responsive
to business needs without being subservient to them.

In formulating economic policies, moreover, we must recognize we can no longer
act unilaterally. The global economic system has extended too far to permit
that. A policy of high interest rates in this country, for example, does more
than stifle our own economy. As government leaders in Italy, France and West
Germany have told me recently, high United States interest rates also throttle
the growth of their own economies, undermine their aspirations and reduce their
real contribution to our mutual defense.

As recently as a dozen years ago, foreign trade mattered relatively little in
this country. But the percentage of our Gross National Product involved in
international trade has doubled in the last decade and continues to grow. More
and more goods and services are being bought and sold on world markets. We
should welcome this, and recognize we need the earnings from foreign trade to
help pay for our energy imports. As our economy becomes increasingly intertwined
with the economies of other nations, our economic policies cannot ignore the
rest of the world, not simply because it isn't right, but more fundamentally
because it is no longer possible.  All of our international relations must
reflect the interdependence among nations as well as the deeply human purpose we
can bring to the exercise of American power and influence. When we have lost
sight of our national purpose, we have made our greatest mistakes in foreign
affairs, and when we have recalled that purpose, we have reached our greatest
achievements. As we learned in Vietnam, the exercise of American power can
neglect that purpose only at the peril of losing our ideals at home as well as
abroad.

There are some who advocate a foreign policy shaped solely by the need to
confront and contain the Soviet Union. Relations with all other nations would be
determined and measured by the extent to which they affected the competition
with the Russians. Such a single-mindedness is unfortunate and
counterproductive.

Of course the confrontation with the Soviet Union is not to be taken lightly.
The Soviet leadership has continued to build up its military forces while
remaining eager to fan the flames of discontent in far corners of the world.
Lacking a mechanism for any orderly transfer of power, the Kremlin remains
locked in the hands of aged leaders unable to accept the prospect of a new era
in external relations.

We must respond to them from a position of strength. I was one of those who
strongly advocated an increase in defense spending in the late 1970's. Indeed,
from 1976 to 1980, United States defense spending rose 10 percent in real terms,
compared to a 35 percent drop in the previous eight years. I continue to believe
a strong military capability is an essential element of foreign policy and a
major deterrent to aggression. This summer I toured United States military bases
in Europe to see firsthand the state of our forces. I also met with General
Bernard W. Rogers, the Supreme Allied Commander in Europe, and received a
lengthy briefing at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London.
But being tough-minded about defense does not mean being permissive about waste
in the defense budget. And we must remember our arsenal cannot be the sum total
of our foreign policy. We must have something to offer besides a strong sword,
and we must stand for something besides an ability to employ force. There are
many components of national security beyond armaments. There is the security of
our energy supplies, for example, which can free us from the threat of economic
blackmail.

Even more fundamentally, a major wellspring of international strength for this
country is the attractiveness of our society in the eyes of others. In my
travels I am constantly amazed at the allure of things American. Wherever I go,
of course, I find blue jeans and American popular music. In many countries, the
height of fashion seems to be a T-shirt emblazoned with the name of such
American institutions as Harvard, U.C.L.A., the Green Bay Packers and the New
York Yankees.

But more importantly, there is also a widespread view of this country as a
symbol of certain values beyond material success. I remember vividly listening
to the president of Senegal invoke the words of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. And I
can recall few prouder moments as Vice President than my meeting with Nigerian
leaders after that country adopted a federal constitution patterned after our
own.  The power of example may well be the greatest power that we have. We must
recognize how valuable it is to stand for something. Ignoring human rights
raises the risk of misunderstanding and distrust of our motives abroad and
erosion of support for our foreign policy at home. We do not need to choose
between standing for our interests or defending our values abroad: The point is,
they go together.

As Vice President, some of my most difficult challenges involved the fight for
human rights - in southern Africa, South America and the Philippines. In Manila,
I met with courageous religious and intellectual leaders on human rights at the
same time I worked directly with President Ferdinand E. Marcos on the lease
renewal for Subic Bay Naval Base and Clark Air Base. These two bases are vital
to the national security of the United States. While it strains our diplomatic
skill, our emphasis on human rights is an important aspect of pursuing our
national interest.

These days there are some who say that there are significant differences between
right-wing authoritarian regimes and left-wing totalitarian regimes, and that we
must tolerate the terror of one and condemn the terror of the other. Among
repressive regimes, there may well be differences in the way they organize their
economies or part their hair or even in the pretexts they give for repression.
But between the army colonel who tortures Jacobo Timerman and the central
committee which tortures Anatoly Shcharansky, there is not one iota of moral
difference. Torture is torture and terror is terror, and this country should do
its best to stop it wherever it occurs.

The advancement of our moral concerns for humanity and democracy, freedom and
justice is profoundly in our national interest; it is not an ethereal,
idealistic approach but rather an eminently hardheaded one. Regimes which
torture their citizens are unlikely to be stable allies. Leaders who mistreat
religious or racial groups are leaders whose hold on power may be brief.
Offering unreserved support to corrupt governments simply because they are in
power or because they are anti-Communist is a recipe for eventual disaster.
Selfinterest as well as self-respect should keep us from zealously courting
despots.

When we set aside our values in an expedient pursuit of narrow interests, we
often end up advancing neither our values nor our interests. Every day that the
Soviet Union shows its concept of human values in Afghanistan, in Poland and in
Moscow, it advertises its moral and political bankruptcy to countries in which
it is competing with us for influence. And every day that we pursue our values,
we are strengthened in our dealings with nations and we advance the kind of
democratic and humane world in which we can be most secure.

As all of us in this nation search for ways to deal with the problems we face as
Americans, this country must be wary of letting any apparent threat, whether
economic or military, foreign or domestic, entice us into dispensing with two
centuries of concern for the principles of freedom, justice and compassion. The
principles which gave our country birth and sustenance will continue to serve us
well if we keep faith with them.

After 20 years in public life, I join most Americans in getting my ''briefings''
from the morning paper and the evening news, in watching events in the nation
and the world unfold and trying my best to understand and interpret. I am
ever-conscious of our nation's strength and resilience and ability to solve
problems.

I relish the opportunity to participate in this process. And I intend to do so
-with everything that's in me.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Walter Mondale at home in Washington photo of
Mondale talking with students at Univ. of Minniesota

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A WORLDWIDE SCRAMBLE FOR THE RAREST RUBIES

SECTION: Section 6; Page 142, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3235 words


Bill Kurtis is a reporter and anchor man for WBBM-TV in Chicago. By Bill Kurtis
In the tropical forests of Thailand, where the border with Cambodia touches the
sea, two pistol-toting mine owners - in a scene out of the Old West - stand
guard over laborers aiming a high-pressure hose against a hillside. The spray of
water cuts into red earth, sending mud and gravel spilling 20 yards below into a
sluice box that is pumping up and down. Farther below, where a muddy stream fans
into a small alluvial delta, an old woman squats under a sloping hat, chewing
betel nuts as she sifts gravel in a bamboo tray. She searches the pebbles for
something far more valuable than gold and 40 times rarer than diamonds. She
looks for rubies.

Compared with America's gold rush in the 19th century, today's scramble for
rubies is smaller but no less exciting, for the trail that leads from these
primitive diggings to the glittering windows of jewelers like Harry Winston or
Tiffany & Company is filled with the same frenzy that made the Old West wild.

Rubies are now the most sought-after of gems, the most valued collectable among
the earth's family of precious col-ored stones.  Hard assets like diamonds,
rubies are sought not only for their beauty but as a hedge against an
inflationary world economy. Unlike diamonds, however, rubies are not controlled
by a modern, giant empire such as De Beers Consolidated. The primary source of
stones is in the malarial forests of Southeast Asia, where mining methods have
not advanced beyond pouring water on a hillside or sifting gravel in a stream.
More important, the area's political instability is constricting the supply. The
more the market realizes how scarce highquality rubies are, the higher their
value rises.

The ruby trail is, in fact, centuries old, and the gem is surrounded by legend
and myth. The ancients believed that the stone would prolong life, detect
poison, guard against sorcery and cure headaches. Bishops were permitted to wear
the ruby in rings as a symbol of devotion. Eighteenth-century collectors
believed that the ruby's vibrations could foretell the future.

Like any precious gem, rubies vary considerably. A purple cast identifies the
Siam ruby, as the Thai gem is known, and pink characterizes the Sri Lanka stone.
''Pigeon blood,'' though, is the preferred ruby shade, and this bright, perfect
red takes on a magical, pulsing glow under ultraviolet light. This highly
prized, fine-quality ruby comes mainly from one area of the globe, a small group
of mines in Mogok, Burma, and therein lies the dilemma for ruby buyers the world
over.

The flow of Burma rubies slowed to a trickle after the Socialist Government of
Burma, which came to power in 1962, took over the Mogok mines. A recent ruby
auction in Rangoon offered parcels so small and inferior - the sale fetched a
mere $20,000 - that buyers considered them not worth the trip. Smugglers are the
only other source of Burma rubies. The Bangkok gem dealer Hui Teng, who claims
to handle 70 percent of the smugglers' business, explains, ''The Burmese
Government pays the miners only $10 a day, so when they hit a big stone, they
swallow it and afterward bring it to the border, even if they have to walk for a
month. The Burmese Government has sent soldiers into the mines, and even they
have walked away.'' The diminution of the Burma ruby supply first became evident
in 1979 when Christie's offered some older Burmese stones at an auction in
Geneva. A 4.12-carat Burma ruby sold for $414,634, a record price for rubies of
$100,639 per carat. Christie's jewelry director in New York, Francois Curiel,
has since observed a startling increase in attendance at auctions for estate
jewelry. ''Auctions are so popular now,'' he says, ''because they are the only
place to find old stones.'' Mr. Curiel claims to have at least 10 customers who
would buy a 10-carat Burma ruby at a price of $150,000 a carat.  Unfortunately,
such stones are rare.

New York ruby dealer Jack Abraham saw the same phenomenon hit the gem market.
''There was nothing like it,'' said Abraham. ''For a six-month period, between
September 1979 and March 1980, we couldn't keep anything in stock. The prime
rate jumped up, and people would run faster to buy rubies.''

The high interest rates eventually slowed even the ruby market's growth, but
compared with the slump in the diamond market, where speculators drove prices so
high they inevitably tumbled - a topquality, one-carat ''D'' flawless diamond
that sold for $63,000 in 1980 would fetch less than half that today - the ruby's
economic health appears less vulnerable. A vice president and gem buyer for
Tiffany, Bruce Cummings, citing the ruby's stability in the Great Depression,
says, ''I am very bullish on today's ruby market.'' Although there are ruby
mines in Sri Lanka and Kashmir, they produce stones of lesser value. The
highest-quality, most marketable red stones are limited to Burma, Thailand and
Cambodia, and production there is scant.

Veng Tir, a 27-year-old Cambodian refugee now living in Chicago, witnessed the
closing of Cambodia's ruby mines after a decade of gem fever that had lured him
and thousands of other Cambodians to the ''Jewel Mountain,'' part of the Bor Pai
Lin Range that stretches across the Thai-Cambodian border near the Gulf of Siam.
Cambodia's ruby mines existed in a lost world, tucked away in shantytown
villages that had sprung up beside the mines. Clouded-in day and night, cut off
from modern communication and transportation, they were almost unknown to an
outside world concentrating on the events in neighboring Vietnam. Tir remembers
that time in the mid-1970's: ''We heard that women walking home in the rain
would find large rubies embedded in the mud they cleaned from their feet. So
everyone went out in the rain to wait for the water to wash away the topsoil
holding the rubies. One man digging in a very small plot of ground discovered a
single stone that made him an instant millionaire.''

However, once Tir arrived at the mining area from his home in Battambang, he
discovered terrible conditions. ''The humidity hung in a mist over the valley
where the best stones were found,'' he recalls. ''Malaria was a constant
problem. Many people died. We walked to the mines before dawn and had to stop
work in the afternoon when the air became too thick and wet to breathe.''

Describing the rules of employment, Tir continues, ''We couldn't buy the land,
but we would pay to lease small plots of earth from the landowners in exchange
for half of any stones we found. My first plot was five square yards. I would
dig up half, sift and wash the stones, then pile the dirt back and dig up the
other half.''

A full year of backbreaking work passed before Tir got lucky. On New Year's Day,
1975, he turned up a fine-quality stone, selling it promptly for 2 million
Cambodian dollars ($10,000 in United States currency) and transferring the money
to his family's bank account. He knew that his family needed money to escape the
political storm moving across Cambodia. They did not move fast enough. The
Communist forces of Pol Pot closed the banks and sent Tir and his family, along
with millions of their countrymen, to camps with little more than the clothes on
their backs. Not until 1979, when invading Vietnamese troops reached their
commune, was the Tir family able to escape across the Thai border. Most of the
Cambodian refugees were penniless, carrying only worthless Cambodian currency -
except those carrying rubies.

''The refugee camps were loaded,'' recalls Tir. ''Once the people got to the
camps, they used the rubies to barter for food or to sell to the Thai-Chinese
dealers who came up from Bangkok. Rubies were not as easy to sell as gold
because you needed to know something about a rough ruby to tell if it was a good
stone, but the dealers who knew their business found a good market in the
refugee camps.''

The thin stream of rubies coming out of Cambodia apparently stopped after the
early refugee migration. Cambodians recently arriving in the Thai border camps
report that their homeland's ruby production has shut down completely.

With Burma's supply now negligible, the world's sole remaining source of
fine-quality rubies is Thailand, and even this rich country has cause for
nervous concern. The best Thai mines, near the city of Chanthaburi, are crowded
along the combustible border with Cambodia, now occupied by the Vietnamese.
Adding to the turbulence, both the Kamput Refugee Holding Center, with 13,000
Cambodian refugees, and a Vietnamese ''boat people'' refugee camp are within 40
miles of Chanthaburi. There are occasional skirmishes along the border, and the
Thai Government zealously guards its territory. A regional command of its
marines has stopped at least one Bangkok gem company from opening new mines
adjacent to the border.  The mining village of Bo Rai is like the Wild West with
motorbikes. In the rainy season, Bo Rai has the dark, gritty feel of Dodge City.
Low-hanging clouds melt into the white haze of motorbike exhaust, laying a veil
across ramshackle, wooden buildings that line the road to the mountains. The
only colors are the bright splashes of umbrellas that sprout everywhere,
allowing the business of ruby dealing to go on unaffected by downpours. Young
miners walk the streets with picks and shovels balanced on their shoulders.
Worn-out mining equipment stands abandoned, as if cast off in some desperate
flight.

Bo Rai is flush with gem fever, and its symptons are evident in everyone who
tries to speak in English about the ''big stones'' in the mines nearby. Although
the border is only a few miles away, the villagers' concentration on rubies is
so intense that little apparent thought is given to the Vietnamese troops
nearby. A few of the more intrepid souls even speak of plans to sneak back into
the Cambodian mines. Such statements cannot be dismissed out of hand as idle
boasts, partly because the danger of the mining villages attracts people who
could be expected to do such things, and partly because most of the miners wear
a side arm, slung daringly in a holster on the hip.

During the course of one day in Bo Rai, a gunshot rang out. A miner, who was
showing off for his woman friend, held a beer bottle in one hand and, with the
other, waved a .45-caliber pistol in the air. Then he fired at a tin can in the
middle of town. No crowds gathered. Children did not stop playing to come
running. The young woman, equally unperturbed, nonchalantly yanked the cap off
another bottle of beer with her teeth.

Outside of the village, beyond a small knoll, the Nern Pad-Dao mine spreads like
a moonscape at the edge of a jade-green jungle.  Bulldozers have stripped the
red earth of its tropical mantle and left nearly 50 acres barren, so that jets
of water can loosen the ruby-embedded limestone sediment. Three partners opened
the mine with an initial investment of about $200,000. They leased the property
and bought hoses, high-pressure nozzles, several simple pumps and a long sluice
box, which, despite an electrical attachment, appears unchanged from similar
designs a century ago. According to the owners, their investment has produced
half a million dollars in rubies in three years. Speaking with the optimism that
characterizes gamblers and wildcatters, one partner insists, ''The best
gemproducing gravel is just a few inches farther into the soil.''

A lone cabin surveys the Nern Pad-Dao claim. Inside, a dog snoozes in a corner.
The workers settled inside could belong to another age.Only the weapons are
reminders of the present. An M-16 rifle stands in another corner. The owners of
the mine wear new, compact Browning .45 semiautomatic pistols. The weapons
protect against claim jumpers and keep employees honest.  A few miles from the
backwoods of Bo Rai, Chanthaburi, a sizable town of 20,000, churns with
excitement, especially on weekends when the gem markets open. Unless an
enterprising gem dealer in Bangkok, Asia's most important ruby capital, has a
special arrangement with a miner, a ruby will very likely pass through one of
the gem stores in Chanthaburi's ''ruby district,'' where the Bangkok dealers
flock.  Second-story gem factories, large enough for only a few workers, buzz
with the sound of lathes polishing and faceting rubies and other stones. The
real action, however, is at street level. Dozens of shops reveal an identical
scene: a buyer and seller seated face to face at a desk piled with rubies of
various sizes highlighted by fluorescent light from above and natural light from
large windows that allow passers-by a full view. Parcels of stones worth half a
million dollars are common.

As a ruby passes through a half-dozen hands between the mine and jewelers'
windows in New York or some other city, its markup will be at least 100 percent
over the dealer's fee in Chanthaburi. The miner often makes the biggest profit,
leaving the Bangkok gem dealer with about a 20 percent profit as he passes the
gems onto his customers around the world.

Dealers from Bangkok to New York have heard rumors that Thai dealers are
stockpil-
ruby
ing good stones, waiting for the value per carat to rise even higher. The dealer
Chirachai Teng, whose Chinese-Thai family runs Oriental Jewelry, one of the
largest of the more than 200 gem companies in Bangkok, denies the story,
stressing that his business requires a rapid turnover. ''The ruby market is
holding steady because of high interest rates,'' explains Teng, who buys rubies
in Chanthaburi.  ''People are cutting their inventory because they can't get as
much money as easily as before. In six months, it will pick up again.''

Finally, Teng says, ''The price of rubies will always go up. Big money is always
increasing, and the supply of stones is decreasing.'' With a few exceptions,
most of the world's high-quality ruby business filters through approximately 10
major Chinese-Thai familyoperated jewelry companies in Bangkok. They, in turn,
sell their stones to buyers like Abraham Nassi, a multimillion-dollar-a-year
American dealer. In an intensely competitive business, Nassi recently purchased
a paper shredder, explaining that one of his rivals had been found rummaging
through a trash receptacle outside his New York office. Nassi, who often sells
directly to major United States jewelers, provides another perspec-tive on the
ruby's potential. ''My brother bought a five-carat ruby in 1972 for $7,000,'' he
says. ''He was offered $250,000 for it last year. I've been seeing a decrease in
supply to such an extent I hardly bought one lot of fine carat-and-a-half stones
my last trip to Bangkok. Prices should definitely keep going up.''

Since the dramatic appreciation of the ruby's value, Nassi has had to contend
with new competition - the gem-investment company.  Geminvestment companies
displayed an impressive growth in the mid-1970's when double-digit inflation
made hard assets like diamonds attractive. They promoted the idea of buying
''investment-quality diamonds,'' usually a minimum of one carat each, to place
in a vault for a few years while the value of the gems increased.

Investment companies introduced into the market an innovation called a gem
certificate, which dispenses with the traditional sayso of experienced jewelers.
One company president explains: ''The significance of the certification system
is that it removes the subjectivity and, therefore, the lack of liquidity from
the market.''

However, many traditional jewelers, like Jess Levine of Chicago, denounce the
certificate. ''There is no longer any expertise,'' he says. ''I like the
old-fashioned way. I'd show a retailer a stone and, using his own knowledge,
he'd tell me what he thought it was worth. Now I'll show him a stone, and he'll
ask for the certificate.  I may as well be a computer filling orders.'' Another
Chicago jeweler, Morton H. Goldin, charges that the investment companies have
hurt the business. ''Much of the time they don't know what they're talking
about.''

The gem-investment companies soon moved from the diamond market into colored
stones. Although colored gems are still considered very difficult to
standardize, the companies offer certification, and that has led to problems.
''I started noticing in Thailand that dark rubies were going up
astronomically,'' recounts the jewel dealer Abraham Nassi. ''I backed out and
said, 'I'm not going to pay those prices for that color.' The prices went up and
then dropped. It turns out investors were selling rubies with certificates that
were giving a color rating according to the intensity of red, not according to
hue or color. That meant the darker the ruby, the better the color, which is
wrong.''

Jewelers also tell stories of receiving widely differing certificates from
various gemological laboratories, and a retired jeweler, Bernard Hersch of
Chicago, recalls, ''There have been a number of instances where one investment
company would sell precious stones and be a partner in the appraisal company
that issued the certificate.''

Still, the ruby's potential growth has attracted big money.  International
Gemstone Corporation of Chicago offered the first limited partnerships in
colored stones in November 1980. At least 13 other companies have followed suit.
Gemstone's president, 28-year-old Christopher W. Hartnett, explains: ''The
reason this is happening is that you finally have a vehicle. You have to create
a prospectus under S.E.C. regulations, and the entire thing is now credible. The
prospectus can let you check out where the stones will be bought, how they are
going to be liquidated; the entire process is laid out.''

Rubies have been joined by other colored stones in the rush to hard assets.
Emeralds, sapphires, topaz and most of the other rare and colored stones have
risen in value along with nearly every other commodity. Still, rubies hold the
promise of particularly spectacular growth because of their dwindling supply.
Even inferior stones are being treated in a number of ways -including being
heated to improve their brilliance - to enhance their marketability. Mail-order
dealers offer lower-grade, commercial one-carat rubies for $10 apiece.  Chicago
jeweler Morton Goldin says, ''I challenge anybody who buys from those
bucket-shop operators to take their stones out and try to sell them.''
Attempting to capitalize on the ruby rush, large stores such as Sears are
beginning to offer loose rubies, along with other colored gems, to their
customers.

Already, trade magazines are reporting a softening in the ruby market, and some
jewelers predict that it will slump as severely as diamonds have. They blame the
investment companies for speculating far beyond what the market can support.
Still, there is the nagging realization that fine-quality rubies are rare and
likely to become even scarcer. Uncertain supply is the wild card in the ruby's
future, and it causes every knowledgeable jeweler and investor to keep an eye on
the red stone. Bruce Cummings at Tiffany says, ''1982 is going to be a hell of a
year for rubies.''

Fifth Avenue is a long way from the Thai border, and investors seeking a hedge
against inflation are far removed from the gun-toting miners seeking one lucky
strike, but the ruby trail, like the trail of the gold rush before it, attracts
a gamut of gamblers who will take great risks for great wealth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of ruby miners in Thailand photo of Thai woman
holding rubies in her hand photo of Bo Rai, mining village near Thai-Cambodian
border photo of 5-carat ruby set in ring photo of Bangkok jewel dealer sortin
rubies

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIFFERENT WARS DIVIDE VETERANS

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 1, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 885 words


HOLBROOK WITH the annual observance of Veterans Day three days away, Vietnam
veterans on the Island have adopted a more aggressive approach in their
decade-long struggle to obtain recognition, jobs and medical care for their
colleagues who fought in an unpopular war and then faced ostracism when they
returned home.

Veterans Day has traditionally been a time for the veterans of other wars to
recall their combat experiences. But this year some Vietnam veterans - men now
in their mid-30's - are determined not to be overlooked.

The Veterans Administration says that there are 75,520 Vietnam-era veterans on
the Island and 392,170 veterans on the Island in all. The largest group - those
who fought in World War II - bought houses in subdivisions such as Levittown
with mortgages they obtained under the G.I. bill. With such a large veterans'
population, local chapters of the Veterans of Foreign Wars and American Legion
are strong, particularly in Suffolk County.

Some of the Vietnam veterans say they were galvanized by the return of the 52
American hostages from Iran and the ticker-tape parades that marked the end of
their 444 days in captivity. With some bitterness, the veterans said they were
upset when the former hostages were given the kind of hero's welcome that was
denied soldiers returning from Vietnam.

''These people were $30,000-a-year people,'' said Gary McKnight, an officer of
the year-old Suffolk-Nassau chapter of the Vietnam Veterans of America. ''They
knew the political situation and knew that it was untenable. Our guys got blown
up and lost their legs and their lives. It's just not fair.''

The chapter, organized a year ago by a handful of veterans, reflects the
increasing militancy of Vietnam survivors. And while one officer of the group
says that militancy is not the word to describe the spirit of the members, all
agree that the group exists because the attitudes of the men who went to Vietnam
were so drastically changed by their experiences there that they can never view
things in the old ways again.

''Traditional veterans' groups temper a soldier's attitudes when he comes
back,'' said Jack O'Brien, the president of the chapter.  ''But with us, the
attitudes we had when we got back have stayed, and are surfacing. It's up to us
to turn that into something positive.''

With more than 100 members, the chapter is one of the most active of 30 that
have been formed nationwide. Some 165 new chapters are being organized, and the
organization expects to have 100,000 members by next year - although some
veterans note that that is only a fraction of the 2.8-million veterans of the
Vietnam War.

They were only 19 or 20 years old when they went to Vietnam. Some - like Mr.
McKnight - had doubts about it, but went anyway. When they came home, they faced
harassment. Mr. O'Brien, who lives in Holbrook, said that someone spat on him.
Richard Zeidel said his cabin in Suffolk was set afire and firemen traced the
blaze to gasoline that had been poured in the closet where he kept his uniform.

''Face it, it was an unpopular war,'' Mr. O'Brien said. ''I got out of the naval
hospital after five months and I'd say to my mom and dad, 'I want to talk about
it,' and they'd say: 'Don't. We don't want you to get upset.' ''

The veterans now say that the idea that Vietnam was better off forgotten is one
reason why 60,000 Vietnam veterans have committed suicide, more than the number
of men killed in combat during the war. That is the figure given in their
literature.

As for jobs, those veterans in the Suffolk-Nassau chapter who can hire their
colleagues try to do so. Mr. McKnight is a cabinetmaker, Mr. Zeidel is an
electrical contractor, Kenneth Mitchko is a chemical pollution control
specialist. All live in Suffolk.

In a way, they object to having to handle the job placement of their colleagues.
Mr. McKnight remembers when the Veterans Administration stationery carried the
slogan, ''Your best bet - hire a vet.'' Now, he said, the letterheads carry a
quotation from Abraham Lincoln. ''It's not the same,'' he said.

Some of the Vietnam veterans' disillusionment with the Veterans Administration
arises from their belief that they were exposed to Agent Orange, a defoliant,
and were deprived of help in adjusting to living at home.

''Some of these guys feel the only thing they do well is what they were trained
to do,'' Mr. Mitchko said. ''They still relate to living in the jungle.''

So far, the chapter has won two seats on the advisory board at the Veterans
Administration Hospital in Northport.  ''The Vietnam veteran has been so
stereotyped that people expect to see someone 'luded out' or with a spike in his
arm or still going around in jungle boots,'' Mr. McKnight said, the reference
being to the drug Quaalude. He added: ''When we show up in a suit and tie, we
blow their minds away. That just proves one more time that our wellbeing is not
in their interest.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of veterans in parade photo of R. Zeidel, J.
O'Brien, G. McKnight, K. Mitchko

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Connecticut Journal

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 3, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1549 words


''THE umbrella doesn't quite cover us anymore,'' was the way David Hays, founder
of the National Theater of the Deaf, described the decision to break away from
the O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford to ''pursue our separate fortunes.''

''We have grown to almost the same size as the center, financially,'' Mr. Hays
continued, ''and although we don't anticipate severe budget cuts, we want the
flexibility to face them as they come with our own board of trustees.''

''We have been a wonderfully successful artistic theater or we wouldn't be
here,'' Mr. Hays asserted. ''The exposure to fine actors in the company took the
stigma out of sign language to the extent that Jane Fonda and Louise Fletcher
used it in accepting their Oscars.''

Among those who have been trained at the Center are Phyllis Frelich, star of the
Tony Award-winning ''Children of a Lesser God'' and Linda Bove of ''Sesame
Street.''

Mark Scism, tour director for the company, noted that ''our business is touring,
and we were threatened with not touring as much and not training as many young
people,'' under the aegis of the O'Neill Center.

''No one is going to say that we are not in good financial health,'' said Mr.
Hays, but he noted that ''some sponsors around the country - colleges and
regional arts centers - may be in trouble because Federal grants didn't come in.
We have had to replace some bookings.''

An annual budget of $1 million has financed 18 Theater of the Deaf tours at home
and abroad and the training of hundreds of deaf young people from around the
United States. Numerous foreign students have paid their own way.

A well-known scenic designer for decades with ''Long Day's Journey Into Night,''
''No Strings,'' ''The Tenth Man'' and more than two dozen ballets for George
Balanchine and the New York City Ballet to his credit, Mr. Hays said that he was
approached by the O'Neill Center 15 years ago to develop a Government proposal
for a Theater of the Deaf within the O'Neill Center. Since then, his company has
inspired and assisted in starting theaters of the deaf in England, Sweden,
Australia and currently in Japan. ''Our mandate in executing the Government
contract under which we receive our basic funding has a social overtone that
requires us to spread our work around,'' he said. ''We will become a paying
tenant at the O'Neill Center.''

The brilliant colors of autumn blazed in northwest Connecticut as usual this
year, but for the first time since 1945, James L. Buckley, one-time United
States Senator from New York, was not able to see them at his home in Sharon.

Mr. Buckley, who ran unsuccessfully for the Senate from Connecticut last year,
is now Undersecretary of State for Security Assistance, Science and Technology,
and the battle for the sale of Awacs to Saudi Arabia kept him Washington, D.C.,
this fall.

Mr. Buckley told a conference of out-of-town journalists at the State Department
recently that his new job was not quite what he had expected.

''When I found myself repudiated by the people of Connecticut when I tried to
get back in the Senate, and found myself in this part of Washington, I thought I
would be in a role of quiet, contemplative obscurity - a job where I could think
deep thoughts and stay out of areas of flak,'' he said. ''Little did I know I
would be led into some of the rather controversial areas in the foreign-policy
arena.''

Mr. Buckley said as he worked for approval of the sale of the five Airborne
Warning and Control System planes and other air defense equipment to Saudi
Arabia, ''even my sainted, publisher-columnist brother, Bill, took to calling me
the merchant of death.'' His brother is William F. Buckley Jr.

The Undersecretary said he never thought that he would be a Washington lobbyist
but that the Awacs controversy found him ''harassing my old colleagues in the
Senate.''

He indicated that he has been so busy in his technology-related State Department
post that he has not had time to follow up one of his 1980 Senate campaign
proposals - to save Polaris submarines from retirement by refitting them with
modern vertical-launch cruise missiles.

''I thought the proposal was so eminently sensible and workable that naturally
the Reagan Administration would act on it,'' Mr.  Buckley said.

To a Connecticut reporter who raised the question, he added, ''I haven't checked
on it, but thanks for reminding.''

A 70-ton, free-form granite fountain, said to be the only sculpture in the state
to honor veterans of the Vietnam and Korean conflicts, received finishing
touches last week in Torrington's Coe Memorial Park. The fountain will be
dedicated this month, possibly on Veterans Day this Wednesday, according to
Francis J. Russo, the chairman of the Park and Recreation Commission.

Edward Monti, a sculptor from Quincy, Mass., used granite from Stony Creek,
Conn., and from Quincy, Mass., to create the fountain.  The sculptor, a
descendant of a family of stonecutters in Northern Italy, owns a granite company
in Quincy that specializes in cemetary memorials. Mr. Monti says he is the only
sculptor who uses a thermoblasting process to shape blocks of granite into
animals, human figures and abstract shapes.

Wearing heavy rain gear, a face mask and earmuffs for protection, Mr. Monti uses
a torch, fueled with a mixture of oxygen and kerosene that reaches 4,000 degrees
Fahrenheit to flake away the stone. He has made fountains at Boston University
and in parks and shopping malls in several cities, including New York and
Dallas.

The Torrington Park and Recreation Commission last summer offered Mr. Monti
$31,000 to sculpt the veterans memorial . The money was appropriated from the
city's Coe-Godfrey Trust Fund, which was established in 1922 for the maintenance
and beautification of the park. The park, named for Lyman W. and Elizabeth S.
Coe, early Torrington industrialists, was donated to the city by the Coe family
on Nov. 10, 1906.

The move to finance the new fountain triggered a flurry of protests from many of
the city's 31,000 residents who said the money could be better used to improve
the park itself or to expand the city's civic center.

Critics of the project also pointed out that the park already had a fountain
circling a monument dedicated to World War I and II veterans and a hand-carved
granite horse trough honoring Revolutionary War veterans. Mr. Russo said the
circular fountain ''never worked right'' and was disconnected last year. Spray
from the fountain was carried off by the wind instead of being recirculated,
causing the pump motors to burn out, he said.

The granite blocks were shaped by Mr. Monti in Quincy and assembled in
Torrington two weeks ago. Water from underground tanks will be circulated
through the sculpture at the rate of 400 gallons per minute and will cascade in
''ever-changing patterns,'' according to the sculptor.

As far as the state's wild turkey population is concerned, the timing of the
latest announcement from the Environmental Protection Department couldn't be
better. With Thanksgiving approaching, and also because it is open season for
hunting pheasant and small game in the state, the agency has announced the
initiation of an effort to prevent the illegal killing of wild turkey in
Connecticut.

The state chapter of the National Wild Turkey Federation has posted a $200
reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of anyone who kills
one of the state's more than 2,500 wild turkeys.  The killer would be charged
with hunting out of season and could be fined up to $200. The federation is a
nonprofit organization made up of hunters and nonhunters whose primary goals are
to see the turkey restored to its former range and to see it wisely managed for
the future.

In 1975 the D.E.P. reintroduced 22 of the formerly native birds into the
relative wilds of the northwestern sector of the state.  Their population grew
rapidly and last May, the first limited wild turkey hunting season was held.

A special fund has been set up by the federation, and outdoor organizations and
individuals interested in preserving the wild turkey are invited to contribute.
The reward system is similar to those developed in other states for wildlife
protection, and the state has the potential to expand the reward system to other
species if funding and interest warrant.

The D.E.P. has had 500 plastic posters issued, half of which are posted at
potential siting areas on state owned land and the rest where private landowners
have agreed to cooperate. Another 500 paper posters are being put up on bulletin
boards and in sporting goods stores.

Anyone with information regarding illegal killings of the wild turkey should
call the D.E.P. in Hartford at 566-3333. For more information on the National
Wild Turkey Federation, call the state chapter in Stamford, at 324-6483.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Edward Monti photo of stone sculpture in
Torrington

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUA DENIES AMERICAN CHARGES

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Nov. 9


Senior Nicaraguan officials charged today that the Reagan Administration had
invented evidence of renewed Sandinist support for Salvadoran guerrillas to
justify an increase in American military involvement in El Salvador.

''We're the scapegoats for the failures of U.S. policy there,'' one senior
official noted. ''And since the United States refuses to accept a negotiated
peace in El Salvador, it has to find excuses for more intervention.''

Officials here also believe that the Reagan Administration has lost all interest
in improving relations with Nicaragua and is intent on destabilizing the
two-year-old Government by undermining the country's troubled economy.

The United States suspended all direct economic aid to Nicaragua this year in
reprisal for what Washington said were Sandinist arms shipments to the
Salvadoran left. Now Washington has reportedly decided to try, for the first
time, to block a $30 million loan to Nicaragua that is awaiting approval in the
Intra-American Development Bank.

No Attack Expected Now

Despite reports that Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  recently asked
the Pentagon to examine possible military actions against Nicaragua and Cuba,
however, Sandinist commanders think direct American military intervention in
Nicaragua now is unlikely.

''Washington wants a 100 percent victory in El Salvador before it takes on
Nicaragua,'' one official said. ''But if the marines land here, all of Central
America will catch fire. If we're attacked, we'll forget our frontiers and the
war will spread throughout the region.''

The Sandinist army is nevertheless on the alert for a longthreatened invasion by
right-wing exiles based in neighboring Honduras, and it is worried by moves by
the Honduran, Guatemalan and Salvadoran Armies to coordinate their activities
more closely.

The Nicaraguan Government is most alarmed, however, by what one official
described as ''the escalation of lies'' by the Reagan Administration, starting
with reports last month that 500 to 600 Cuban combat troops had passed through
Nicaragua on their way to El Salvador, where they reportedly destroyed a major
bridge. Nicaragua has denied the reports and Cuba has challenged Washington to
prove its charges at the United Nations.

Nicaraguans See a Campaign

''It's one thing to accuse us of being Marxist-Leninists or totalitarians,'' a
key Sandanist leader said, ''but it's very different and much more serious to
invent Cuban troops.''

Officials here believe that American reports of Nicaraguan arms shipments to
Salvadoran rebels and an American press report last weekend that Nicaragua had
received 1,000 aircraft from Vietnam were part of a carefully orchestrated
campaign reflecting the Reagan Administration's growing frustration with the
situation in El Salvador.

With Washington's strong support, the Salvadoran junta is planning elections for
a constitutional assembly in March, but it has been unable to persuade the
opposition to lay down its arms and participate or to make progress in defeating
the guerrillas.

''Washington has recognized that its policy of elections with repression is not
working,'' Daniel Ortega Saavedra, coordinator of Nicaragua's three-man junta,
said. ''So it is left with an intervention. But it needs a pretext and that has
to be Nicaragua, Cuba and the Soviet Union. So it invents arms shipments, 500
Cubans and 1,000 planes from Vietnam to create a whole climate to justify an
intervention in the region.''

Mr. Ortega added that a military solution was not possible in El Salvador and
that Nicaragua favored direct talks between the Salvadoran junta and the
opposition coalition of leftist guerrillas and non-Marxist parties. Nicaragua
believes that peace in El Salvador is a prerequisite for stability throughout
Central America and for improving Managua's relations with Washington.

Brief Truce in Words Ends

Although a visit here in August by Thomas O. Enders, the Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs, led to a brief truce in the verbal warfare
between the two Governments, in recent weeks bitter exchanges have resumed, with
American officials saying that Nicaragua is becoming ''a totalitarian and
repressive regime.''

Nicaragua in turn said that American participation in joint naval maneuvers with
Honduras last month were ''an act of provocation'' and accused Washington of
trying to undermine this country's economy and stir up right-wing unrest. Last
week, American officials were infuriated when a pro-Sandinist newspaper
published the names of 13 people attached to the local American Embassy and said
they worked for the Central Intelligence Agency.

At the heart of the crisis in relations, however, are Washington's conviction
that Nicaragua is still helping Salvadoran rebels and its concern at the rapid
buildup of the Sandinist army, which has about 40,000 troops and 24 Soviet-made
T-55 tanks.

Nicaragua has justified the strengthening of its army by pointing to increased
American arms sales to El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, all countries ruled
by conservative generals, and to continuing border raids by right-wing bands
based in Honduras.

One well-placed American official said the mood in Washington toward Nicaragua
was ''terrible.'' ''I don't know anyone in the Administration who thinks there
is any hope in dealing with the top Sandinists,'' the official added. ''The
debate is between those who want to punish the Sandinists and those who favor
letting them die on the vine.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


S ECRETARY of Health and Human Services Richard S.  Schweiker, in his newest
proposals for major cuts in Federal welfare and health care costs, has quietly
sought to exclude his own staff from further budget reductions. In a letter to
David A.  Stockman, director of the Office of Management and Budget, Mr.
Schweiker proposed cuts in Medicare and Medicaid but said that looming
reductions in his staff ''are not appropriate.'' Mr.  Schweiker said, ''At
present, our Congressional liaison, planning, budget, finance, legal and public
affairs staffs are taxed to their limits in support of this Administration's
program and policy changes.'' He argued that these employees were needed
''because program changes in this department are so profound'' and ''require
top-down direction from the office of the Secretary and will be implemented over
the next several years.''

F ROM the best table at Mel Krupin's restaurant to the finest seats on the
50-yard line at the Redskins' games, a certain breed of Washingtonian is fully
aware that status is ultimately defined by location. Take the case of the
Securities and Exchange Commission.

Snuggled conveniently for years at 500 North Capitol Street, beside Union
Station and near Congress, the S.E.C. has just received word from the General
Accounting Office that it will move to a building under construction a
half-dozen blocks away on E Street, between Fifth and Sixth Streets. The good
news is that the move, which needs Congressional approval, will place all S.E.C.
personnel under one roof for the first time. Before this, agency personnel were
scattered across the city.

The bad news is that the choice top floors have been rented to a private law
firm, and the building itself is viewed with the same delight with which Russian
bureaucrats view Siberia. ''No restaurants, no cabs, nothing,'' grumbled one
S.E.C. official.  ''They're trying to do it as cheaply as possible. I mean there
are so many better places around town, more amenable.''

O VER the phone, Bobby Muller, executive director of the Vietnam Veterans of
America, talked about Veterans Day on Wednesday: ''The past 12 years were
necessary to get us to the point where we are now. We're a real, credible factor
in the political process. I'll tell you, the mood of the country, the people,
with regard to Vietnam veterans is totally different. The hostages effected some
crazy kind of catharsis where people were somehow able to deal with us as an
issue. Given the Presidential campaign in which war and peace was so essential,
and given the unease over the world situation, there's been a revival of the
broad concerns that were central to the Vietnam era. We have finally arrived.''

S HOULD taxpayers pay the $210 annual dues for a Government employee to join the
Chamber of Commerce? Or, more specifically, should Anne M. Gorsuch,
administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, allow the E.P.A.'s
administrator in Seattle, John R. Spencer, to join the chamber, whose members
''are active lobbyists before the Environmental Protection Agency and state
environmental agencies,'' according to Representative Toby Moffett, Democrat of
Connecticut, who is chairman of the Government Operations Subcommittee on
Environment, Energy and Natural Resources.

Mr. Moffett says the issue ''raises serious conflict-of-interest questions
affecting the entire agency's decision-making proceses.'' An E.P.A. spokesman
said the agency had not yet paid Mr. Spencer's dues, but was ''intending to do
so if it's legal.''

A CCORDING to Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, ''It becomes utterly anarchic
when professional criminals start to wear bullet-proof vests.'' Thus, New York's
Democratic Senator introduced legislation the other day that would require those
who sell bullet-proof vests to obtain licenses. Mr. Moynihan, who consulted with
Philip Caruso, president of the New York City Patrolmen's Benevolent
Association, offered the bill in the aftermath of the bloody Brink's armored car
robbery on Oct. 20 near Nyack, N.Y. Two police officers and an armored-car guard
were killed in the holdup in which at least one of the hold-up gang wore a
bullet-proof vest. Mr. Moynihan said the vest allowed the assailant additional
time to inflict a fatal wound on one of the officers and later he was found to
have a spent bullet from the dead policeman's gun in his pocket.  Francis X.
Clines Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NOT SO VITAL STATISTICS

BYLINE: By Hedrick Smith

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 587 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 9


For trivia collectors and others interested in Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig Jr., a selection of essential tidbits about the man who presides over Foggy
Bottom:

Height and Weight - 5 feet 11 inches; 190 pounds.  Waist - 38 inches.

Shoe size - 9 1/2 C.

Hat size - 7 1/4.

Overcoat size - 42.

Eyesight - Half-glasses for reading.  Hobbies - Golf (high 80's or low 90's);
tennis, watching pro football (he's torn between the Washington Redskins and the
Philadelphia Eagles).

Snacks - Salted peanuts; relish trays with carrot sticks, celery, white grapes.
First choice dinner - Sirloin or filet mignon on the rare side; baked potato
with sour cream; tossed salad with blue cheese dressing.  Personal heroes -
Winston Churchill; to a lesser degree, Gen.  Douglas A. MacArthur; President
Dwight Eisenhower; and the tennis player Arthur Ashe, for the way he has handled
his recovery from a heart attack.

Daily routine - Up at 6:15 A.M., in the office about 7:30; and if no diplomatic
dinners, leaves for home about 8:30 P.M. Goes to bed about midnight. Six days a
week. Works at home on Sunays.

Favorite saying - ''Is it do-able?'' Favorite vacation spot - Nantucket.
Favorite books - The works of Shakespeare.  Religion - Roman Catholic. Had
Jesuit training, attended Notre Dame for a year before attending West Point. (He
had a football scholarship but didn't make the varsity, and washed dishes in the
cafeteria to pay for his education.)

Philosophy - Believes in the perfectibility of man and regards John Locke, the
18th century British thinker, as the most stimulating philosopher.

Favorite actress - Shirley Temple.  Sweet tooth? - Chocolate ice cream.
Favorite TV shows - ''Saturday Night Live'' and ABC's ''Fridays.'' Favorite
movie - ''Gone with the Wind.'' Lucky number or superstitions - None.

Most difficult period - As White House Chief of Staff for President Nixon as the
mounting Watergate scandal finally drove Mr. Nixon from office.

Best memory - Marriage to Patricia Fox on May 24, 1950.  Memorable moments of
his career - A month after his marriage, serving in Japan as a young Army
lieutenant, Mr. Haig got the flash report of North Korea's thrust into South
Korea and took it to Gen.  Douglas A. MacArthur, the Supreme Allied Commander.
Also, in 1971, he was fascinated by his meetings with Prime Minister Zhou Enlai
of China as a pathfinder for his boss, Henry A. Kissinger, national security
adviser to President Nixon, setting in motion Mr. Nixon's Ping-Pong diplomacy.

Best military assignments - In 32-year career, Supreme Allied Commander, Europe;
and three combat assignments in Vietnam, 1966-67.  He and his wife have moved 35
times in 31 years.

Favorite drink - Jack Daniel's black label on the rocks.  Fashion -Recently
recognized as the best-dressed official in Government, he takes dress very
seriously, wears pants with cuffs, double-vent jackets, lively pin-striped and
glen plaid suits; and a tie clasp from the United Technologies Corporation.
Hedrick Smith

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a bottle of Jack Daniel's photo of Douglas
MacArthur photo of Shirley Temple

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. Team in Thailand Extends Inquiry Into Chemical Warfare

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 134 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 9


A United Nations team investigating the use of toxic chemicals by Vietnamese
forces has extended its inquiry for four days after hearing of new cases among
Laotian refugees in northern Thailand, an Interior Ministry spokesman said
today.

Six villagers who escaped from Laos said they had been attacked with toxic
chemicals. Thai authorities detained the refugees in Udon Province, 300 miles
northeast of here, the spokesman said.

The Thai spokesman quoted members of the United Nations team as saying that they
had recorded testimony by people who said they had been attacted by Vietnamese
forces using toxic chemicals but that they had found no material evidence. The
eight-member team is to report to the General Assembly later this month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. FINDS CHEMICAL WARFARE TOXINS IN INDOCHINA

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 10


The State Department said today that it had evidence, in the form of new samples
of rocks, leaves and water from Southeast Asia, that chemical warfare agents had
been used in Cambodia and Laos.

Richard Burt, director of the department's Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs,
said an analysis of the samples confirmed the existence of toxic chemicals. He
said they were being used against people resisting Vietnamese control of Laos
and Cambodia. He said that even if the agents were being used ''by indigenous
forces,'' the Soviet Union was advising the forces and ''controlling chemical
warfare in Southeast Asia.''

''We now have the smoking gun,'' he said, referring in testimony before a Senate
arms control subcommittee to evidence of chemical warfare. ''We now have four
separate pieces of physical evidence.''

Mr. Burt also testified that the United States had ''concluded that chemical
weapons are being used in Afghanistan, but we have no evidence.''

Haig Reported on Toxic Chemicals

The chemical attacks are often known as ''yellow rain'' because of the color of
the chemical particles landing on rooftops and vegetation. American officials
have received reports of chemical warfare in Southeast Asia for more than a
dozen years but until recently have had no physical evidence.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. said in a speech on Sept.  12 in West
Berlin that the United States had physical evidence that poisonous chemicals
were being used in Southeast Asia. A day later, the State Department presented
an analysis of one leaf sample taken in March in Cambodia, or Kampuchea as it is
also known, near the Thai border.

One of the new samples mentioned by Mr. Burt today was said to be water taken
from the same village. He said the others were from sites of separate attacks in
Laos.

Mr. Burt said the samples revealed ''very high quantities'' of chemicals known
as trichothecene mycotoxins. Exposure to the chemicals causes vomiting, itching,
dizziness and death.

Location of Production Plants

''Over the past five years, and perhaps longer, weapons outlawed by mankind,
weapons successfully banned from the battlefields of the industrialized world
for over five decades, have been used against unsophisticated and defenseless
people in campaigns of mounting extermination which are being conducted in Laos,
Kampuchea and more recently in Afghanistan,'' he said.

Mr. Burt testified that tests of other soil and vegetation samples from the same
areas of Southeast Asia indicated that they were free of the toxic chemicals. He
said this was evidence that they did not occur naturally there.

Mr. Burt said the State Department had been unable to find any facilities in
Southeast Asia capable of producing the mold and extracting the mycotoxins in
the quantities the United States believed they were being used. Such facilities
do exist in the Soviet Union, he said, adding that the were ''under military
control and with heavy military guard.''

He said that Soviet chemical experts had inspected several places in Southeast
Asia where lethal and nonlethal chemicals were stockpiled.

Biplane Reportedly Used

Until the samples were obtained, charges that the Soviet Union or its client
forces in Southeast Asia were using chemical weapons were based on reports of
refugees, journalists and other observers. The first victims were believed to be
highland tribal people such as the Meos, who have long resisted Communist forces
in Laos.

The chemical attacks, according to accounts provided to the State Department,
were conducted by low-flying aircraft, including a biplane that is used as a
crop duster in the Soviet Union.

The Geneva Protocol of 1925 outlaws the use of chemical weapons in warfare and
the Biological Weapons Convention of 1972 forbids the production, stockpiling or
transfer of toxic weapons. The agreements, signed by the Soviet Union and
Vietnam, do not, however, provide for verification.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

How to Remember Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 355 words


On Veterans Day, consider the nation's newest war memorial: instead of white,
the color of glory, its walls are black, the color of death. Instead of soaring
to the sky, it drops into a trench. In almost every aspect, it is depressing
rather than uplifting. Is that an appropriate way to remember those who gave
their lives in war?

Yes, say supporters of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial planned for Washington. No,
say some critics, and even some Vietnam veterans.  They object that a somber
angled retaining wall, listing 57,692 war dead and set into the ground between
the Washington and Lincoln monuments, reflects a final victory for the anti-war
movement.

Since the memorial focuses on names, rather than the war, it ''makes them
individual deaths, not deaths in a cause,'' complains The National Review.
''They might as well have been traffic accidents. The invisibility of the
monument at ground level symbolizes the 'unmentionability' of the war.''

Perhaps it does all that, but that's exactly the point. For a long time, the war
in Vietnam was unmentionable. In fact, the impetus for a memorial springs not
from contemporary pride but from later guilt about the men and women who served.

Were they heroes or victims? They tended to be lower middle-class or poor,
because the better-off found ways to avoid Vietnam. Most did not know what they
were getting into, and if they were lucky enough to return home physically
unscathed it was to indifference, even contempt.

The nation remains in deep conflict about the war. But with time, all Americans
have joined at least in a sense of pain for those who died. A memorial that
emphasizes the names without offering any conclusion about the war reflects the
truth about how the nation remembers Vietnam.

Critics of the memorial would like something more assertive - a Vietnam version
of marines raising the flag at Iwo Jima, perhaps.  That would create a shallow
monument to politics. The Vietnam dead deserve better.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HONORING VETERANS OF WAR, AND ANTI-WAR

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 274 words


To the Editor:

As the wife of a U.S. Air Force officer who has been missing in Vietnam since
1967 and as a strong supporter of Jan Scruggs and the efforts he and others are
making to ensure that the planned memorial to Vietnam veterans becomes a
reality, I believe the prominence given on your Op-Ed page of Oct. 24 to one
veteran's opinion about the memorial is out of proportion to its importance.

I refer to the article ''Insulting Vietnam Vets,'' by Tom Carhart, who complains
that the memorial will be black and will be installed below ground level and
therefore is a symbol not of honor and recognition but of shame and sorrow.

Mr. Carhart failed to mention that he was one of the 1,421 competitors in the
design competition. Nor does he state that although he had prior knowledge that
the jurors would be civilians, he made no objection until after the winning
entry was selected.

Maya Ying Lin's design, chosen unanimously by the panel of prominent architects,
landscape architects, sculptors and a design critic, has been widely praised for
its eloquence, dignity and nobility, which is the message it conveys to me.

The black granite walls extending outward 200 feet from the apex of the memorial
will be erected amidst grass and trees in a two-acre park in Constitution
Gardens on the Mall in Washington, D.C. The memorial will not be the black hole
that Mr. Carhart describes, but rather a subtle yet powerful statement honoring
the memory of those who were lost and recognizing the sacrifices of all who
served in a war in which there was neither victor nor vanquished.
PHYLLIS S. CORBITT, Arlington, Va., Oct. 28, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HONORING VETERANS OF WAR, AND ANTI-WAR

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 187 words


To the Editor:

Mobil, in its ad on the Op-Ed page of Nov. 5, urges contributions to the Vietnam
Memorial Fund. Good. Would they urge an extension of the memorial to include
conscientious objectors, and remember them as moral veterans?§ome who went to
Vietnam went in bad conscience. Some went in good conscience. Some, finally, in
doubtful conscience. The same must be said of those who refused to enlist and
who consequently went to jail or fled the country.

It is not for us to judge motives. If we honor the actions therefore of those
who fought, should we not also honor the actions of the pacifists?

''All endured untold hardships defending the freedoms we all too often take for
granted,'' said Mobil. Well? Is not respect for conscience one of those
freedoms? Remember, we are not judging motives in either case. President Kennedy
hoped for the day when soldier and pacifist would be held in equal honor.
(Rev.) JEROME MURPHY Tarrytown, N.Y., Nov. 5, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE U.S. AND VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Gareth Porter

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 891 words

DATELINE: WASHIN GTON


The United States should stop trying to overthrow the regime that Vietnam
installed in Cambodia, and focus its policy on a more important American
interest: reversing the increasing Soviet military presence in Vietnam. The
policy of supporting China's military pressure on Vietnam and its arming of
anti-Vietnamese forces in Cambodia, and the economic and diplomatic isolation of
Vietnam, is not working. The only winners are Moscow and Peking, each of which
exploits the conflict in Indochina to become more deeply involved in Southeast
Asia.

The anti-Vietnamese resistance in Cambodia, China's threat to invade Vietnam,
and the economic boycott of Vietnam are supposed to force the Vietnamese to
agree to replace the regime in Phnom Penh with one more acceptable to China and
non-Communist Southeast Asia.  But none of these tactics can help achieve the
intended aim.

First, there is Pol Pot's bloodstained political and military apparatus, which
America uses to put pressure on the Vietnamese in Cambodia. As our officials
concede, Pol Pot's army is almost universally hated and feared by the Khmer
people. Isolated in a sea of popular hostility, it cannot mount any effective
challenge to the Vietnamese and the Heng Samrin Government. Its existence makes
most Cambodians turn to the Vietnamese military presence as insurance against
its possible return to power.

Asean - the Association of Southeast Asian Nations - has been trying to graft a
non-Communist leadership on to Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge, hoping to make it more
acceptable to the world and the Cambodian people. But despite an agreement among
the three Cambodian anti-Vietnamese factions to keep talking about a coalition,
Asean and American officials say privately that a coalition is less likely than
ever before. No one really believes that a non-Communist ''third force'' could
become a military alternative to Pol Pot's forces.

China's threat to Vietnam's northern border hurts Vietnam economically, since it
has forced Hanoi to double its army, to 1.1 million. But it also helps Hanoi
maintain some popular support for its foreign policy, and this nullifies the
political benefits accruing to outsiders from the economic drain.

China's avowed aim of bleeding Vietnam in Cambodia and on its northern border
provokes disunity among those whose support is essential to keeping up pressure
on Vietnam. Malaysia and Indonesia, openly opposed to using the Cambodian
conflict to weaken Vietnam, have been quietly pushing for a more conciliatory
Asean line. They hope to pull Thailand away from China's policy and want America
to help by moderating China's hard line toward Vietnam.

The idea that denying Vietnam assistance from capitalist sources can force the
Vietnamese to retreat on Cambodia is based on dubious assumptions: that the
Vietnamese will not bring about internal economic changes to improve the
critical food shortages at home, that popular discontent over the economy will
be focused on policy toward Cambodia, that protest will become a potential
threat to the Vietnamese regime, and that the regime will believe that yielding
to Chinese demands would solve Vietnam's economic difficulties.  Significantly,
Malaysia has concluded that economic pressures on Vietnam will not work.

While we wait the 15 or more years China says it may require for its strategy to
work, the Soviet Union becomes more firmly entrenched at Cam Ranh Bay and Danang
airbase. Greater Soviet leverage on Hanoi is an inevitable consequence of
Chinese pressure on Vietnam and Vietnamese dependence on Soviet help. America's
interest in preventing the Russians from acquiring a strategic foothold in the
region is being sacrificed to achieve an unrealistic, secondary political
objective in Cambodia.

An alternative strategy would be to reach an agreement with Vietnam as soon as
possible providing for withdrawal of its troops from Cambodia in return for an
end to the Pol Pot army's presence and a Chinese agreement on nonaggression and
noninterference in Indochina.  Such an agreement would enhance Thai security by
removing the Vietnamese military presence from the Thai border, permit
Cambodians to reassert more independence from Vietnam without fear of Pol Pot's
return, and give Vietnam the incentive to begin squeezing the Russians out of
their present military position.

Convincing China to go along with this kind of settlement would not be easy,
even though it can be argued that China's primary interest in Vietnam would also
be better served by it. But China would ultimately have to ask whether its own
strategy can succeed without strong American and Asean support. In any case, the
China problem should not be used as an argument against a strategy that is more
appropriate to the interests of America and non-Communist Southeast Asia.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Gareth Porter writes on Indochina for the Center for International Policy, a
research center that focuses on United States policy toward the third world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon of a Vietnamese man

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1246 words


Soviet says Swedish has elec- tronic listening post A3
China taunts Soviet over strand- ing of submarine A3
Industrial unrest continues in Po- land A3
Around the World A5
Top Afghan military officials said to study in Moscow A8
Gulf states main challenge Oman's role in U.S. maneuvers A9
Libya is opposing Saudi peace proposals A10
West Bank university, closed by Israel, starts drive to reopen A11
Egyptian aide says nation's poli- cies have not changed A12
Tunisia reported worried over fundamentalist gains A13

Government/Politics
Miami's mayor gains black sup- port to win re-election in runoff A16
Officials warn cutbacks are harming public housing in U.S.  A29

VETERANS DAY
Today is Veterans Day. Following are holiday schedules: Parade - Begins 10 A.M.,
Fifth Avenue and 39th Street; moves south to 24th Street; ends at noon.  Parking
- Alternate-side regulations suspended; all other rules in effect.  Sanitation -
No collections; no street cleaning.  Federal, state and municipal offices
-Closed.  Post offices - Closed; only special delivery and express mail
delivered.  Banks - Closing optional in New York; banks closed in Connecticut
and New Jersey.  Stock and commodity markets -Open.  Transportation - Regular
schedules.  Libraries - Closed.  Schools - Closed.

Living Section
Food Restaurants: Big three in Washington C1

Getting it all together at dinner parties C1

60-Minute Gourmet C3

Researching the roots of gas- tronomy C3

Catfish, long a Southern deli- cacy, branches out C6

Best Buys C7
Living Their shining early hours C1

Metropolitan Diary C2

Discoveries C8

Personal Health C12

Elementary pupils learn ills of alcohol C13

Wine Talk C18

Queen and a first lady at char- ity gala C20

Washington Talk
Briefing A22
Washington follow-up A22
James Watt and environmental- ists are the best of enemies A22
Historians bring lost years of Su- preme Court back to life A22
Presidential fever, the 1984 strain, is spreading A22

General
Around the Nation A16
Brink's case suspect won't testify because her lawyer is barred B3
Landmarks panel formally re- jects 71st Street tower B24

Education/Welfare
Rutgers senior sues to bar fee to advocacy group B3

Arts/Entertainment
Mood is optimistic at theater own- ers' convention C22
Dance program by Ed Di Lello C22
Mahmud Mirza gives a sitar re- cital, unaccompanied C23
Musical ''Oh, Brother!'' opens at the ANTA C23
The Pop Life: Ringo Starr is out with his second album C26
Neil Bogart, record producer, looks forward to 1984 C26
New cable TV company to em- phasize family fare C26
Robert Butler's first novel, ''Al- leys of Eden,'' reviewed C29
Trio of Les Blank shorts is at the Film Forum C29
WNET-TV examines the troubles of a Vietnam War veteran C31

Sports
Red Smith on the good old days B8
Yanks sign Piniella for 3 years B9
Knicks rout Nets, 111-99, as Rich- ardson excels B9
Islanders win, 5-3, as Bossy scores 2 B9
Neal Walk sees beyond the game B9
Life in hockey's minors: dreams and despair B11
Mets name Frey batting coach B11

Features/Notes
About New York B4
Notes on People B8
Sports People B11

News Analysis
Hedrick Smith on Reagan news conference A1
David M. Margolick assesses law- yer's disqualification B3
Tony Schwartz examines Novem- ber TV-ratings sweeps C31
Thomas C. Hayes on impact of merger of 2 insurance concerns D1

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A30

First, end the recession How to remember Vietnam If Queens get 107 channels
Letters A30
James Reston: 'a very happy group' A31
Russell Baker: and the Reich goes on A31
Alan Wolfe: economic growth's il- lusion A31
Gareth Porter: the United States and Vietnam A13

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 800 words


By Anatole Broyard
THE ALLEYS OF EDEN. By Robert Olen Butler. 256 pages. Horizon Press. $12.95.

ROBERT BUTLER'S ''The Alleys of Eden'' is the kind of novel about Vietnam that
we would never expect to read: a book about a deserter named Cliff who lives in
an alley with a Vietnamese bar-girl and wants to spend the rest of his life
there, because, with all its troubles, Vietnam seems to him to retain more of
its integrity, its sense of self, than the America he has left behind. It
appears to Cliff that the Vietnamese know who they are because they have never
learned how to deceive themselves, while the Americans he remembers have learned
hardly anything else.

Although he had been a radical before being drafted, Cliff is surprised to find
that, at first, he likes the Army. He feels in it a ''protective comradeship''
he has never known before, a kind of masculine caring that he thought had gone
out of the world. Then a prisoner he is helping to interrogate dies - not
because the interrogators are brutal, but because they are clumsy amateurs - and
Cliff deserts. He deserts because he can no longer believe in a country that,
with all its vanity and its vaunted progress, is still clumsy and amateurish.

Matter of Innocence

He goes to live in an alley with Lanh, a young Vietnamese woman who has studied
psychology and politics in the bars where she entertains American soldiers for a
living. Cliff meets her when another American soldier asks Lanh to sing a
Vietnamese song so that he can tape it and send it home to his wife. Lanh
appreciates the irony of having a whore sing to your wife, and she begins her
song with ''You've sent your man to make us whores.''

Why do you want me? she asks Cliff. I'm too small for you, she tells him, as if
to say what does your big country want with my small country? In the bedroom,
Lanh says to Cliff, ''I can hardly see myself in the shadows.'' She explains to
him what he doesn't even understand himself, his reasons for not wanting to go
back home: ''A man's home,'' she says, ''is where he is innocent. You could
never feel innocent again in the United States.''

But then Saigon is falling and they both believe that when the Vietcong arrive
they will be stripped naked and marched through the streets before being
tortured. Cliff tells Lanh that he is going to leave and take her with him
somehow. When she says ''You'll hate me back there,'' he answers ''No one who
loves another is safe from that.''

How they get aboard the last, or next to last, American helicopter to leave
Saigon, how they fight and trick their way through the crowds to the American
Embassy, is the most difficult kind of passage to write. To make it as desperate
as it must have been without sliding into melodrama is like a qualifying test
for a good writer.  Mr. Butler seems to have studied and learned from the best
masters: his time shifts are reminiscent of Ford Madox Ford, and in one
Chekhov-like detail, he tells us that, on the way to the embassy and the
helicopter, Cliff and Lanh can smell the favorite dishes being cooked as a last
supper by the people of Saigon.

''They're so big,'' Lanh says of the Americans she meets with Cliff in the
Middle West. ''They scare me.'' She also says that although she ''did not feel
Vietnamese in Vietnam,'' she does here.  Everything, especially the heavy
kindness of the people, reminds her that she is alien.

Question of Prayer

And of course she was right about how Cliff would feel. Though he tries to go on
loving her, wants to go on loving her, she is not the same woman anymore.
Suddenly she is a doll, a talking doll, who can speak only a few awkward words.
All her grace is gone: the scale of things here is opposed to it. Cliff feels
that she is, after all, being stripped and made to march through the streets,
that she is being tortured.

Telling himself that ''there was no nationality in an orgasm,'' Cliff tries to
bind himself to Lanh through sex, and for a while it works. He feels himself to
be ''singing in the voice of mandarins and monks on hilltops he'd never seen,
great forests of mahogany, temple bells.'' But then one day he finds Lanh
praying and asks, ''What is it you're praying for?'' And she answers ''I don't
know.''

And perhaps that's the theme of this remarkable first novel: that we don't know
what we're praying for. Mr. Butler has written a political love story, a lovely
political story, ''a flow,'' as he puts it, ''of reverie and regret in a bed in
a room in another country.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert Olen Butler

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 11, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: VIETNAM VETERAN RECOUNTS HIS TRAVAILS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 31, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 798 words


''THE Vietnam Veteran: A Matter of Life and Death,'' a two-hour Veterans Day
special packaged by Boston station WGBH and being carried on WNET-TV tonight at
9, got a publicity boost recently when the national offices of the Veterans of
Foreign Wars and the American Legion publicly protested the inclusion of one
segment.  ''Frank: A Portrait of a Vietnam Veteran,'' a documentary by Fred
Simon, had already been shown in the Boston area and elicited what Lawrence K.
Grossman, president of the Public Broadcasting Service, called ''an
extraordinarily positive viewer response.'' However, the veterans' organizations
found the portrayal of Frank to be entirely negative and, in the words of one
letter, ''potentially damaging.''

At issue is an interview, taped in black and white, in which the camera focuses
only on the face of Frank B. as he talks about his experiences in Vietnam during
1970 and 197l and his subsequent difficulties in readjusting to what is supposed
to be a more normal life. In the sense that the result is hardly comforting,
entirely devoid of cheering crowds and marching bands, the portrait is indeed
negative. But as Frank gropes, with astonishing candor, to explain what happened
to him, the effect is undeniably powerful.

The veterans' groups believe the broadcast will represent ''a disservice to the
millions of young veterans who have made successful adjustments.'' But the
production carefully defines its own limitations with an opening statement:
''The following program is the story of one Vietnam veteran - his experience in
Vietnam, and what his life has been like since his return home more than 10
years ago.''

Frank was not a reluctant draftee. He enlisted in the Navy in 1962 at the age of
18. By the time he reached Vietnam, he had had special sniper training. He
remembers having some vague idea about fighting for freedom, against Communism,
but basically it was a job that slowly turned into a nightmare of simply trying
to survive.

Among other things, Frank recalls finding the mutilated bodies of American
soldiers and being so upset that he later took revenge on the dead bodies of
Vietnamese soldiers. Suddenly, he says, ''I was John Wayne, I was Steve McQueen,
I was Clint Eastwood - I was all these other people, but I was not really Frank
- I was living a fantasy.'' He collected commendation medals and Purple Hearts
for being wounded and headed home, jauntily stepping off the plane and ''finding
nothing'' in the way of sympathy or support.

Throughout much of the 1970's, Frank's life became a descent into alcoholism,
hostility and sexual confusion. His marriage fell apart.  He felt he could kill
somebody. He was hospitalized for psychiatric treatment. His nightmares went
from black and white to living color.  There is still no happy ending. He says:
''I guess the intensity comes from reliving something that I don't know whether
it was right or wrong - that I'm confused about even today, 10 years later.''

Frank is now a social worker living in Boston. His only conclusion: ''My feeling
is that we need people to talk like I'm talking now. To be honest about what
happened over there so that these guys who are walking the streets and holding
this stuff inside can feel the freedom to talk about it somewhere - and not be
judged for it.''

Frank's experience is echoed in ''Warriors' Women,'' another documentary
included in this special. Produced by Dorothy Tod, the half hour focuses on four
women whose husbands returned from Vietnam with an assortment of psychological
problems. Again the veterans seemed to feel that nobody understood, or cared
about, what they had been through.

One wife describes how she took her husband to see the film ''M*A*S*H,'' a black
comedy she admired, only to watch him with tears streaming down his face. Other
veterans spoke constantly of the atrocities they had witnessed and perhaps even
participated in.  Another woman's distraught husband finally committed suicide.

Are the protestors right? Is all of this too negative for what, after all, is
supposed to be a day of celebration? The producers of ''Frank,'' responding to
some of the criticism, argue that the Veterans Administration recently released
a Congressionally financed study entitled ''Legacies of Vietnam.'' One of the
investigators estimated that ''about one-quarter of the roughly 2.8 million
Americans who served in Vietnam - regardless of combat exposure - exhibit
clinical levels of stress.'' At this point, it seems, many Vietnam veterans need
considerably more than marching bands.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THOUSANDS AT COLLEGES JOIN DRIVE AGAINST ATOMIC ARMS

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 915 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


Thousands of students and faculty members at 151 college campuses around the
country staged a teach-in today on the threat of nuclear war, opening what is
planned as a continuing national education program to generate popular demands
for multinational nuclear arms reduction.

Planning for the ''Convocation on the Threat of Nuclear War'' was begun only
three months ago by the principal sponsor, the Union of Concerned Scientists, a
Boston-based group with 100,000 members that was formed in 1969 and opposes
nuclear power.

Spokesmen for the group, which also has an office here, said the widespread
participation by campus groups in 37 states, given only the broadest suggested
agenda, indicated a growing awareness that the threat of nuclear war is rising.

Tom Ayres, one of the coordinators of the campus meetings, said he could make no
estimate of total attendance until reports were telephoned in tomorrow and
Friday. But Henry W. Kendall, who instigated planning for the day as president
of the scientists' group, called the turnout a ''runaway success.''

First Step Taken

David D. Brunell, director of the arms control project at the scientists' union,
called the program ''the first step in beginning to bring the national level of
concern about the prospect of nuclear war from 10 percent of the population -or
it may be only 5 percent - to, say, 30 or 50 percent.''

At Cornell University, where about 1,500 people attended a meeting described as
the largest in the East, two Nobel laureates, Hans Bethe and Roald Hoffmann, and
360 other members of the faculty endorsed the convocation.

Both the mood and the oratory were notably different from the 1960's student-led
demonstrations against continuing the war in Vietnam. Prof. Kendall, who teaches
physics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, called those
demonstrations a ''model,'' but there was plainly an effort today to make
arguments for control of nuclear weapons acceptable to middle Americans.

About half the participants at many of the sessions were reported to be
''noncollege people'' of middle age and older.

European Demonstrations

Several speakers mentioned the recent street demonstrations in Europe against
American nuclear weapon deployment there. But, following the sponsors' wish to
avoid reawakening the 1960's image of confrontation in the streets, nowhere were
such demonstrations cited as an example. Instead, there were repeated calls for
a widespread national debate.

A more broadly based, off-campus week of ''awareness-arousing'' community
meetings across the country is being planned for April 18-25 by a group called
Ground Zero, headed by Roger C. Molander, formerly a nuclear weapons specialist
on the staff of the National Security Council.

Mr. Molander, who joined in a panel discussion before an overflow audience at
Georgetown University law school here and later at Swarthmore College near
Philadelphia, said the April meetings would be ''held in Rotary Clubs and
American Legion posts - community environments that people will feel comfortable
in.''

But based on the turnout today, the convocation's sponsor committed itself to a
second program next year.

Symbolic Holiday

Prof. Kendall said Veterans Day had been picked for the convocation ''because of
its symbolism, both to veterans and to the victims of war.'' He added, ''World
War III would leave no veterans.''

The campus programs included films, seminars, panel discussions and speeches by
well-known scientists, physicians, retired military leaders and politicians,
including some associated with the Manhattan Project, which developed the first
atomic bomb.

An audience of about 800 at Harvard University's Sanders Theater gave some of
its loudest applause to Yuri Kapralov, a consular official at the Soviet Embassy
in Washington, who apparently was the only official Russian participant in the
day's events.

Mr. Kapralov said that ''there is no system of weapons that we are not prepared
to eliminate, provided it is done on the basis of equity and equal security.''
He appeared on a platform with Paul Warnke, the Carter Administration's
negotiator at the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, and Stephen Meyer, an M.I.T.
political science professor who has been a consultant to American military and
intelligence agencies.

4 Objectives Outlined

From Bates College at Lewiston, Me., to the University of California at Los
Angeles, audiences heard a ''scientists' declaration,'' signed by Prof. Kendall
and eight others, that called for focusing public opinion on these four
objectives:

- A comprehensive American-Soviet ban on nuclear weapons tests.

- Limits on flight testing of new missile systems.

- ''Substantial and verifiable reductions'' of existing American and Soviet
nuclear arsenals.

- An ''intensive'' American-Soviet effort to halt the proliferation of nuclear
weaponry and to encourage similar weapons reductions by other nuclear powers.

Two themes stressed by many speakers were that Americans ''share a common
interest with the Russian people'' in limiting nuclear firepower, and that the
Reagan Administration appears to believe that a limited nuclear war can be
fought and won.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

G.O.P. CLOCKS DIFFER ON TIMING OF BUDGET MOVES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


The venerable political maxim ''Where you stand depends on where you sit'' goes
a long way in explaining the confusion and conflicting statements that have
surrounded President Reagan's efforts to impose a second round of Federal budget
cuts.

The issues at stake are all political dynamite: proposals to cut sensitive
social programs, plans to raise taxes and the President's campaign promise to
balance the Federal budget.

But perspective is what counts, and all these issues present different political
problems for the key actors in the drama: the President, the members of the
Senate and the House of Representatives.

For the White House, 1984 was to be the magic year in which the budget would be
balanced. That is also the next Presidential election year. For President
Reagan's predecessor, Jimmy Carter, the target year for a balanced budget was
1980, which was his re-election year.  Mr. Reagan ruefully acknowledged
yesterday, however, that the likelihood of reaching that goal in 1984 ''has
become an unlikelihood, because of unforeseen changes.''

Stance of G.O.P. in Senate

Senate Republicans also look to 1984, as well as 1986, when most of them will be
up for re-election. They would like Congress to make a longterm commitment to a
balanced budget, and hope that it will be in place before they next face the
voters.

Since only a dozen of the 53 Senate Republicans will be up for election next
year, they view 1982 as a choice year to raise taxes and cut benefits. In fact,
the Senate Republicans had sold the White House on this plan.

But House Republicans balked. Every House seat will be up for election next
year, and House Republicans consider raising taxes in an election year to be a
form of political suicide. In fact, no one can remember the last time that taxes
were raised in an election year.

Instead of a long-term commitment to a balanced budget, the House Republicans
prefer to play it year-by-year, or, more precisely, election-by-election.

Sensitivity of White House

Although the White House regards 1984 as the key year, the Administration is
sensitive to next year's Congressional elections and therefore heeded the pleas
of the House Republicans to defer any tax increase. Representative Robert H.
Michel of Illinois, the Republican leader, told the President last week not only
that the House would not pass a major tax increase next year, but also that
Republicans who supported such an increase would be vulnerable at the polls.

''While the President is interested in what's going to happen in '82, he's more
concerned with '84,'' said one House Republican leader. ''A lot of guys here are
going to be screaming for results in the third quarter of '82, but the President
should not provide those results at the expense of '84.''

Despite their brave front, many Senate Republicans were furious with the
President's abandonment of his promise to balance the budget by 1984, and his
lack of commitment to a tax increase next year.  ''The White House was fearful
of an overwhelming defeat in the House,'' said an aide to the Senate Republican
leadership, who had sat in on strategy sessions between White House aides and
Senate leaders.

An aide to the House Democratic leadership pointed out that although senators
were rarely defeated on a single issue, ''House members are less well known,
especially with redistricting, and can't afford to be talked into being
statesmen on an unpopular vote.''

Survival of Alliances

Although the White House, Senate and House have differing institutional
perspectives, some customary alliances have crossed institutional lines. One
such union involves the director of the Office of Management and Budget, and the
chairmen of the House and Senate Budget Committees. This alliance, which
survives administration after administration, is very much alive today, with all
three men viewing their prime objective as holding down the budget deficit.

At the White House, nobody was more disappointed with the President's decision
than David A. Stockman, director of the budget office, and in the Senate nobody
was more upset than Pete V.  Domenici, chairman of the Budget Committee. Mr.
Domenici's view may be shaped, in part, by the political reality that only one
Republican on his committee, Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, is up for re-election next
year.

On the other hand, the President's decision was a victory for another longtime
alliance, involving the Treasury Secretary, Donald T. Regan, and the chairmen of
the tax-writing committees. Their major concern is not balanced budget, but a
healthy, overall economy. Here too, personal politics was not entirely
extraneous. Senator Bob Dole, the Kansas Republican who is chairman of the
Finance Committee, was faced with the fact that six of the committee's
Republicans are up for reelection next year. So are five of the committee's
Democrats, for a total of 11 of the 20 committee members.

''People up for re-election are not inclined to cut benefits and raise taxes,''
a key aide to Mr. Dole said, reciting a political fact of life.

A third alliance embraces a President and the legislative leaders of his party.
As Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. and Senator Senator Robert C. Byrd, the
Democratic leader, sought to protect Jimmy Carter, so Mr. Michel and Senator
Howard H. Baker Jr., the Republican leader, seek to protect President Reagan.

''Being in the White House is a confining situation,'' noted Representative
James R. Jones, Democrat of Oklahoma, chairman of the House Budget Committee,
who was chief of staff in Lyndon B. Johnson's White House. ''When a President
runs for office he clearly has a good pulse of the public. But if public opinion
changes, he has a difficult time keeping up. Lyndon Johnson never fully
understood the depth of public feeling on Vietnam, and Ronald Reagan has failed
to recognize some emerging perceptions out there: that the call for sacrifice
isn't being evenly distributed, and that large budget deficits sound like
business as usual.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Critic's Notebook;
HOW MUCH OUGHT A CRITIC TO KNOW?

BYLINE: By JOHN LEONARD

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1746 words


WHAT happens is this: the crazed reviewer disappears into the book. He has been
gobbled up. He knows not where he is - lungs, pancreas, urinary tract, big toe.
A novel like Robert Stone's ''A Flag for Sunrise,'' for example, is so consuming
because it is ''about'' everything from the ''moral fascination'' of Vietnam to
revolution in Central America to communications theory to the death of God. If
Mr. Stone goes all the way, shouldn't the reviewer plunge after him, sink or
swim? Perhaps not.

Gnosticism is probably the big toe of ''A Flag for Sunrise,'' where this
reviewer got lost. Mr. Stone's ''whisky priest,'' Father Egan, is supposed to be
''the Christian humanist witness in a vicious world.'' Instead, in a jungle
clearing, near a pyramid, in front of some Toltec stelae depicting human
sacrifice, Father Egan preaches heresy. Surrounded by ''messengers'' from the
north, he says that God is ''mislaid.'' He speaks of a ''secret love.'' He looks
for buried ''spark,'' ''the particle of Light.'' He babies a killer.

Well, a crazed reviewer can spot the demiurge a mile away. That same demiurge
has shown up in recent novels by Harold Bloom and Vincent Canby, as well as in
Elaine Pagels's account of the Gnostic gospels. Why Gnosticism, and the
derivative heresies of the Manichaeans and the Albigenses, should be making such
a flashy comback mystifies - is God a schizophrenic? - but never mind. ''A Flag
for Sunrise'' throbs with the stuff.

The crazed reviewer spends a day on the reference shelf, snuffling up demiurges.
Certainly the ''angels'' go south and are devoured by ''matter.'' Maybe the
United States is the demiurge. No wonder the blue-eyed sun is blind. When
another of Mr. Stone's characters happens on a ''convocation of evil elements, a
jar culture oozing out and discovering itself,'' is he pedantically reminding us
of the discovery of the Gnostic ''library in a jar'' at Chenoboskion in the
surprising Middle East? One hopes not. But - and so on. The crazed reviewer has
gone south and is reporting from inside Mr. Stone's big toe. Other parts of the
body are ignored.

Of, course, the heart and the backbone of this novel, not to mention the brain,
are likely to be elsewhere. Perhaps Mr. Stone is saying that we can't think our
way to faith. Perhaps his North Americans are in Tecan because of the bananas.
Bananas, he tells us, are full of potassium: ''One of the symptoms of potassium
insufficiency is a sense of existential dread.'' Wasn't Heidegger sort of
Gnostic?

The problem is that novels as complicated and ambitious as ''A Flag for
Sunrise'' frighten the reviewer into trying to compete with the book. Unless the
reviewer is a very big boy indeed - one thinks of Melville on Hawthorne, Taine
on Stendhal, Thomas Mann on Goethe, Valery on Mallarme, Isaiah Berlin on
Tolstoy, Lionel Trilling on E.M. Forster, Edmund Wilson on the Dead Sea scrolls,
Immanuel Kant on pure reason, Claude Levi-Strauss on table manners, and the
English department at Yale University - this is dumb.

Early in the Russian Revolution, when Trotsky complained to Molotov about the
incompetence of the Central Committee, Molotov is said to have spluttered:
''Comrade Trotsky, not everyone can be a genius.''

Exactly.

How much ought a reviewer to know? Stanley Edgar Hyman went so far as to
suggest, in ''The Critic's Credentials,'' that nobody was qualified to review a
modern novel who wasn't acquainted with psychoanalysis, anthropology, history,
sociology, religion, philosophy, sports, ad absurdum. Matthew Arnold, after all,
knew everything. So did that plagiarist, Coleridge. James Joyce, one recalls,
learned Norwegian to read Ibsen.

Pass the bananas. We are asked to understand Gestalt psychology in order to
''grasp Kafka's fables imaginatively,'' whereas some of us might feel that we're
better able to grasp Gestalt psychology because we appreciate Kafka. Is Proust
really improved by prior knowledge of Henri Bergson; or Malraux by a familiarity
with Heidegger, Jaspers, Kierkegaard and Nietzsche; or ''Goodbye Columbus'' by a
deep steeping in Thorstein Veblen's ''Theory of the Leisure Class''? Yes, no and
maybe.

On the other hand, I can't imagine why anyone acquainted with the Upanishads,
the Diamond Sutra, Meister Eckhart, Dr. Suzuki, arhats, bodhisattvas,
jivanmuktas, japam, Chuang-tzu and Epictetus would bother to read ''Franny and
Zooey'' in the first place.

Suppose a critic were to tell you that Albert Camus once stayed in Andre Gide's
apartment in Paris, where he used to swing on a trapeze in the living room,
until it got embarrassing? That Dante Alighieri, contrary to popular impression,
had a Mrs. Dante and four Danties, and nobody's name was Beatrice? That there
also seem to have been two perky little Plutarchs, although their father
wouldn't acknowledge them? That Sinclair Lewis, while an undergraduate at Yale,
sold the plots of stories to Jack London, and they haggled over pennies of
payment? That, according to Pascal, ''superstition equals concupiscence''?

All this is true. On being told any of it, are you more likely to trust the
teller when he pretends to explain the significance of Hanuman the Monkey Chief
for Octavio Paz, or why Sam Beckett feels so bad? Sainte-Beuve, who once
discussed Michaud's fingernails in a long critical essay, thought he knew
everything, and yet missed the point of Baudelaire, Flaubert, Nerval, Balzac and
Stendhal. Polymathic Ezra Pound managed to miss the point of both Shakespeare
and Mussolini.  George Steiner still can't understand how Anthony Blunt could be
so right about Poussin and so wrong about the Soviet Union.

On the whole, it is safer to keep one's distance. Sometimes, the best critic is
a little boy, a bored child, a naif - because, more often than not, the literary
emperor is wearing somebody else's peek-a-boo designer jeans. Gurgle, shriek or
jeer as you please; the reviewer is a footnote. As the French waitress explained
to A.J.  Liebling, ''A chagrin of love never forgets itself. You must not make
bile about it.''

Meanwhile, at least one critic knows more and more and gets better and better at
writing it down. Susan Sontag had already finished reading Elias Canetti, in
German, before the rest of us, on the occasion of Mr. Canetti's Nobel Prize for
Literature, were asked to try to remember what it was we were supposed to think
about him. Miss Sontag's splendid essay, in ''Under the Sign of Saturn,'' fills
up the holes in our heads.

Whatever else he may be - solemn, bookish, ear-oriented, mythmongering,
grotesque-happy, death-obsessed, conversant with all that is Islamic and
Chinese, immune to ''the temptation of the left,'' witness to the age, ''hero of
the will,'' a character in two novels by Iris Murdoch, pessimist, moralist,
aphorist, misogynist - Mr. Canetti is not a Bulgarian.

That he was born in a Danube port city is of no consequence. His multilingual
father was Turkish, his difficult mother was Austrian and he grew up, a
Sephardic Jew, in Vienna. He left Middle Europe in 1938, for obvious reasons. He
has lived more than half his life in England. He persists in writing in German,
as if Hitler hadn't cannibalized all that high culture, that sleeping princess;
as if we needn't have waited around for Gunter Grass to disinfect the language.

Miss Sontag suggests, and respects, and sometimes smiles at his seriousness. He
is, she says, a stranger to irony, ''preoccupied with being someone he can
admire,'' seeking ''edifying standards of despair.'' This is hard, and may
account for the fact that he published nothing from 1935 (''Auto-da-Fe,'' his
first and only novel) until 1960 (''Crowds and Power''), although he confided
seriously to his notebook (''The Human Province,'' available in English from
Continuum/Seabury).

To my taste, not Miss Sontag's, ''Auto-da-Fe'' is, no doubt deliberately, a
claustrophobic enterprise, stuffing Spengler into a stocking the size of ''The
Blue Angel.'' Mr. Canetti had more ''lunatic novels'' in mind. After the
''bookman'' in ''Auto-da-Fe,'' there would be a religious fanatic, a collector,
a ''technological visionary.'' Additional forms of not-yet-novelized monomania
are to be found in ''Earwitness'' (1974): the Corpse-Skulker, the Fun Runner,
the Narrow-Smeller, the Misspeaker, the Woe Administrator.  If these books are
ever to be written, in whatever language, I hope Miss Sontag reads them for us.

''Crowds and Power'' - a critique of ''the religion of power,'' full of
''biomorphic paradigms'' - is more daunting. Imagine such a treatise, in which
Freud is reduced to a single footnote and Marx and Hegel (talk about your big
boys) aren't mentioned at all. The crowd, ''the irrational,'' is anterior to any
Primal Horde; it is ''recalled'' by such ''collective units'' as fire, rain, the
fingers of the hand, the bee swarm, teeth, the forest and the snakes of delirium
tremens; it conspires, like the French Revolution, at a ''poetics of political
nightmare.'' Mr. Canetti would abolish history altogether.

Clearly, this year's laureate is no Verner von Heidenstam, Karl Gjellerup,
Grazia Delledda, Frans Eemil Sillanpaa, Halldor Kiljan Laxness or Pearl Buck. We
make Fun-Running of the Nobel Prize for Literature because we don't know
anything about physics, chemistry, physiology, economics or peace. But this time
the gnomes of Stockholm, the Narrow-Smellers of the Swedish Academy, seem to
have done almost as much homework as the admirable Miss Sontag. It would be nice
if Mr. Canetti had a sense of humor - Nabokov had one, but died un-Prized; Mr.
Grass still knows how to laugh, and so does Mr.  Borges of Argentina - but he
is, being serious, a profound admirer of Goethe.

Goethe said: ''How dare a man have a sense of humor when he considers his
immense burden of responsibilities toward himself and others? However, I have no
wish to pass censure on the humorists.  After all, does one have to have a
conscience? Who says so?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert Stone

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 12, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 204 words


Arnold B. Dibble Dies at 65; Ex-Correspondent for U.P.I.

EL PASO, Tex., Nov. 11 (UPI) - Arnold B. Dibble, a retired United Press
International executive who reported on every continent except Antarctica in his
40-year career, died yesterday of an apparent heart attack. He was 65 years old.

Mr. Dibble, a native of Austin, Minn., attended Hamline University in 1935 and
1936 and the University of Missouri School of Journalism from 1936 to 1939. He
joined United Press in 1938 at Columbia, Mo., and worked in Jefferson City,
Kansas City, Fort Worth and Dallas.

In 1942, he went to New York and subsequently served as radio bureau manager,
night bureau manager and day bureau manager. He covered the Korean War later
worked in Tokyo, Manila and Hong Kong.

Mr. Dibble left the news service in the late 1950's and worked for Newsweek
magazine and in public relations. He returned to United Press International in
1966 as news editor for Asia, and directed the news agency's coverage of the
Vietnam War.

He returned to the United States in 1975 as Minnesota news editor, and retired
three years later.  Mr. Dibble is survived by his wife, Lee Dilworth Dibble; a
daughter, Susan, who lives in Japan, and a granddaughter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 339 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 13, 1981 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

IN PURSUIT OF THE HIJACKER WHO LEAPED TO FAME

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 727 words


TEN years ago this month, a young man calling himself D.B. Cooper, dressed in a
business suit, carrying a briefcase, wearing two parachutes and $200,000 richer
than when he boarded the plane, bailed out of a 727 jet cruising 10,000 feet
over the state of Washington. In this fashion ended one of the most successful
hijackings in airline history, and one of the nation's most unsuccessful
manhunts was begun. To this date no trace of the high-flying extortioner has
been found.

''The Pursuit of D.B. Cooper,'' which opens today at the Gemini 1 and other
theaters, is the fantasy of some needy movie makers about who D.B. Cooper really
was and what happened to him after he disappeared into the rugged Washington
timber country. Roger Spottiswoode, the English director, and Jeffrey Alan
Fiskin (''Cutter's Way''), who wrote the screenplay based on J.D. Reed's book
''Free Fall,'' do not have D.B. Cooper's luck, nor do they display even a tiny
bit of the imagination and ingenuity that went into his caper.

However, because they are aware that hijackings are not necessarily
thigh-slappingly hilarious, they've had the good sense to begin the movie at the
end of the holdup. Through one ruse and another, they have also coaxed a number
of excellent actors into performing what is a dismally unfunny chase-comedy that
eventually seems as aimless, shortsighted and cheerlessly cute as the character
they've made up and called ''D.B. Cooper.''

He turns out to be a supposedly adventure-loving, emotionally unreliable, former
Green Beret named J.R. Meade (Treat Williams), a fellow of such charm that he
can wander away for unexplained months and, after a few apologies, still be
welcomed home by hard-working Hannah (Kathryn Harrold), the beautiful, spunky
wife he regularly abandons. Much of the film takes place near scenic Jackson
Hole, Wyo., and points south as Meade and Hannah make their haphazard dash to
the Mexican border. In separate pursuits are Bill Gruen (Robert Duvall), the
airline-insurance investigator who, by chance, was Meade's instructor in the
Green Berets and recognizes his ''style,'' and a nutty veteran, Mason Remson
(Paul Gleason), who served with Meade in Vietnam.

There are two quite well-staged chase sequences, one down the white waters of a
raging mountain river, and another in which Meade, flying an ancient biplane,
turns the tables and pursues the insurance man, who is driving an old
automobile. Everything before, after and in-between is forced high spirits.

Because they are on the screen so much of the time and because their material is
so terminally thin, Mr. Duvall, Mr. Williams and Miss Harrold are far less at
ease and far less funny than the supporting players, who are able to get on and
off fast and don't have the responsibility of carrying the picture.

Chief among these players are Mr. Gleason, who is amusing as the consistently
incompetent slob who attempts to cut himself in on some of the D.B. Cooper loot;
R.G. Armstrong, as the casually larcenous owner of a desert service station, and
Dorothy Fielding, the beautiful New York television and stage actress, who makes
a brief but funny appearance as a terrified flight attendant aboard the plane
hijacked by D.B. Cooper.

''The Pursuit of D.B. Cooper,'' which has been rated PG (''Parental Guidance
Suggested''), contains some vulgar language and one nonerotic sexual sequence.

Forced Spirits

THE PURSUIT OF D.B. COOPER, directed by Roger Spottiswoode; screenplay by
Jeffrey Alan Fiskin, based on the book ''Free Fall'' by J.D. Reed; director of
photography, Preston Ames; edited by Allan Jacobs and Robbe Roberts; music by
James Horner and Waylon Jennings; produced by Daniel Wigutow and Michael Taylor;
released by Universal Pictures. At the Gemini 1, 64th Street and Second Avenue;
Cinerama 1, Broadway and West 47th Street; RKO 86th Street, at Lexington Avenue,
and other theaters. Running time: 100 minutes. This film is rated PG.

Gruen . . . . . Robert Duvall
Meade . . . . . Treat Williams
Hannah . . . . . Kathryn Harrold
Brigadier . . . . . Ed Flanders
Remson . . . . . Paul Gleason
Dempsey . . . . . R.G. Armstrong
Denise . . . . . Dorothy Fielding
Avery . . . . . Nicolas Coster
Homer . . . . . Cooper Huckabee
Howard K. Smith . . . . . Himself
Hippie . . . . . Christopher Curry
El Capitan . . . . . Ramon Chavez
Cowboy . . . . . Stacy Newton
Horse Lady . . . . . Pat Ast


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: photo of Treat Williams
 photo of Robert Duvall

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

The Cat's Still Out of the Bag

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 634 words


As melodrama, it has warmth, even poignance. Bright brash young David recklessly
spilled the big family secret so the President took him out to the woodshed and
gave him a proper whuppin'. Then, manfully, David apologized, thanked the
President for giving him a second chance and insisted he is still a true
believer. Thus proceeds ''the education of David Stockman.''

But do not be distracted by melodrama. There is a much grimmer lesson disclosed
by the publication of an article under that title in The Atlantic Monthly. The
cat, no matter how conscientiously Budget Director Stockman now tries to stuff
it back, is out of the bag. The article, whose ample quotations are undisputed,
adds up to a stunning confession:

The Reagan Administration's vaunted economic policy cannot work; the
Administration knows that; and yet the Administration keeps on flogging it as
just the medicine America needs.

The article thus reveals something even more troubling than the inadequacy of
the President's economic policy. It shows his willingness to pretend, to lead
the public on. Indeed, just days ago, Mr. Reagan himself was on television
pushing an economic program that his budget director knew was a failure as long
ago as last May.

''Our program has only been in effect for some 40 days, '' he said, ''and you
can't cure 40 years of problems in that short time.  We've laid a firm
foundation for economic recovery in 1982.''

That is not at all how the Administration approached economic policy ten months
ago. The history that Mr. Stockman gave to William Greider, week by week, is a
tale of brash and zealous hope quickly overwhelmed by political reality. The
experience leads Mr. Reagan to hang tough and pray, but it led Mr. Stockman to
desperation.

Eager to lead a revolt against the welfare state, Mr. Stockman suppressed the
doubts in his formidable mind and adopted the supplyside religion: reward the
industry of the rich, they will invest and all will prosper. As his
contribution, he composed a budget of welfare spending cuts and unexamined
defense increases, contending with Mr. Reagan that huge tax cuts would actually
increase revenues and thus eliminate the Federal deficits and inflation.

But by spring, he saw that it wouldn't work. He did not let on in Congress,
excusing the deception with a secret plan: to help the President cut tens of
billions from the Pentagon and fight at his side to limit the tax cutting. Mr.
Reagan, however, vetoed big military cuts. And to pass a ''Republican'' rather
than ''Democratic'' tax bill, he gave billions in bribes to a legion of special
interests.

Seeing the magnitude of this failure, Mr. Stockman tried one more attack, on
Social Security. The President agreed - proving that he, too, knew the
supply-side magic was failing. But a predictable political storm forced him to
drop the idea.

What then is left of Reaganomics? An unforseen recession and the prospect of
large deficits thereafter - deficits that will again drive up interest rates to
frustrate recovery. That is why Mr.  Stockman continues to plead for new taxes
in 1983 and 1984 and significant cuts at the Pentagon. The fact that he survives
his embarrassing truth-telling can only mean that the President, too, knows what
bitter confessions lie ahead.

It all brings to mind the way Lyndon Johnson pretended America could
simultaneously afford Vietnam guns and Great Society butter. It could not, and
the inflation that followed the pretense hurts the country still. The price of
Mr. Reagan's pretense remains to be seen. And so proceeds the education of the
American public.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOW THE WEATHERMAN FACTION WAS BORN

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 483 words


To the Editor:

As an observer at the June 1969 convention of Students for a Democratic Society,
during which the Weatherman faction was born, I would like to supplement Sheldon
Wolin's Nov. 3 Op-Ed piece with some historical background.§.D.S. broke with its
left-liberal parent organization, the League for Industrial Democracy, in
1965-66 largely over the issue of anti-Communism. S.D.S saw the anti-Communist
orientation of its liberal and democratic socialist sponsors as anti-democratic
rather than as a reasonable safeguard against authoritarian leftism. In June
1965, S.D.S. removed its non-Communist membership requirement and opened itself
to internal assault by such anti-democratic revolutionary groups as the
Progressive Labor Party.

As the Vietnam War and racial and intergenerational conflicts of the late 60's
worsened, extreme notions on the nature of American society and the need for
violent revolution began to make sense. The ready explanations of P.L.P and
others schooled in Marxist-Leninist phraseology hit home dramatically amid an
increasingly paranoid and isolated cultural universe which student radicals
inhabited.

Yet P.L.P. was a disciplined Stalinist Communist party, which attacked the
radical youth culture for its libertarian uses of drugs and sex and launched a
Worker-Student Alliance faction within S.D.S., named for P.L.P.'s classical
Marxist goal of organizing the industrial proletariat. By June 1969, this new
faction had mobilized the strength to oust the S.D.S. ''national office'' at the
convention.

With anti-Communism anathema in new-left circles, S.D.S.'s oldguard leadership
could resist P.L.P. only by outmaneuvering it from the ''left.'' What could be
more radical, after all, than ''revolutionary violence''?

It is from the document ''you don't need a weatherman to know which way the wind
blows '' (sic), published by national office partisans in the 1969 convention
issue of ''New Left Notes,'' that the term ''Weatherman'' originates. In
envisioning support by a ''revolutionary youth movement'' for an escalating
armed struggle for black liberation (as part of a movement by third-world
peoples to overthrow U.S. imperialism), this Weatherman manifesto directly
challenged P.L.P.'s more orthodox working-class strategy.

When it became apparent, however, the P.L.P. had the votes to dominate the
convention, the national office faction dramatically exited the convention hall
amid chants and counterchants and upraised fists to deliberate in an adjoining
chamber and entrap itself within the logic of its rhetoric.  RALPH SELIGER New
York, Nov. 4, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 13, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
CHASTENED TEAM PLAYER

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 17, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 971 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 12


For the first time in a year of virtuoso performances, David A. Stockman was on
the defensive.  Contrite and visibly shaken, the director of the Office of
Management and Budget appeared before the television cameras in the White House
briefing room to say that President Reagan had offered him a ''second chance''
and that he was gratefully accepting it. He would stay on in his $70,900-a-year
job because the President wanted him ''on the team.''

Until this week, Mr. Stockman, 35 years old, had been the enfant terrible of
''the team,'' and possibly its most valuable player.  In six years as a
Congressional aide and four years as a Republican Representative from Michigan,
Mr. Stockman had been learning about the Federal Government and Congress - how
the money was spent, which members voted for which programs, who lobbied those
who voted, which members could be budged, or bought, with Presidential favors.

Zealous and Energetic

In the House cloak rooms, Democratic and Republican, and among the aggressive
lawyers and economists who run the committees and subcommittees, David Stockman
was, and is now, known as zealous, energetic, articulate, witty and, when he
wanted to be, personally engaging.

David Alan Stockman, one of five children, grew up in rural Michigan, on a farm
near St. Joseph, where his parents still live.  He majored in history at
Michigan State University, studied theology for a while at Harvard, then
switched to politics.

The milestones of his early years seem to be those of a traditionalist. He
played football in high school, was a member of Future Farmers of America,
participated in the Methodist student organization at East Lansing. He was a
leader of the anti-Vietnam War movement as an undergraduate. At Harvard, he
studied social sciences with Nathan Glazer, Daniel Patrick Moynihan and James Q.
Wilson, all erstwhile liberals who have drifted to the right.

In 1970, Mr. Stockman joined the staff of Representative John B.  Anderson,
Republican of Illinois. Two years later, he became executive director of the
House Republican Conference. In 1976, he was elected to the House from
Michigan's Fourth District, and was reelected in 1978 and 1980.

In those 10 years on the House side of Capitol Hill, Mr. Stockman accumulated a
nearly encyclopedic knowledge of government. That, and his apparent passion for
the themes that President-elect Ronald Reagan had been espousing, made him, at
age 34, a seemingly irresistible candidate for the budget job. Nor did it hurt
that his fellow House Republican, Jack F. Kemp of upstate New York, the author
of the supply-side tax cut Mr. Reagan had embraced, supported him.

And so, five weeks into the Carter-Reagan transition, Mr. Stockman was chosen to
be budget director for a President who was committed to a set of goals many
considered contradictory - to cut taxes deeply over three years, add tens of
billions of dollars to annual military spending and, by 1984, produce the first
balanced Federal budget since 1969.

Emerged as a Force

Within weeks, Mr. Stockman emerged as a force to be reckoned with.  While
newcomers to Government, like Treasury Secretary Donald T.  Regan, were learning
the ropes, Mr. Stockman was smoothly articulating policy.

By spring, Mr. Stockman was managing the Administration's campaign for a tough
budget resolution for 1982, negotiating with the conservative House Democrats
whose votes Mr. Reagan had to have. The President and the seemingly tireless
budget director went from success to success -from winning the first budget
resolution to an equally stunning victory on the more difficult budget
reconciliation act, in which Congress voted to scale back programs politically
dear to many members.

Meanwhile, Mr. Stockman was beginning to campaign backstage for changes in the
Administration's program. In the spring, worried about high interest rates and a
seeming lack of bond market confidence in the Administration, he advocated a
smaller and later tax cut for 1981 - a position the President adopted.

No sooner had Mr. Reagan signed the three-year tax cut in August than Mr.
Stockman began signaling that unacceptably large budget deficits lay ahead. He
had not, according to Administration insiders, opposed the bill as too big. That
would have conflicted squarely with the President's unmistakable desire to beat
the Democrats and put on the books a three-stage, across-the-board tax cut.

To hold down the budget, Mr. Stockman engaged in a bruising conflict to trim the
rise of military spending.  Through all of this, Mr. Stockman was giving to a
journalist a series of interviews for delayed publication in The Atlantic
Monthly. The interviews, as presented in the December issue of Atlantic,
disclose in pungent detail Mr. Stockman's private doubts about his own budget
numbers and about the ability of the Administration to balance the budget while
cutting taxes.

Those doubts, plus a suggestion in the article, denied by Mr.  Stockman today,
that the President as well as the budget director did not fully believe what was
being said by the Administration about its economic program, forced Mr. Stockman
to offer to resign.

The President, for his own reasons, decided to keep his young budget director.
Mr. Stockman's mastery of the budget and the complex budgeting process surely
was one reason. Within the next 50 days, Mr. Stockman must put together the
President's budget for the fiscal year 1983, to be submitted to Congress in
January.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of David Stockman

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

IN ITALY, THE BOMB'S A POLITICAL ISSUE FOR FIRST TIME

BYLINE: By HENRY TANNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words

DATELINE: ROME, Nov. 13


In all, perhaps a half-million demonstrators have marched this fall in Rome,
Milan, Venice and many smaller cities against the stationing of nuclear weapons
in Italy.

The dimension and nature of the marches came as a surprise to the political
parties that normally direct and control every facet of Italy's political life.

The parties found themselves bypassed and overtaken by an amorphous coming
together of antiwar activists, opponents of nuclear weapons, ecologists,
feminists, conscientious objectors, religious groups, youth organizations and
leftists with conflicting political affiliations.

This was something new on the Italian political scene - a mass expression of
genuine pacifism that seemed to be different from the anti-Americanism of the
protests during the Vietnam War and cold war.

A Tradition in Northern Europe

This kind of disarmament movement has been a tradition in northern Europe, but
not in Italy, where nuclear arms have not been a serious political issue, at
least until now.

There was no public outcry two years ago, when Italy and West Germany became the
only countries on the European continent to accept the deployment of new
American nuclear weapons on their soil.

Last August there was almost no immediate protest when the Italian Government
publicly named the site where these weapons would be installed.

The politicians had no reason to expect a vast outpouring of opposition, and it
seemed safe for them to stay away from the demonstrations. Not a single leading
national figure in the established political parties and the labor unions was
identified among the marchers in Rome.

'Now We Have Reagan'

There is no simple explanation for the switch in public mood. The Rev. Gianni
Novelli, one of the few Roman Catholic priests among the march organizers, was
asked in an interview why the protests were taking place now instead of two
years ago. ''Two years ago we had Carter,'' he said. ''Now we have Reagan.''

Many Italians complain about the Reagan Administration's preoccupation with
military matters, decision to go ahead with the neutron bomb, blunt warnings to
the Russians and contradictory statements on the possible use of nuclear weapons
in Europe. They see such policies as ''nuclear saber rattling,'' and cite them
as the main reason for the sudden rise here in support for disarmament.

''These feelings had been there all along, in search of a target,'' a Western
European diplomat explained. ''Reagan provided the target.''

Italian officials now concede that it was a mistake to name Comiso, near the
southeastern corner of Sicily, as the site where the 112 new NATO cruise
missiles would be installed.

'Fire Under the Ashes'

The announcement was made in early August, for no obvious reason.  The timing
was unfortunate because it came just after the American decision to go ahead
with the neutron bomb.

Although there was no immediate public reaction, that moment is now being
pinpointed by the militants as the beginning of a steady, at first
imperceptible, increase in sentiment against nuclear weapons.  Elisabetta Ramat,
one of the organizers of the marches, said that feeling ''was burning like fire
under the ashes.''

According to Father Novelli, many Italians became alarmed by the threat of
nuclear war when American planes from the aircraft carrier Nimitz, whose home
port is Naples, shot down two Libyan jets ''only a few miles from Italy.''

''Now, Italy is in the front line of NATO, and in people's minds it has become a
vulnerable first target to attack,'' Father Novelli said.

U.S. 'Propaganda' Assailed

He said Italians resented ''the drum fire of American propaganda which tells us
that Libya is the enemy just as Fascist propaganda used to tell us that England
was the enemy.'' He said the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, ''may be
crazy, but the Libyan threat to Italy has been artificially dramatized.''

The protests have been directed mostly against North Atlantic Treaty
Organization nuclear weapons, since those are the ones to be installed in Italy.
However, some of the leaders went out of their way to state their concern about
the Soviet role in the arms race.

''Those who want peace do not take sides,'' said Pietro Folena, a protest
organizer and member of the Youth Movement of the Communist Party.

He said in a newspaper interview that if Italians ''were directly involved in
Poland we would be more anti-Soviet.'' ''But here we have NATO and its
missiles,'' he added. ''It's natural that we shout against the Pershings but it
does not mean that we have forgotten the SS-20.''

The Case of the Soviet Submarine

The case of the Soviet submarine in Swedish waters got ample coverage in the
Italian press, but did not make much impact. Many Italians regarded it as a
farce involving bungling Russians.

The marches were the first big public demonstrations in Italy since 1977 and
early 1978, when left-wing students regularly clashed with the police in a haze
of tear gas, concussion grenades and sometimes gunfire.

It is still uncertain whether the new outpouring of popular feeling will soon be
forgotten or whether the organizers can fashion a permanent movement out of the
marches and meetings.

The organizers concede that they have been inspired by the disarmament movements
in northern Europe. Gianni Squitieri, one of the founders of the Italian
National Peace Committee, said the idea for the group arose when a small number
of Italian disarmament activists met for the first time last spring at a march
in Brussels.

Italian Activists Unite

''We started talking to each other and we said that it was absurd that we should
be meeting in Brussels and that there should be an organized peace movement in
northern Europe but not in Italy,'' Mr.  Squitieri said. ''We kept in touch when
we got home.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of sign displayed calling for peace

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 14, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VOICE OF AMERICA ANNOUNCERS MAY GET MORE CHOICE IN NEWS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1154 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 13


The director of the Voice of America has told his staff that he is considering
allowing the network's foreignlanguage broadcasters more leeway in selecting and
interpreting the news provided them by the agency's central news division.

Such a course would reverse a longstanding rule that prohibits broadcasters in
the Voice of America's 38 foreign-language sections, many of whom are emigres or
refugees with strong adversary attitudes toward the countries they fled, from
altering or substituting news items. Voice of America employees say that Eastern
European exiles have been among the most vigorous in arguing that their
broadcasts should be allowed to reflect strong anti-Communist feelings.

At a news conference this afternoon, James B. Conkling, the recently appointed
director of the Voice of America, said that while he was not planning to give
''free rein'' to the foreign-language services, he did believe that ''the
foreigners, the people we have in the foreign services, very often know what
their people on the other end know better perhaps than the English-language
people who give them the news.''

Longstanding Internal Dispute

The Voice of America has been embroiled for several months in an internal
dispute over what many journalists within the organization see as a move toward
propaganda and away from the hard-won right to resist pressures from any
Administration in power, a right finally supported in a 1976 charter requiring
the Voice of America to broadcast ''accurate, objective and comprehensive''
news.

Several top officials have been replaced by Mr. Conkling, a former
entertainment-industry businessman appointed this year by President Reagan. One
of the officials who was replaced, M. William Haratunian, the deputy director,
has circulated a farewell memorandum to the senior staff saying that there was
''severe apprehension'' among professionals in the organization.

''It is my concern,'' Mr. Haratunian said in the memorandum, ''that the absence
of mutual trust between political appointees and professional broadcasters has
created an adverse atmosphere at VOA.  This risks damaging VOA's credibility,
and therefore its ability to serve as a truly national voice of our country.''

In a meeting with Voice of America employees Tuesday, Mr. Conkling said he was
in the process of ''realigning'' the organization. As an example, Mr. Conkling
said he was looking into ''a certain relaxation, or enhancement, of the
foreign-speaking activities, so that they may have a little more freedom to
reach the people they understand in selecting the items they want to talk with
them about and in 'transculturizing' the way they talk with them.''

'It Won't Be Overnight'

''I think this may be an avenue we'll go toward,'' Mr. Conkling said, adding:
''It won't be overnight, and it won't be the huge, whole job at one moment. But
it is an area in which we are thinking which I believe we will probably
pursue.''

At the meeting, Mr. Conkling introduced two new staff members, Terrence F.
Catherman, a career Foreign Service information officer who will replace Mr.
Haratunian, and Charles E. Courtney, another career officer who will occupy the
newly created post of deputy director for policy and programs. Mr. Conkling said
that Mr.  Courtney's role would be to ''judiciously apply the policy that
obviously goes with our program.''

Mr. Conkling did not tell the staff that Philip Nicolaides had been appointed
deputy program director for commentary and news analysis.  Mr. Nicolaides, a
former Houston radio commentator and writer for conservative publications such
as Conservative Digest and Human Events, had been on the public affairs staff of
the United States International Communication Agency, the parent organization of
the Voice of America.

Propaganda Function Cited

Mr. Nicolaides was the author of a Sept. 21 memorandum to Mr.  Conkling in which
he argued that the Voice of America needed to restore its propaganda function
after what he called the previous Administration's ''tendency toward mush.'' In
the 10-page memorandum, Mr. Nicolaides wrote:

''We must strive to 'destabilize' the Soviet Union and its satellites by
promoting disaffection between peoples and rulers, underscoring the likes and
denials of rights, inefficient management of the economy, suppression of
cultural diversity, religious persecution, etc.''

Among other comments, Mr. Nicolaides suggested that the Easternbloc nations were
''starved for religious information'' because ''only about 45 original minutes
of weekly programming to the U.S.S.R. is religious in nature and content - and a
lopsided onethird of that is Jewish!''

Mr. Nicolaides concluded his memorandum with these words: ''And when we finally
get to the point that the only criticism of the VOA is howling from the Kremlin,
antiphonal ululation from the U.S. hard left and even greater efforts at Soviet
jamming, we can crack open the Champagne.''

Today, Voice of America employees were circulating a petition asking Mr.
Conkling to dissociate himself from Mr. Nicolaide's views and cancel his
appointment. Mr. Conkling called a staff meeting this afternoon to answer
questions.

'Any Ideas He Wants'

After the staff meeting, Mr. Conkling met with reporters and defended his choice
of Mr. Nicolaides, saying that ''he can have any ideas he wants short of being
Hitler.'' Mr. Conkling said he expected all his employees to leave their
politics at home.

Clyde G. Hess, a public relations consultant who was chief of the news and
current affairs division of the Voice of America when he retired from the
organization in 1973 after nearly 20 years' service, said in an interview today
that the organization had spent two decades overcoming the image it had during
the McCarthy era in the 1950's.

By the mid-1970's, Mr. Hess said, the Voice of America had survived the intense
pressure of the Nixon Administration to have news of the Watergate scandal
played down or suppressed. ''We became more objective than the BBC,'' Mr. Hess
said of the British Broadcasting Corporation. ''Covering Vietnam was difficult
for us.  The BBC, meanwhile, had its own Vietnam - Northern Ireland. They never
matched in fairness, objectivity, fullness or scope our coverage of Vietnam.''

''When you go strident, when you go decibel, you turn the audiences off,'' Mr.
Hess said. ''You lose your credibility. It can take as long as a generation to
rebuild that credibility and trust once it is lost.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW CHURCH GROUP ASSAILS SUPPORT FOR LEFT

BYLINE: By CHARLES AUSTIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 46, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


A new organization of theologians and church leaders has charged that Christian
activists in the United States ignore the benefits of democracy in favor of
social revolution that leans to the left.

Leaders of the organization, the Washington-based Institute for Religion and
Democracy, say they hope to ''raise the level of the dialogue in our churches
about democratic values'' at a time when the debate over the relationships
between religion and politics is being hotly disputed nationally and
internationally.

A Lutheran theologian who addressed a news conference at Freedom House, 20 West
40th Street, last Monday charged that American religious leaders had become
''indifferent to the meaning of democracy.''

The theologian, the Rev. Richard John Neuhaus, senior fellow at the Council on
Religion in International Affairs in New York, said the new institute's
criticism of American religion was ''not an attack, but an invitation for the
churches to consider the Christian stake in and warrant for democracy.'' Pastor
Neuhaus was the chief author of the group's 11-page policy statement.

The statement has the support of the institute's six-member executive committee,
which includes Ed Robb, a United Methodist evangelist, and Michael Novak of the
American Enterprise Institute.  An advisory board includes members of the clergy
and laity from several Protestant denominations and the Roman Catholic Church,
some of them well-known conservatives.

The institute's policy statement said that leaders of American churches become
''apologists for oppression'' when they support left-wing causes at the expense
of democratic reform.

In the last three decades, American churches have frequently been accused of a
leftist bias by conservative Christian individuals and groups. The World Council
of Churches and Catholic advocates of social revolution in third-world countries
have also been criticized by conservatives for their alliance with radical
movements in Latin America and Africa.

Portions of the institute's policy statement echo these criticisms, and the
document partly reflects the concerns of the new right-wing religious groups.
But Mr. Robb, who heads the institute's executive committee, and Pastor Neuhaus
disassociated the organization from the Moral Majority political action group.

''The Moral Majority is too close to the Reagan Administration,'' Mr. Robb said.
''We do not believe that Americanism is the Kingdom of God.'' He said the
institute would not engage in partisan politics.

The policy statement added, ''God has given us no one pattern for the ordering
of societies or of the world.'' Nonetheless, the statement asserted that
Christians should be anti-Communist.

Mr. Robb said that American church leaders practiced a ''double standard'' when
they were critical of rightist regimes in Chile, South Korea or South Africa,
and were silent on human rights violations in Cuba, Vietnam or Zimbabwe. Major
Christian churches have not given enough attention to those imprisoned for their
faith in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, he added.

Members of the institute's executive committee include the Rev.  Ira Galloway, a
Methodist clergyman from Peoria, Ill., and David Jessup, a Methodist layman who
has criticized his church's involvement with liberation movements in Latin
America and Africa.

A study of the institute sponsored by the United Methodist Church and the United
Church of Christ contends that the new organization is a ''special project of
the Coalition for a Democratic Majority,'' a group of neo-conservative Democrats
formed in 1972. Several of the institute's board members are aligned with the
coalition, Mr. Robb said, but he added that the new group was a ''fully
independent organization.''

Mr. Robb asserted that the institute had already received support from people in
the ''mainline churches.'' He said that money for the first year of the
organization's activity had come from the Smith-Richardson Foundation and the
Scaith Foundation, both prominent backers of conservative causes, and from
individual contributors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Dance View;
DANCE HISTORY IN ITS CULTURAL CONTEXT

BYLINE: By Anna Kisselgoff

SECTION: Section 2; Page 12, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1615 words


Because dance is regarded so traditionally as an art of the fleeting moment,
there is a strong tendency to look at even its history in isolation. In the
theater, dance's antecedents seem less important than the actual live
performance in front of us and how it affects us at the time. Viewing a
manifestation of an art form bereft of context seems more common to dance than
to the other arts. A viewer who is startled by an industrial-style metallic
abstract sculpture suddenly plunked down in his village square, is startled
precisely because he has a prior reference frame - the statue in honor of the
Civil War dead or the neo-classic draped nude in the local squire's garden. A
dance viewer, on the other hand is usually seized by the immediate impact and
worries less about what came before.

Perhaps then it is not so curious that so many books on the history of dance are
written outside history proper. They analyze one dance work after another in
chronological order or at best, chronicle one esthetic trend in dance after
another on the basis of these individual productions. Little attention is
generally given to the cultural context that gave rise to these forms of dance
or even to the contributions dance forms made toward shaping the overall
esthetic in the arts of a set period.

In Walter Sorell's highly ambitious and all-encompassing new book, ''Dance in
its Time,'' (Anchor Press/ Doubleday, $19.95), we have quite the reverse.
''Dance In Its Time'' is nearly all context. There is little examination of
specific dance works and there is a wideranging discussion of literary, artistic
and socio-political background that occasionally even seems to have little
direct connection with dance. In many ways, the book, sub-titled ''The Emergence
of An Art Form,'' is a general cultural history from the special viewpoint of a
senior American critic, himself a playwright and painter. It is exactly the
work-by-work analysis that Mr. Sorell has sought to avoid just as he has
deliberately managed, amazingly, to elude extended discussion of most
personalities - star dancers and choreographers - whose names seem to constitute
dance's selfcontained history.

In place of a detailed essay on Marius Petipa, for example, there is a word
picture of the atmosphere in which this Frenchman worked in Russia. The focus is
on the upper class balletomania that influenced the policies and tastes to which
Petipa adhered.

It was Mr. Sorell's aim to write ''the story of dance in the context of its
environment'' because ''to understand the essence of the dance, we ought to know
both the simultaneous creations in other fields of artistic activity and the
totality of human experience of the era.'' ''Dance In Its Time'' is then a
welcome antidote to more fragmentary studies in the dance field and a rich
supplement to the general dance surveys that are worthwhile on other grounds.

Mr. Sorell is not the only writer to attempt to place dance's development within
a general historical framework. But even Lincoln Kirstein, in his brilliant
early ''Dance'' and in his 10-year-old ''Movement and Metaphor'' put the dance
work at the core of his analysis and surrounded it with context. Mr. Sorell
comes up with context - for instance, a capsule history of the Renaissance -and
plants the dance subject in the middle.

This wide ranging approach is highly stimulating and not without its
controversial aspects. Inevitably, Mr. Sorell has had to synthesize a great deal
of material that is treated separately by specialist historians. The charge from
them may not be popularization - the standard of writing is rigorous - but
possibly a personalized interpretation that deflects from the author's own
scholarly approach.

Yet this is what makes ''Dance In Its Time'' so worth reading. Mr.  Sorell has
researched an enormous amount and this is the first dancerelated book to bring
so many threads together. There are admittedly passages where the dance focus
appears to be lost in the general survey. But then there is always Mr. Sorell to
surprise us by making a series of unexpected connections.

There is, for example, his idea that the Italian ballroom dances - the precursor
of ballet - arose out of the lack of direct communication among people on a
verbal level. In the Middle Ages, ''the vocabulary was small and crudely
rudimentary.'' Expressive language, through allegory, became important. Mr.
Sorell notes that people in the Renaissance loved to express themselves in
metaphor and the new court dancing must be seen in this frame of mind. The bows
and gestures of the dancing couples were ''metaphors in which they spoke to each
other without voicing a word. The ambience of romantic love hovered around them,
and the approach to dance was still based on the tenets of chivalry.''

It is one of Mr. Sorell's themes that dancing, even when transferred to the
stage, remained perniciously long in the hands of such aristocratic dilettantes.
The result was that dance was considered a light entertainment and therefore
lagged behind music, literature and painting in defining its own principles as
art. ''The reason for this slow development of dance as an art form based on
esthetic principles is that it had been in the hands of the aristocratic
dilettantes for too long.''

It is not surprising that the arrival on the scene of the 18thcentury reformer,
Jean-Georges Noverre, meets with the author's approval. Noverre was a
professional choreographer, with the urge to analyze and dissect, in tune with
an age of reason where ''the artist would call himself to account for what he
was doing and why.''

This bias in favor of Noverre, who promulgated emotional expression, contrasts
with Mr. Sorell's view of Petipa. ''Petipa's work, seen in its totality, was
flawed by his idolization of the ballerina and his meticulous formalism
...Destiny charged Petipa to summarize the accomplishments of the 19th-century
theater dance in a few strokes of genius and, at the same time, to bury it in
his own greatness.'' Such contrasts tell us something of the cultural context
from which Mr. Sorell himself writes.

Formalism is uncongenial to him. Expressionism as a style is dear to him, and
self-expression is an approving term in his book. His heart is with the
modern-dance pioneers, his intellect is with the Romantics. Interestingly, he
appears to see the modern-dance revolution in Germany and the United States as a
neo-Romantic phenomenon. His own familiarity with German and Austrian currents
in literature, drama and art makes his chapters on 19th-century Romanticism the
richest in the book.

As often happens with writers with strong feelings, he is wonderful when
describing what he likes least. One doesn't have to agree with his condemnation
of the experiments of the 1960's (I don't) to recognize a brilliant statement
from a special perspective.

By way of introduction here, he offers an essay on the impact of television and
film on our culture. Proust and Joyce ''envisaged a new space-time
relationship'' comparable to cinema techniques. Or, he asks, did film
technologically translate the esthetic of such writers, who reflected their
time?

Dance, he suggests, has not accomodated itself to film yet. Dance becomes a
second-hand exprience because we do not see the dancer, only the camera seeing
the dancer. Oddly, he is unaware of recent video experiments that are not mere
translations. In an interesting out-of-date remark, he writes: ''So mechanized
is our era that dances created for the stage are transplanted to film without
hesitation. No one would transpose a ballet choreographed for film or video onto
the stage.'' No one, that is, but Merce Cunningham, who has recently created
dances for video and film and then reproduced the choreography onstage.

Mr. Cunningham and Alwin Nikolais are the watershed in Mr. Sorell's view. Even
given his Expressionist bias, it is startling to see him place them in his ''Age
of Anxiety'' chapter. Yet this is a brilliant insight. We are so attuned to the
formalism and abstraction dominating the work of both choreographers - the crux
of their radicalism - that we forget they emerged in the 1950's. Here again, Mr.
Sorell makes an illuminating connection. The year 1952 is a ''pivotal point'':
The year of Samuel Beckett's ''Waiting for Godot'' and the year of John Cage's
first ''Happening,'' with Merce Cunningham, at Black Mountain College. Mr.
Cunningham's ventures into a ''meaningful world without conventional meaning''
was not so remote from Mr. Beckett ''the most accomplished form-smasher of the
time.''

''The Roaring Twenties in their Sixties'' is how Mr. Sorell describes the
avant-garde activities of the 1960's. It is all neo-Dada to him. ''It was called
new dance or new theater because it was neither.'' The ''heightened nonart''
coinciding with the Vietnam War had its antecedents in the post-World War I
period for him and inevitably reached a dead end. A lull unquestionably moved
into the 1970's and Mr. Sorell characterizes the dance experiments of the past
decade in terms of ''glamour of superficiality and of a vitality going
nowhere.'' Fighting words and food for thought.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE GERMAN MALAISE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 40, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5594 words


John Vinocur is chief of The New York Times bureau in Bonn.
By John Vinocur

There is no night, now, when television doesn't bring this message: too many
burdens, too many risks; all the tensions, all the demands, all the threats -
the Germans as victims. Some nights it is crass, others just insinuated or
interspersed between a contralto in pink tulle and an installment of ''Dallas,''
dubbed into German, in which J.R. sounds like a parking-lot attendant from
Schweinfurt. But by 11 P.M., after all the discussion programs, the
current-affairs round tables and the four major news shows, it has made its
appearance, this sense of trouble, of dissatisfaction, of fatigue.

Judge the United States this way, by its television, and the country, on the bad
nights, can come off lobotomized, an enormous, silly grin. Judge West Germany in
the fall of 1981 by the same standard, and it seems agonized, enormously
irritable, disoriented.  More than anything else, it seems fragile. Over the
last few months, something has shaken loose in the country that for so long
seemed to be the United States' sturdiest, most eager ally. It is in the
streets: in the tone of the speakers at rallies who, announcing themselves as
German patriots, demand an end to the ''master-slave'' relationship with the
Americans, and in the marches and demonstrations railing against current plans
for NATO missiles or the neutron bomb. (For a discussion of the neutron bomb,
see page 46.) It is in the polls: in the charts showing that more young people
favor an attempt at achieving neutrality than favor continuing a military
alliance with the United States. It is in the new outbreak of terrorism: in the
attacks that most people thought had ended for good in 1977, this time with
''colonialist'' American military personnel as prime targets. It is in the
wounded economy: in the figures that show not only that West Germany is in
recession, but that unemployment will worsen next year and that the days of
almost reflex economic stability are gone.

These elements have created a malaise, a vacuum of frustration and anger that is
best understood in relation to what the West Germans have come to believe about
themselves. During the 1970's, they had been told that detente was irreversible,
that West Germany's strength would grow until it could choose to let the
disputes of the superpowers pass over its head; Europe, they were informed, was
slowly moving to a point where, in a few decades, the results of World War II
wouldn't matter any more. The future, inevitably, would be what the preamble of
the West German constitution demands: the reunification of the Germans. Today,
in light of Poland and Afghanistan, this dialectic looks like extraordinary
wishful thinking. But the reaction of a significant part of the population is
less a willingness to deal with new realities, which don't provide much room for
West Germany's special desires, and more a furious embrace of the illusions -
or, at least, the serious miscalculations - of the last 10 years.

It is no secret that the country's appearance of drift, the tones of neutralism
and the new, left-wing nationalism have upset the United States - and upset just
as much those European friends, such as Italy or France, who count on West
German steadfastness as a basic element of their national security. It is an
extraordinary mark of the times when officials of the Socialist Government of
President Francois Mitterrand can contend in conversations with reporters that
France is Washington's most reliable European partner in the East-West
confrontation. This sense of West German flux and vulnerability will provide the
atmosphere for talks beginning in Bonn Nov. 22 between President Leonid I.
Brezhnev of the Soviet Union and Chancellor Helmut Schmidt. When the men met
last, in the summer of 1980, Mr. Schmidt was at the apex of his career, a
statesman talking about West Germany's growing leadership role in the world. Now
he is a symbol of his country's brittleness, a 62-year-old politician who has
just been fitted with a pacemaker. And Mr. Schmidt, who still represents
pragmatism and a pro-Western orientation in the country, will be dealing with a
Soviet leader who wants to reach the growing segment of the population that is
redefining the nation's burdens and risks so that they are blamed on the United
States and its plans - rather than on the Soviet Union with its threats to its
neighbors, its occupation troops in the nonaligned world, its missiles.

A year ago, most of this was barely at the surface. It is difficult for the
Chancellor himself to explain how things got this way - his responsibility is
too clearly involved - but he is described by a confidant as feeling that the
country's mood, sour and Angst-ridden, comes in part from an insufficient
exercise of authority on all levels. In private, according to one of his
confidants, Mr. Schmidt brushes close to contempt for some of his countrymen:
there are a lot of people in West Germany, he says, who lack courage.

The Chancellor's confidant uses a harsher word: defeatism. He thrusts it at the
young intellectuals, the people who call the demonstrations, write most of the
television shows and magazine articles, sign the petitions that blame the United
States for the world's tensions and want ''an alternative security policy'' -
the current code phrase for some kind of basic change in West Germany's place in
the East-West balance of power. An old co-worker of Mr.  Schmidt insists that
such name calling is a waste of time. He thinks there is no more ''libido''
involved in the relationship between Mr.  Schmidt and the electorate: the
country and its leadership, he says, are in transition, but everybody has
different and vague ideas of where it will all end up.

A fairly clear direction is evident. It emerges during a few days of watching
television and reading the press. Two constant undertones have developed: One
suggests an almost conspiratorial plot against the Germans; the other stresses
that all the decisions are out of their hands. A former United States admiral
named Gene R. LaRocque (no one mentions that he is retired) appears on the
screen two nights in a row to report that the United States would prefer to
fight World War III in Europe, which is understood to mean Germany. Another show
produces a recently retired and virtually unknown Bundeswehr general named
Gunter Vollmer, who announces that NATO troops are basically equipped for
forward movement, a suggestion that they are really attack units rather than
defensive armies. The sense of victimization is not just military and not even
wholly tied to the United States: a prime-time segment is given over to the
country's ''struggle'' to protect itself against the use of dangerous pesticides
in the fruits and vegetables it imports. An astrologer, a tall former showgirl,
asserts the same night that the world could likely meet disaster in 1982. The
leading newsweekly's cover story is a fictional scenario of a nuclear holocaust.
Hundreds of young people, squatters occupying houses in West Berlin, go into
their 11th month of battles with the police. The morning's newspaper reports
that people opposed to the Frankfurt Airport Authority's building a new runway
through a wooded area think the plan is a NATO-United States plot. The mood is
captured in a remarkable admonition - the vocabulary could have come out of a
Hitler-era time capsule - tacked to a tree in the controversial woods: ''Tremble
before this tree. It was holy to your forefathers. Doing anything against the
tree is a sign of an inferior people and base individual morality.''

Under the circumstances, it is impossible to please. There is a television
special about the United States Armed Forces called ''How Reliable Are the
Americans?'' It offers a no-win conclusion: they are over-armed in the strategic
area, which increases risks of war; they are lacking in conventional forces, an
army of drug users and incompetents, which cannot provide the on-the-ground
protection the Germans demand. Another cover story portrays Ronald Reagan's
America as moronic and totally unjust, a country conceived for the rich whose
President ''is leading his people into the 19th century.'' By the beginning of
November, the tone on West German television was such that Michel Meyer, a
French television correspondent writing a report for the Aspen Institute of
Berlin, said that in seven weeks of watching, ''I didn't see a single program
that was either friendly or clearly positive about the United States.''

The strong emotions have prevented a precision of purpose, a clear definition of
what is taking place in West Germany and of what is wanted - other than fewer
burdens, fewer risks. It is not the ''Dutch Disease,'' the tag given to recent
pacifistic trends in Western Europe, because the elements are so specifically
German; Germany does not catch spiritual colds from the Netherlands. It is
perhaps more a crisis of national identity - a reality crisis, really - because
it expresses fear and anger about the
nation's being locked into facts: its loss of unity and of total independence as
a result of World War II.

The dissatisfaction has become fashion. A petition called the Krefeld Appeal,
sponsored by left-wing organizations, including the Communist Party, judges the
United States to be the sole cause of global insecurity and refers to the
''growing discussion of alternative security arrangements.'' It has been signed
by more than 1.5 million people. They are not just kids wearing Palestinian
scarves, but the fashionable, the trendmakers. The list includes Heinrich Boll,
the Nobel literature laureate; Hanna Schygulla, the actress, and Udo Lindenberg
and Marius Muller-Westernhagen, West Germany's most inventive rock-and-roll
singers.

For all the discontent, there are those like Manfred Rom-mel, Mayor of Stuttgart
and the son of the general, who maintains that most West Germans don't echo the
television shows or the Krefeld Appeal.  His reputation as a totally independent
politician - too liberal for his own party, the Christian Democrats; too
undoctrinaire, too frankly pro-Western for many Social Democrats - gives weight
to his assertion: ''Deep in our heads, in the middle of the night, we know
what's real, what's wishful thinking and what's scare talk.'' The Germans, he
feels, have always had a need to savor potential calamity.

Some recent polls have suggested that the Christian Democratic opposition, often
seen as a clearly pro-American, pro-NATO alternative to Mr. Schmidt's Social
Democrats, would take power if a vote were held today. But the party hardly
seems a cure-all. It is undergoing a leadership battle and a struggle with its
own philosophy that shows it to be more influenced by the mood of the country
than capable or desirous of changing it.

Other public opinion polls present an even more complicated, more unsettled
picture.

An extensive sounding this summer by the Allensbach Institute, one of the
leading testers of public opinion, found that more than 70 percent of the
population views the next 10 years with fear or skepticism. In barely two years,
the number of frightened people has doubled. Pessimism about the economy is
running at a higher level than at any time in the last 16 years. The polls
generally show that most Germans believe that their country should be allied to
the United States and NATO, but their attitudes, when broken down in detail by
Allensbach, are fascinating. Fifty-six percent of the 16-to 29-year-olds
surveyed want to avoid a war at all costs, even if it means that the Soviet
Union would take over Western Europe. Within that same age group, if the choice
is between life under Communism and democracy, only 25 percent say that
democracy is worth defending. The overall population would fight for democracy,
but in the group below 30 years of age, 45 percent prefer a West German attempt
to reach neutrality to a continuing military alliance with the United States.
Although the polling organization concluded that there really isn't much
visceral anti-Americanism in general, among people who describe themselves as
members of the ecology movement - a party called ''the Greens'' has done
unusually well in municipal and regional elections - 46 percent associate the
United States with unpleasant things.
''Stop behaving as if the Americans were your enemies and the Soviets your
friends!'' Helmut Schmidt had to shout at a meeting this year of his Social
Democratic party. The Chancellor's description of the situation was perhaps less
nuanced than reality, but it was a remarkable acknowledgement of trouble.

The mood cannot be explained in terms of a specific event - like the Reagan
Administration's decision last summer to proceed with the production of neutron
weapons - but rather in terms of a number of themes that have aligned with each
other in a kind of counterpoint.  There is the weakened economy, the blows to
detente and their relation to the greater self-confidence and sense of control
of events that West Germany developed during the 70's -developments contrasted
here with the struggles of the United States with Watergate, Vietnam and weak
Presidents. And there is the unfamiliar pugnacity of the new Reagan
Administration. Even before his inauguration, Mr. Reagan had been cast by
segments of the press in the role of demon and proto-fascist that Christian
Democrat Franz Josef Strauss had been assigned until his defeat in elections
last year by Mr. Schmidt. Just as Mr. Strauss's conservatism was completely
de-legitimized, so was that of Mr. Reagan, who is constantly described as the
cowboy, the third-rate actor.

These currents fused with the thinking of a West German generation that had
grown up with the causes of the 70's - the women's movement, third-world
glorification, ecology and the antinuclear energy campaign and similar issues
that succeeded one another in West Germany as repositories for idealism and,
often, confused radicalism. The antinuclear-energy movement provided an almost
ready-made group of activitists for the equally anti-nuclear ''peace'' movement.

An additional element affecting the mood as a whole is the pull of German
intellectual history and tradition. With the exception of the first 25 years
after World War II, Germany had never really considered itself to be totally
part of the West. The reassertion of a particularly German world role during the
70's re-created that more traditional notion of a German middle way between the
West, often denounced as mercantile and impure, and Eastern Europe, seen as more
romantic and less corrupt.

Of all these interwoven themes, the new economic realities are especially
important. Inflation is now running at 6.6 percent, a modest number by
international standards, but an increase of more than 30 percent in two years.
The unemployment figures during the summer were the highest in 29 years. The
current account deficit - the tally of a country's earnings against its expenses
- is running at about $10 billion to $12 billion for the year, among the highest
of any industrial country in the world. There will have been no growth in 1981;
rather, the economy will have contracted by about 1.5 percent, a recessionary
figure.

The lamed economy did a particular kind of political damage. Not only did it
heighten the individual's sense of vulnerability, but it halted a fundamental
means of doing business employed by the Social Democratic-led coalitions of the
last 12 years. That approach has involved buying off the vocal left with grants
and social reforms, from third-world aid to women's rights. The new economic
situation broke down the standard quid-pro-quo arrangement between moderates
like Mr. Schmidt and the most aggressive and militant segments of society. With
no more Government money available for the permanent reorganization of West
German life, a vast store of energy was ready late last year for new passions.

Those passions have very much to do with a conviction that seemed to grow in the
70's that West Germany would be able to hold itself outside the super-power
rivalries. Attachment to the idea was deep, and it was reinforced in 1980 when
Mr. Schmidt successfully resisted Washington's pressure to sanction the Soviet
Union for its invasion of Afghanistan. Feeling strengthened by backing from the
France of Valery Giscard d'Estaing, the West Germans decided to do nothing that
would impair the gains of their detente policy. It was a time when West Germany
was most clearly asserting its own national interests, when Willy Brandt, the
Social Democratic Party chairman, was starting to refer to the United States and
the Soviet Union as the ''superpowers,'' undifferentiated twins of the same ilk,
and Helmut Schmidt was at the peak of his popularity.

Then came Poland. Mr. Schmidt, the pragmatist, immediately understood the
problem: Solidarity could not, like Afghanistan, be turned into a non-European
abstraction. The Soviet Union would threaten Poland and the basis of detente
would be continuously hostage to the possibility of Soviet interference. He
recognized that Francois Mitterrand's Government would no longer join him in a
policy that kept the United States at arms' length; instead, the French were
insisting that the West catch up with the Soviet Union in weaponry before
talking about arms reduction. Mr. Schmidt reacted with realism, showing that the
cautious movement toward a West German middle way was no longer practicable. The
Soviet Union, he felt, would have to be regarded with harder eyes. West
Germany's best hopes for influencing the new American President toward
moderation, he reasoned, would be in showing that West Germany, in the
essentials, shared Mr. Reagan's assessment of the threat.

But Mr. Schmidt had miscalculated in three ways.  First, he did not recognize
how his own Government's policies over the last 10 years had successfully
de-demonized, successfully taken the sense of menace out of, the Soviet Union
for large parts of West German public opinion, notably young people. While the
United States was often portrayed as imperialistic (Vietnam), corrupt
(Watergate) and incompetent (Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter), German officials
again and again stressed the Moscow's embrace of peaceful coexistence. This
approach became so much of a reflex, so deeply ingrained, that at a Social
Democratic Party ''peace forum'' this fall, essentially designed to turn opinion
away from the notion that the Americans are the world's troublemakers, Defense
Minister Hans Apel began his speech by saying how careful, cautious and
reasonable the Soviet Union is. What we need in reply to Soviet aggression and
threats, Willy Brandt told a reporter, ''is more detente, not less.''

Mr. Schmidt's second miscalculation was in relation to his own strength in the
Social Democratic Party and to the mood in it that produced a continuous flow of
remarks by people like Mr. Brandt, undercutting the Chancellor's position and
making resistance to it not only legitimate, but admirable - and somehow
''patriotic.'' The West German trade unions, which traditionally played a
moderating role in public opinion as a virtual arm of the Chancellor's party,
were irritated with a tough national budget that provided no new job programs;
they weren't going to fight Mr. Schmidt's battles with their full strength.
Herbert Wehner, the Social Democratic parliamentary whip, was old and sick and
unable to hold the left-wing party members in line. Rather than working to
dampen the angry mood, the Chancellor's party was an active participant in
creating it.

The Chancellor's third miscalculation involved NATO's plan for deploying a new
generation of American middle-range nuclear missiles in Europe. Mr. Schmidt was
a prime mover in the creation of the missile plan because he was both concerned
about the possibility that the Soviet Union would use the new missiles it has
been deploying to exert political pressure on Europe, and the possibility that
the United States might detach itself from the defense of its NATO allies. When
Mr. Schmidt called attention to these possibilities in a speech in London in
1977, he clearly assumed that he would be able to get the missile plan past
German public opinion. He would use detente to purchase enough quiet at home to
carry through a defense and security policy that would calm and satisfy the rest
of the alliance, including the United States.

But with detente weakened, or nonexistent, and the economy in trouble, the
Chancellor found himself alone with the missiles and without the political
trade-offs to quiet the concern about them.  All those people who over the last
decade had come to see the United States as a dangerous, erratic force - and the
Soviet Union as a rather less foreign, more predictable element - decided the
missiles and Ronald Reagan would plunge the world into a new cold war, end West
Germany's greater control over its own affairs and re-establish the country as
an American forward base for a confrontation with the Soviet Union.

Since 1968, detente had been raised to the level of scripture. It was felt as a
particularly German success, a trend that would one day bring the divided nation
together. As long as it did not appear to be challenged - after all, it has been
bedrock philosophy during almost a third of the life span of the Federal
Republic - other compromises were possible. Now, in place of compromise, there
is hurt pride, frustration, anger and a more intense nationalism. With them come
great emotion and a weakened hold over the rational - both very unhappy
filaments in the Germans' past.
''If peace fails, we Germans will be the first to be wiped out,'' says Willy
Brandt. ''We'll be extinguished as a people.'' Erhard Eppler, a Social
Democratic Party executive and former Cabinet minister under Mr. Schmidt, tells
visitors, ''If Americans want to understand West Germany, then compare the
process here with that of the Poles and the Russians.'' For Mr. Eppler, pacifism
today is ''calculated reasonableness,'' and Soviet complaints about NATO's new
missile deployment plan are as ''understandable and justified as American
resistance was to the stationing of Soviet missiles in Cuba in 1962.'' Heinrich
Albertz, a Protestant minister and former Mayor of West Berlin, talks about the
''patriotic duty'' of young Germans to ''defend the German people from danger.
We are at a point when it's in the German interest...to differentiate ourselves
from the superpowers and resist.'' Peter Bender, a friend of Mr. Brandt and of
Egon Bahr, the Social Democratic disarmament spokesman, writes: ''As long as the
Atlantic alliance is the measure of all things for Western Europe, Moscow will
hold on to what it has with all its strength. Eastern Europe can't emancipate
itself from the Soviet Union without Western Europe emancipating itself from the
United States.''

These men are among the most important players in the current situation. Mr.
Brandt, the Nobel Peace Prize winner, the man who knelt at the Warsaw Ghetto
memorial, the man who resigned from the office of Chancellor in the semidisgrace
of a spy scandal, has become a father-figure for many of the discontented. Now
that he has been resuscitated as a national political force, his sometimes
equivocal statements have been a windfall for many young Social Democratic
politicians who hope both to end the Schmidt era and to take over the party's
leadership.

Mr. Eppler, a main spokesman of the so-called peace movement, has provided its
link to the large, often apolitical antinuclear energy movement, which brought
the country's atomic power program to a standstill in the late 70's. Mr. Albertz
is representative of the Protestant clergy's involvement in the process. Haunted
by its failure to resist Nazism, wounded by its lost resonance in national life,
the clergy has sought, perhaps unconsciously, to run ahead of all of the
''progressive'' trends in West Germany over recent years.  Mr. Bender, in a
widely read book, has tried to suggest a formula for West Germany's going its
own way and has articulated, with unusual frankness, the feelings of many of the
discontented.

Mr. Bender's book, ''The End of the Ideological Age,'' was launched under
extremely unusual circumstances. As if giving a signal, both Mr. Brandt and Mr.
Bahr, neither every-day contributors to book review columns, wrote articles
heralding the significance of what Mr. Bender has to say. Essentially, he argues
that the American military presence in Europe should be maintained for
protection while Western Europe develops a greater degree of autonomy and
convinces the Soviet Union by continuing accommodations that there is no reason
to fear this new European third force. NATO, in this view, is not an
organization of countries with similar views and values but a device for
maintaining a semblance of international order while the necessary
transformations are taking place. Indeed, a new Europe can save the Soviet Union
from creeping ''Americanization.'' The book's central thesis is this: ''The
perspective exists that the Kremlin will let democracy come to the borders of
the Soviet Union when Western Europe no longer serves, seems to serve or could
serve America as a base against the Soviet Union - when neither missiles nor
radio stations are allowed that can reach the Soviet Union, when neither human
nor civil rights on the Polish or Czechoslovak 'models' are permitted to be
allowed as political weapons.''

The Neue Zurcher Zeitung, the Swiss newspaper usually regarded as one of the
world's most independent and incisive, felt the book was worth a front-page
editorial. It was made up, it said, of the wishful thinking that infects a
significant number of West Germans, and the book had the arrogance to pretend
that purely German interests were those of the rest of Western Europe. Without
ever using the word ''Germany,'' the newspaper said, the book made clear which
country ''would take over leadership in the space left free by the Soviet Union
and the United States.''
In Martin Cruz Smith's novel ''Gorky Park,'' a member of the Soviet Academy sits
in a Moscow steambath with his highly placed cronies talking the talk of the
powerful. ''We have to keep an eye on those bastards the Germans,'' he says.
''The minute we take our eye off them they'll get together again, take my word
for it.'' Peter Bender does not endorse this attitude, but he does quote Pyotr
A. Abrasimov, the Soviet Ambassador in East Berlin, telling his Western
counterparts: ''You take care of your Germans, we'll take care of ours.''

These days, along with the Schlachtfeld Deutschland (Germany-asbattleground)
scenarios and the remark by Mr. Bahr about the United States (''the former
occupation power'') behaving in colonial style, come reports from German
correspondents in Washington about Administration officials who talk about the
need for ''taking care'' of the unruly Germans. One story said that there has
been discussion about withdrawing an American brigade as a reminder of who's
boss. The article quoted an unnamed member of the National Security Council as
saying that the Germans must learn that ''if you don't toe the line, you get
whacked.'' Whether such discussions actually reflect any serious thinking in the
Administration is unclear. But West Germans who believe that their future is
with the United States say that a threatening approach would only mean more
fear, more distrust and potential political instability.

What these Germans want from the United States is serious negotiations with the
Soviet Union at the talks on middle-range missile reduction that begin this
month in Geneva and very close and well-publicized consultations throughout the
process; they also want some new inventiveness in projecting the Reagan
Administration as a protector of peace. President Reagan's decision last summer
to start production of neutron weapons, these people say, made the job more
difficult.

At the same time, it has become clear that the United States may find useful
allies in Western Europe among the countries that cannot be fully at ease with
the trends in West Germany. Already, Mr.  Mitterrand and his Prime Minister,
Pierre Mauroy, have spoken out clearly against neutralism and pacifism in
Europe, and have kept the French Socialist Party away from all the recent
marching and chanting. These friends -including the Italians and the new
conservative Government in Norway - may be best equipped as European neighbors
to make clear that any slack in West German resolve weakens their common
security and the goals of European integration they all support. Postwar Germany
is unusually influenced by the opinions of its friends. But there are obvious
limits on how vigorously these opinions can be expressed; the friends are also
terribly dependent on not offending West Germany. In spite of its new frailties,
West Germany remains the Continent's strongest economy, a protector of its
neighbors' currencies through the European Monetary System and an irreplaceable
market for their goods.

Inevitably, however, the problem must be resolved by the West Germans
themselves. In the next months, Mr. Schmidt will be trying hard to show that the
country can influence its own future and is capable of lowering tensions in the
world. His meetings with Leonid Brezhnev this month and then, early next year,
with Erich Honecker, the East German leader, follow this approach. The danger of
these meetings is that they carry the risk of new offers and new illusions for
West German public opinion. Mr. Brezhnev, in particular, may be able to make
seeming concessions on the missile issue that would be appealing to many West
Germans, but would be so formulated that they would be impossible for the United
States to accept. The result would be to drive a deeper wedge between the
allies. But Mr. Schmidt, no beginner in such talks, seems confident that he
could dampen such an attempt and turn any situation to his advantage. If his
timetable and instincts are right, there will be a new optimism and a new
confidence among the West Germans sometime before April, when the Social
Democratic Party will vote on whether to reaffirm the NATO missile decision - a
statement of confidence the Chancellor has set as a condition for staying in
office.

But the plan seems to lack vision. If the country's agonies are deep, if there
is a crisis of identity in which the missile issue is only a symptom, then Mr.
Schmidt's plan may cover the cracks and gain him time, but it leaves the deepest
part of the trouble untouched.

Those depths are very difficult to reach, but they are where the future of the
country lies. The questions involved are the country's relationship to the
United States and NATO, its commitment to the West and its attitudes toward
reunification. These areas contain vast taboos, and they are usually discussed
in half tones, by inference, and couched in cosmetic formulations. For all West
Germany's success with democracy, its political leaders cannot publicly admit
that, with almost no exceptions, the rest of the world is totally satisfied with
the nation's division. No politician could afford to quote Francois Mauriac's
phrase about postwar Germany: ''I love Germany so much that I rejoice every
morning to think there are two.''

When Parliament looks at West Germany's status and goals, it covers the
discussion in a linguistic mist that often seems aimed at protecting dreams and
illusions and at avoiding discomforting the allies and the Soviet Union. No
rightist admits that he is working toward making Germany into a reunified nation
of nearly 80 million, the dominant force between the United States and the
Soviet Union. No leftist stands up and dares to raise the ultimate question
involved in his vision of a reunited ''socialist'' Germany -whether it would
become a new China on the Soviet Union's western front. And no critic of
Germany's current role in NATO tells the Danes, the Belgians and the Dutch that
his neutralism really means moving the line of NATO defense against the Soviet
Union westward to their borders.

A real debate on the country's malaise and its future is enormously difficult.
There is a great reluctance among those who want to lead West Germany out of the
Atlantic alliance to say specifically how it should be done. Imprecision and
insinuation, after all, maintain options and political careers. Those who resist
such a change, who believe that history is not ready to release West Germany
from the burdens of its division, have a hard time as well. Arguing this way
sounds cold - and even almost anti-German - because the argument carries the
notion that there is no one in the West, and very likely in the East either, who
could live in comfort with a new German situation.

The issue is unresolved and very much at the bottom of the anxieties and
dissatisfaction. Heinrich Albertz, the peace-movement leader, has said that his
experience in postwar West Germany shows that there are ''too few democrats who
really have confidence in the democratic structures'' to deal with the country's
deepest concerns.  But there may be no substitute for a new, uncompromising
discussion of the realities of West Germany's place in the world. Without such a
debate, all the tensions and insecurities now gathering around West Germany -
the kind the Germans insist they so much want to avoid - seem certain to grow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Defense Minister Hans Apel photo of Willy
Brandt photo of Helmut Schmidt and Leonid Brezhnev in Moscow photo of Russian
troop in East Germany photo of American troops in West Germany photo of
anti-nuclear demonstration in Bonn photo of Chancellor Helmut Schmidt in
hospital room

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEUTRON BOMB: AN EXPLOSIVE ISSUE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 46, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3902 words


Wayne Biddle writes frequently about science and public issues.
By Wayne Biddle

Four years ago, the United States triggered a controversy in Europe over its
plans to build neutron bombs. In April 1978, Ronald Reagan, then a future
Presidential candidate, stepped into the fray. He declared that the new bomb was
''the first weapon that's come along in a long time that could easily and
economically alter the balance of power. It could be the ideal deterrent.''
President Carter eventually set the plan aside, but last summer the Reagan
Administration decided to go ahead with it. This move raises yet again the
problem - and with it the heated, emotional controversy and debate - of how to
defend Europe in the atomic age without destroying it.

Was Mr. Reagan right in 1978 when he placed such high hopes on the neutron bomb?
And is he still right today? The crux of the neutronbomb issue is whether the
production and deployment of this weapon will somehow push us closer to the
threshold between war posturing and war fighting, or pull us back to a position
of greater strength and increased deterrence. Resolving the issue requires
answering difficult questions: What do neutron weapons add to the West's
existing arsenal? How do military commanders foresee using them? How do the
weapons fit into the politics that link Americans with Europeans?

Today, the most common rationale for building neutron bombs is to counter the
Warsaw Pact nations' huge tank armada in Europe. Behind the East German
frontier, which would look a lot like Wisconsin if the watchtowers and barbed
wire were removed, sit 19,700 Soviet tanks in various states of readiness. Ready
for what? Some could conceivably be intended for possible internal use within
Eastern Europe; some might be for psychological effect. In an area of the world
where military confrontation is largely symbolic, it is hard to know what these
tanks really mean, what danger they really pose. But North Atlantic Treaty
Organization generals feel obliged to translate numbers into offensive tactics.
They feel obliged to see blitzkrieg.

Recent interviews with Pentagon officials cast important new light not only on
the neutron bomb itself, a weapon that has been clouded by misinformation for 20
years, but also on a policy that is shaking the NATO alliance as never before.
Perhaps the most important fact that these officers reveal is that the neutron
bomb (''enhanced radiation weapon'' is the Pentagon's preferred term) is not, as
publicly perceived, a ''clean'' device that would be surgically used against a
small number of key enemy troops without damaging buildings or risking
widespread radiation exposure. Like any other nuclear weapon, it is clearly an
instrument of mass destruction. ''I think one of the great problems we have,''
says Gen. Niles J. Fulwyler, chief of the Army's tactical nuclear and chemical
policy-making unit, ''is that some people perceive enhanced radiation weapons to
be something drastically new - some new invention that is far different from any
other weapon. That is unfortunate. Enhanced radiation is nothing more than part
of a continual process of modernization'' of the nation's nuclear arsenal.

Though the public image of the neutron bomb began to form in the late 1950's,
its technical features had already been known in military scientific circles for
much of that decade. During their research on the hydrogen bomb after World War
II, scientists saw the possibility of building a small nuclear device that could
release more energy as radiation than as blast. By 1951, the United States was
testing warheads of less than one kiloton yield.

The early 1950's were marked by several influences that sound familiar today.
First was the frustrating experience of American troops unable to win a
clear-cut victory in Korea. Second was the inability of our European allies to
meet military-force goals against what was believed to be an enormously superior
Soviet conventional army. And third were the Truman and Eisenhower budgetary
constraints. These factors led to two momentous decisions that have affected
world affairs ever since. In 1954, Dwight D. Eisenhower adopted the famous
''massive retaliation'' plan for countering Soviet expansionism at the strategic
- or intercontinental - level, and concurrently authorized the placement on
European soil of ''tactical'' nuclear weapons - that is, battlefield artillery
and short-range missiles of relatively low yield - to deter conventional attack.
Because the Soviet Union possessed neither a credible strategic deterrent nor
tactical nuclear weapons, this solution seemed to American and European leaders
like a perfectly effective one. It more or less stayed that way until the
mid-1960's, when the Soviets began to catch up.

By then, our European friends were expressing concern about the implications of
a two-sided tactical nuclear war - a battle to be fought by the superpowers on
European soil. The NATO stockpile of nuclear weapons leveled off at about 7,000,
most of which were about the same yield as the Hiroshima bomb (and some very
much higher), even though they had been made smaller and lighter. War games
predicted civilian casualties from a ''limited'' nuclear military operation in
West Germany alone at five million people. The effect on public opinion was
hardly surprising. Helmut Schmidt commented in 1962, more than a decade before
he was to become Chancellor, that the use of tactical nuclear weapons ''will not
defend Europe, but destroy it.''

At the same time, massive retaliation began to look merely blusterous and less
effective as military policy as the Soviets modernized their own deterrent.
Still, a linkage, or ''tripwire,'' theory formed the basis of confidence among
NATO governments. Linkage to the Europeans meant that any Soviet attack on their
territory must be regarded by the Americans as an attack on the United States,
triggering an all-out strategic response. It still does. But today we operate
under an evolved version of John F. Kennedy's ''flexible response,'' meaning
that the Western reply to Soviet attack would not necessarily be massive. It
could be limited to tactical nuclear weaponry, or even conventional arms if they
were sufficient. It is the ambiguity of this position - exactly where does the
nuclear tripwire lie? - that has made many Europeans suspect that what we really
want is to fight our radioactive war with the Soviets on European soil. As a
result, NATO now seems in danger of crumbling.  When something like the neutron
bomb emerges from more than 20 years of behind-the-scenes development, the
cracks in the alliance open wide enough to see the Kremlin through.

The long years of engineering grew out of a notion originated by Samuel T.
Cohen, a Defense Department consultant, in the mid-1950's.  Around 1957, at the
instigation of Edward Teller at the Lawrence Livermore weapons laboratory, work
began that led to the development of a device which, according to Defense
Secretary Caspar W.  Weinberger, ''enables infantry to fight closely behind it,
as with conventional artillery.'' Army experts interviewed at the Pentagon admit
that the Secretary is exaggerating. But they do believe that the neutron bomb
could be used in a way that would cause less collateral damage and radioactive
contamination than standard fission weapons. The Pentagon's General Fulwyler
says, ''The enhanced radiation weapons offer even greater possibilities for use
than the weapons of the past.''

The neutron bomb is actually a small hydrogen bomb, in which a nuclear-fission
reaction triggers a nuclear-fusion reaction. (Fission splits an atom's nucleus
into fragments; fusion forces two nuclei together.) In fission reactions of the
type used at Hiroshima, blast and heat account for 85 percent of the energy
released, with prompt, destructive radiation (such as that from neutrons, for
example) accounting for only 5 percent of the total. In a hypothetical
purefusion weapon, by contrast, prompt radiation from the joining of a variety
of hydrogen nuclei goes up to 80 percent, while blast and heat go down to 20
percent. A typical neutron bomb is a fissionfusion hybrid that releases 6 to 10
times as much neutron radiation as a pure fission weapon of the same yield. In
other words, a relatively small, one-kiloton neutron bomb, which might not stop
tanks by blast alone but is designed to irradiate their crew members lethally,
would be about as effective as a 10-kiloton fission weapon (the Hiroshima bomb
was 12.5 kilotons). It will produce as much radiation, but less blast and heat.
This comparative difference is the source of the neutron bomb's reputation as
''clean.''

One of the most unfortunate pieces of misinformation surrounding these devices
is that they do not destroy property. The 1982 Arms Control Impact Statement
submitted to Congress by the State Department says that the description of a
neutron bomb as ''a weapon that 'kills people while leaving buildings undamaged'
is an inaccurate interpretation by some portions of the press that has served to
catch public attention all over the world.'' Many people seem to have the
impression that the deadly neutrons spray out almost like a poisonous gas, with
little or no explosion. Nikita S.  Khrushchev once commented that neutron-bomb
advocates were ''acting on the principle of robbers wanting to kill a man in
such a way that his suit will not be stained with blood, in order to appropriate
the suit.'' But it is crucial to note that the major portion of the neutron
weapon's energy is still released as blast and heat - typically about 65
percent. ''If you stood there looking at it from a distance,'' General Fulwyler
emphasizes in describing a hypothetical neutron-bomb explosion, ''you could not
tell the difference from a standard fission weapon. You still get tremendous
blast, flash and thermal. I would not want people to think of an enhanced
radiation weapon as a close support weapon.'' Any nuclear weapon is incredibly
destructive. What is involved here is a matter of degree.

By calculating how much radiation is produced at such-and-such distance from
where a neutron bomb explodes, tacticians get a rough idea of how many tank
crews, say, would be knocked out. A one-kiloton neutron bomb theoretically
causes enough radiation exposure a halfmile away from where it explodes to make
these crews soon unable to perform physically demanding tasks. Most of the crew
members would eventually die, though it might take several days. At closer
ranges, death comes faster. The Russians know these facts as well as anyone,
needless to say, and would presumably space their tanks so as to minimize their
vulnerability. It must be kept in mind that very little information is available
for judging the toxicity of neutrons to human beings.

To give an approximation of how the countryside would be affected, a 1978
article by Arthur H. Westing, a professor of ecology at Hampshire College in
Amherst, Mass., cites some figures in a 1978 article in the Royal Swedish
Academy of Sciences journal Ambio: A one-kiloton neutron weapon detonated at an
altitude of 650 feet would kill virtually every unshielded living thing on the
25 acres immediately below it - in an area about a quarter-mile across.
Microorganisms such as bacteria, fungi and algae would be wiped out on about 100
acres; insects, on 250 acres, and trees, on 500 acres.  The area of radiation
intense enough to insure the eventual death of half the animal population would
be more than 1,200 acres, or about a mile and a half across.

If the explosion occurred at a lower altitude, these figures would multiply.
Pentagon fact sheets suggest 100 feet as optimal, despite the fact that Samuel
Cohen, the originator of the neutron-bomb concept, insists that about 3,000 feet
is the proper height to minimize blast effects on the ground while still
creating radiation hazards. At l00 feet, and even at 650 feet, most buildings in
the vicinity would certainly be significantly damaged.

It is the possibility of multiple detonations that has been bringing the
citizens of Berlin, London, Paris, Rome, Amsterdam and other European capitals
into the streets for demonstrations this fall. For them the arcane analyses of
force levels and tactics are beside the point. General Fulwyler is confident
about the Army's ability to use neutron bombs effectively on the battlefield if
it has to, but he insists that Europeans have no more to worry about with them
than with the high-yield nuclear-fission warheads that have been in the field
for more than 20 years. In fact, he points out, the new weapons are safer and
more secure. ''For those who say the neutron bomb will lower the nuclear
threshold -I do not see that. Regardless of type, as long as it is a nuclear
weapon, the decision for initial release is not going to be easy for any
President - whether it's enhanced radiation or not. That terrible moment will
not be easier.'' Neutron weapons, in any case, will not completely replace the
older nuclear weapons, but complement them.

The current controversy was sparked by the Reagan Administration's failure to
confer with NATO members before deciding to go ahead with production. Virtually
all European leaders have expressed uneasiness over the move. Even Joseph M.A.H.
Luns of the Netherlands, the NATO Secretary General, complained that ''the
recent enhanced-radiationwarhead production decision was not an example of
tact.'' In the back of everybody's mind was probably a State Department cable
from Secretary Haig - dated Feb. 5, 1981 - that assured NATO members that the
Reagan Administration would make no decision on production without full
consultations.

Of all NATO governments, none was put in a more awkward position than Helmut
Schmidt's. In 1978, the West German Chancellor, under heavy pressure from the
Carter Administration, had sought his Cabinet's support to allow neutron
deployment. The Chancellor privately won his Cabinet's approval but Mr. Carter,
lacking any open backing from Bonn, deferred the matter, deeply embarrassing
Chancellor Schmidt. Then, in December 1979, NATO agreed to accept 572 new
Pershing-2 and cruise missiles to offset a new generation of Soviet SS-20
missiles. It was assumed that this action indefinitely postponed any revival of
the neutron bomb. ''I feel our American friends should be given the advice to
watch closely the effect of their political statements on the Europeans,''
Chancellor Schmidt said recently. Americans must not foment a situation ''where
one day the Italians and the Dutch, the Scandinavians and the Germans believe
the Soviet Union to be more ready to negotiate about arms control and cut down
on armaments than their own ally.''

In the United States, political opposition to the neutron bomb is being led by
Representative Theodore S. Weiss, a New York City Democrat, who sees the device
as part of a military drift toward weapons that make a nuclear battlefield more
practicable. ''In a sense,'' he says, ''we're on a variation of Nixon's Vietnam
tactic of behaving as if you're so crazy that almost anything can be expected -
and so therefore the enemy comes to the negotiating table. This assumes that the
enemy is much more rational than you are. But today we're saying just the
opposite about the Russians.'' Representative Weiss introduced a Congressional
amendment last June to delete appropriations for production of the bomb. The
proposal was defeated 293 to 88. Representative Weiss is not optimistic about
ever removing neutron weapons from the United States arsenal. But he has
recently circulated a letter to colleagues to register further opposition to Mr.
Reagan's policy, and feels the public must be made aware of the extent to which
the American and Soviet Governments are now talking past each other.

The chief Congressional proponent of the neutron-bomb plan is Samuel S.
Stratton, a Democratic Representative from upstate New York. ''The tactical
nuclear weapons that we have at present,'' he says, ''are 10 kilotons. You need
10 kilotons to destroy a tank. A neutron weapon is one kiloton, and you can
explode it without touching the ground. As a result, there is no fallout
whatsoever. All you have to do is be in a basement away from the immediate blast
and you're safe.'' While Representative Stratton's technical brief would appear
to be at odds with Pentagon statements about how the bomb would be used and
scientific analyses of its effects, his political logic has proved powerful in
Congressional debates. ''The neutron weapon is essentially defensive, simply
because it kills tank operators without destroying the German countryside you're
trying to defend,'' he says. ''A weapon that is primarily limited to just
killing soldiers and goes out of its way to preserve the invaded territory is
offensively useless. The Russians are opposed to it because they cannot profit
from it even if they could build it.'' In arguing against the Weiss amendment,
Representative Stratton said that it would be ''criminally negligent'' not to
manufacture the various neutron-bomb parts so that they were at least available
in an emergency. His basic reasoning - which carried most of the House
membership - was that ''the best way not to use nuclear weapons is to be
prepared to use them.''

''Essentially, what we're trying to do is deter,'' Representative Stratton says.
''Anybody who has dealt with the Russians realizes that they're not crazy. They
will not attack unless they figure that they can really romp through the enemy's
defenses.''

NATO decided long ago that it does not need to match the Warsaw Pact tank force
one-to-one, so it currently relies on about 11,000 tanks, 6,000 standard
tactical nuclear weapons, plus hundreds of thousands of nonnuclear antitank
weapons. The 1973 Arab-Israeli war showed that tanks are vulnerable to a variety
of precision-guided munitions (P.G.M.'s), commonly called ''smart bombs.'' These
are nonnuclear missiles that are guided to their targets by lasers, wires,
television cameras or other means. Perhaps this is one reason why the Russians
feel compelled to build so many armored vehicles.  Still, General Fulwyler
cautions that ''when we visualize that battlefield, there's no way in heck that,
if the enemy does what we think he's going to do with the doctrine and tactics
he trains with, we can have enough P.G.M.'s to effectively meet the threat
without escalation.''

Given the rapid advances in smart-bomb technology, however, a broad range of
analysts are on record as differing with the general.  Nonetheless, defense
planners continue to worry that Warsaw Pact tanks might be able to launch a
blitzkrieg attack. The military analyst must gauge the strength of his own
forces (nowadays with the aid of computer models) under the worst possible
conditions and try to determine how they would fare against the enemy. Pentagon
analysts believe that NATO's conventional defenses could be broken through,
particularly if Moscow took maximum advantage of its shorter lines of supply
during a mobilization period. Computerized war games conducted at Livermore
suggest that 10 to 40 fission warheads would be needed to defeat a Soviet
armored division, with the number about halved for neutron weapons. There is
endless debate about this scenario, of course - computer models only reflect the
assumptions of their programmers - but when President Reagan's advisers brief
him on the issue of tactical nuclear arms in Europe, what he hears about is a
Warsaw Pact breakthrough. Add to this the traditional factors of service-branch
competition, Congressional pressure and campaign rhetoric and what results is
the neutron bomb.

Important elements of illogic in the neutron-bomb theory set in the context of
the history of arms development and escalation, together with the disturbing
ambiguities and unanswered questions about how and when the bombs would be used,
compel one to a certain skepticism. If the point of the neutron bomb is that it
enables the military to use nuclear weapons that would cause less damage to
smaller regions, then the enemy's inevitable efforts to spread out or shield its
targets would merely increase the number of such bombs that would have to be
used. Thus, the area destroyed would be expanded.  Although the dispersal of
Warsaw Pact tank divisions might work to NATO's temporary advantage, one would
assume that standard tactical nuclear weapons already accomplish this. Nothing
really will have been gained other than the introduction of new nuclear weapons
into the arms race. There is also the possibility that the Russians would be
tempted to preclude the use of the neutron weapons through a first strike.

For the foreseeable future, neutron bombs will remain in the continental United
States and its territories. Secretary Weinberger claims that some could be
transported to Europe within hours if necessary. He has also mentioned that
deployment need not be limited to Europe, that they could be sent to ''any
theater where the necessity of repelling overwhelming force may be required.''
South Korea and the Middle East (Israel possesses the Lance missile) are often
mentioned as potential recipients.

United States policy makers have said for decades that the nuclear threshold is
not related to the kinds of weapons available - that the decision to initiate
nuclear combat will be political, not technical. And it is the political
liabilities of the neutron bomb that now seem to bear hardest on the issue.
Indeed, there are some within the Reagan Administration itself who believe it
may unravel the NATO military structure. Western citizens are being asked to
believe that superpower leaders will always behave cautiously and rationally in
the heat of battle. But history shows that other instincts often prevail in war.
The event seldom corresponds to expectations.

Twenty years ago, the physicist Freeman J. Dyson wrote in The Bulletin of the
Atomic Scientists that, like the hydrogen bomb, the neutron bomb is technically
a symptom of modernization and politically a symbol of power. Rather than making
our images of war and deterrence more concrete, the neutron bomb continues to
emphasize the volume of Pandora's Box.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of effects of neutron bomb

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A VILLAIN IN THE SENATE

BYLINE: By Gilbert Millstein;
Gilbert Millstein, news editor of NBC Nightly News and the author of two books
on New York City is workinf on a new novel.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 55, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 657 words


POINT OF ORDER A Profile of Senator Joe McCarthy.  By Robert P. Ingalls.
Illustrated with Photographs. 159 pp. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. $9.95.
(Ages 12 to 16)

ONE of the memories I cherish most fondly of retribution - however small - for
an evil deed concerns Joe McCarthy not at all. It concerns a victim of another
of the Congressional committees so zealously in pursuit of Communists - this one
an actor. He had been turned in to the committee by another actor, a minor
player frozen in fright for whatever career he was in danger of losing on
Broadway and in Hollywood. The first actor, of course, refused to admit anything
(to this day, I don't know whether he read even The New Republic) and was
blacklisted for a long period of years. One night, the victim and the informer
(a ''fink,'' as his kind was known) both happened, not intentionally, to turn up
in a well-known actors' hangout in New York. The fink, whose perfidy was equaled
only by his gall, put out his hand to the actor. The actor regarded him steadily
for all of 30 seconds. Then he spat on the informer's shoes and headed for the
bar. A round of applause went up that must have lasted at least two minutes. The
informer, non-plussed for probably the first time in his life, turned around,
went out the door and never returned. The actor was unable to drink anything
like all the drinks people tried to buy him.

But, the pity of it all was that, thereafter, the victim suffered and the
informer prospered, and, with rare exceptions, it has almost always been that
way. The truth, to generalize, moves on tiny feet of lead, and the people are
either cursed or blessed with short memories. Who now, of the age of readers of
this calm, salutary book, knows of the Red Scare and the Palmer Raids of the
20's, the Klan and the Scottsboro Boys, the House Un-American Activities
Committee and its one-time chairman, Martin Dies? We've put Vietnam and
Watergate and Richard Nixon behind us, haven't we? And so on. It's a pity (and
here I lean on George Santayana, as so many others have) that those who cannot
remember the past are condemned to repeat it.

But, in this book, clearly and patiently set forth, almost in primer style, is
the story of Senator Joe McCarthy, the ''Tail-Gunner Joe'' of World War II, who
was no such thing, but who was a psychopathic liar, bully and drinker, whose
motives to this day are unclear. He made hunting down Communists his career,
though, and ruined or seriously damaged the lives of many decent, reputable
people, and was brought down not for that, but for overreaching himself -
attacking first the Army and then other members of the most exclusive club in
the country, the United States Senate. As the author points out, ''When the U.S.
Senate finally condemned McCarthy's excesses in 1954, it did not question
McCarthyism as such. Senators showed that they could tolerate McCarthy's abusive
treatment of left-wingers and liberals who held no elective office, but
ultimately they could not forgive his personal attacks on his colleagues in
Congress.'' And, even then, he was deprived of nothing - not his seat, his
committee assignments or his perks. Further, the Congress went right on to pass
a bill designed to outlaw the Communist Party, by then a toothless Pekingese. It
took the Supreme Court - a notably just one at the time - to knock down most of
that nonsense.

And what finally happened to Tail-Gunner Joe? He was damaged politically -
nothing else - and possibly not permanently. We'll never know. Here's how the
author puts it: ''Friends thought he drank more heavily than before, and his
body appeared to show the ravaging effects of alcohol. On May 2, 1957, McCarthy
died of a liver ailment, at the age of forty-eight.'' I say regretfully that he
was not punished for his sins but for raising the dander of other politicians.
Here are the facts in this book - well set forth. They should be long
remembered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER JOURNAL

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 3, Column 1; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1638 words


THEY have been riding Conrail trains to work for 22 years or more, six county
residents who now have a new chance to make the voice of the rider heard in
Albany and New York City.

The six have been named by Governor Carey to the recently created Metro North
Rail Commuter Council as representatives of Westchester's 80,000 commuters.

''I know the members of this Council will be relentless in pursuing the kind of
commuter service Westchester so badly needs,'' said County Executive Alfred B.
DelBello, who had submitted their names to the Governor.

''My goal is to get the word from commuters to top management,'' said Taylor G.
Cushmore of Ossining, who, as chairman of Railroad Improvements Deserve
Everyone's Support (Rides), will represent commuters of the Upper Hudson
Division. The freelance television director, who moved to the county in 1970,
said that costs for revamping the Croton-Harmon repair shop had risen every year
despite his claim that ''they never spent the $5 million'' authorized under a
1979 bond issue.

Safety is a prime concern of Mr. Cushmore, who said he had seen ''a number of
examples'' of passenger doors that remain open as the train starts to move
despite a mechanism designed to prevent that. As for seating, Mr. Cushmore said
that he and his wife, both of whom work in New York City and once rode the 7:24
to work, were forced to board the 6:03 in order to get a seat.

Frederick D. Wilkinson Jr., an American Express Company vice president who lives
in Mount Vernon, said that early improvements should be among noncapital items
such as more frequent station announcements on the trains. Mr. Wilkinson, who
represents the Lower Harlem Line, also said that too often ''on a warm day, the
heat is on, and on a cold day the heat isn't on.''

The other four members are Lorraine Pirro of Yonkers, chairman of the Yonkers
Rail Commuter Council; Carol Hess of Rye; Harold Dyer of Pleasantville and Frank
Reel of Greenburgh.

The council was one of three formed last July by the New York State Legislature.
It is an advisory group overseeing the Hudson, Harlem and New Haven commuter
rail lines and a small portion of the Port Jervis Line. In addition to the six
Westchester members, one commuter each from Dutchess, Putnam, Orange and
Rockland Counties will make up the council. Mr. Reel is an at-large member.

The other advisory groups are the New York City Transit Authority Advisory
Council and the Long Island Rail Road Commuter's Council.  Together, the three
councils will replace the members of the Permanent Citizen's Advisory Committee
to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, a watchdog group created in 1977.

Yonkers has been echoing with the words ''unity'' and ''professionalism'' since
Election Night, when the Republicans regained the Mayor's office and increased
their hold on the City Council.

Last Wednesday, Mayor-elect Angelo R. Martinelli, standing in his campaign
headquarters with two of the remaining three Council Democrats, announced some
news that City Manager Eugene J. Fox, a Democrat, knew was coming. A search team
has been named to seek his replacement.

The search consultants will be Pace University's Institute of Suburban
Governance, which is headed by Edwin G. Michaelian, Westchester's last
Republican County Executive. For a fee of up to $15,000, Dr. Michaelian's group
will interview and assess several candidates for recommendation to the Council,
which must vote on one of them. Mr. Martinelli told a news conference that a
''maximum of three'' candidates would survive the search process, ''and then it
will be our choice.''

''I hope the process can be completed by Jan. 1,'' Mr. Martinelli said, ''but
I've been told I'm overly optimistic.'' He takes office at City Hall on New
Year's Day.

About Mr. Fox, a lawyer who was the Yonkers Corporation Counsel before being
named City Manager, Mr. Martinelli said: ''The current City Manager is a nice
individual, but not what I'd call a true professional, a professional of the
kind we'd want.''

''I hope he'll resign, but if not, he'll be replaced,'' Mr.  Martinelli added,
in answer to a question.  Reached by telephone, Mr. Fox said of Mr. Martinelli,
''I know he made a campaign promise to replace me because I'm not a
professional. I don't know how you define that, but I've had a year and a half
of big-city experience. I'm not going to run around, resign or goof off. I'm
going to continue to do my job. If I had my druthers, I'd stay on.''

Asked what he planned to do if he left City Hall, Mr. Fox answered, ''I'm an
attorney by profession. I have a certain degree of security.''

Mr. Martinelli also announced that a committee of prominent Yonkers citizens
would work with the Michaelian committee. The first two members, he said, were
State Senator John E. Flynn and Emmett Burke, chairman of the city's Municipal
Housing Authority and a former Councilman. As many as three more memebers remain
to be chosen.

Mr. Martinelli introduced five Council members, including two Democrats, Harry
Oxman and Frank J. McGovern. ''We're here because we want to work together,''
said Mr. Oxman, the Council's minority leader.

Yonkers, the state's fourth-largest city, is struggling through a financial
squeeze that requires state and county financial aid to bring its 1981-82 budget
into balance without municipal layoffs. Mr.  Martinelli, asked why a
professional city manager would wish to take over Mr. Fox's job, answered that
the $62,500 post was ''a real challenge.''

One-and-a-half years ago the Veteran's Administration opened a Vietnam Veterans
Outreach office at 226 East Fordham Road in the Bronx, one of 102 such
counseling centers established around the country since President Carter signed
the Veterans Health Care Act of 1979.

The Bronx office covered Westchester County, according to Walter Sampson, its
director, but now Westchester is to get its own center, on Mamaroneck Avenue in
downtown White Plains, probably in the area of the County Office Building and
possibly before the end of the year.

Mr. Sampson said it would be a ''satellite'' of the Fordham Road operation,
meaning that three of the seven staff members - two counselors and a secretary -
will be transferred to the new office, along with some of the volunteers who
also work with the Vietnam veterans.

Announcement of the new branch came from the office of Representative Richard L.
Ottinger, Democrat of Mamaroneck, whose spokesman said that ''with Al DelBello
we've been fighting for this facility for a long time.''

Mr. Sampson said that ''hundreds'' of veterans had been helped since the Bronx
operation began. ''It was established for readjustment counseling for those who
had served in the Vietnam era, especially for those who had been in combat,''
Mr. Sampson said. ''As you know, it was an unpopular war, and when the vets came
back many found there was nobody they could talk to - there was a lack of
transitional planning.''

The average veteran who comes in, through referrals or as ''walkins,'' he said,
is in his 30's. ''They will say they're looking for a job, not counseling, but
when we speak to them we find it's not a job but delayed stress.''

Mr. Sampson, a draftee, served as a medic in Vietnam from 1966 to 1968 and later
worked in New York City's municipal hospital program.  ''I didn't like the way
they handled veterans, and that's how I got into this,'' he said.

The office uses volunteers - ''social work students, counselors, psychology
students, housewives'' - and Mr. Sampson said he welcomed additonal help. His
Bronx office number is (212) 367-3500.

The water temperature was 38 degrees, the air, 54, when members of Pace
University's hockey and rugby clubs plunged into Choate Pond at the school's
Pleasantville Campus Wednesday.

The purpose of the swim, a relay race, was to raise money for the teams, which
are financed by their own members with assistance from the Student Affairs
Department. Terrell Kolodzinski, the assistant dean for students, said the
hockey club, whose 21 members play and practice at Playland in Rye, spends about
$5,000 a season on ice rink rental and equipment, and that the rugby club, with
20 members, requires about $700 for gear and the hiring of officials.

The fund-raising event, devised by the hockey club, made a big splash on campus,
according to Bill Loftus and Brian Fischer, presidents of the hockey and rubgy
clubs, respectively. Each team, they said, had raised $500, money collected by
the individual swimmers - six from each club - who asked students, friends and
faculty members to be their sponsors in the event.

These supporters were among those shouting the loudest when 1,000 students and a
handful of faculty members gathered around the 60,000 square foot pond to cheer
on their favorites. Tom Reynolds, a hockey club member acting as judge, blew his
whistle, and the first pair of contestants ran into the murky, eight-foot-deep
water. Like those to follow, they were wearing only bathing trunks, and as the
others would do, they kicked and stroked 100 feet toward the pond's center,
climbed on to a tiny island, gulped down a cup of beer, and swam back to shore
to tag the next team member. When the last swimmer had huffed and puffed his way
out of the water, a total of 12 minutes had elapsed, and the hockey club had
been pronounced the winner.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of a train

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SPECIAL REMEMBRANCE

BYLINE: By SASHA CAVANDER

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 24, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1150 words


MY family and I celebrated Veterans Day this year in a special way. We all went
to the cemetery first, with public memories and private tears, to remember the
past and make promises for the future.

We buried my father last Nov. 11. Veterans Day seemed absolutely right, even if
his death did not. The most solemn and widely observed of all the war holidays,
Veterans Day honors peace; truce, the resolution of conflict and struggle. An
appropriate day, then, for his burial.

My father's death marked a personal truce - the yielding of the body to the
spirit. We rejoiced, as one does after a long battle: that he was no longer in
pain but at peace, no longer a prisoner of war against cruel disease, invasive
medical technology, the depersonalized and jail-like hospital setting. (In the
intensive-care unit, he thought he was being held there against his will, like a
political prisoner.)

And we rejoiced: That his special love for his family never faded, nor their
love for him.  That he never lost his sense of humor and high spirits, even in
the face of dying light; or his elegance which was the watermark of the man.

That he explored the whole of life with his mind and body and taught his
children and grandchildren to do the same.  That he gazed with quizzical
acceptance upon life's pluses and minuses and decided the final balance was very
much in his favor.  That he was a fighter, tough of spirit to the end, and in
his own way won the final victory, which set his spirit free to live forever.

I was the only female pallbearer. There were those who objected or
misinterpreted this act of simple devotion as ''sexual equality, at a time like
this.'' I wanted - one last time - to feel the weight of this particular man. I
wanted, after all that technology had touched him, for human hands to carry him
from this world as they had lifted him into it when he was born.

At the grave site, we observed our private armistice. The family included those
who had fought in and survived the battles of Pearl Harbor, the Bulge, D-Day -
my aunt and uncle, whose son had died in Vietnam just two days before he was due
to come home, parents of small sons who worry that draft registration brings the
specter of war again too close, unless the international picture changes, unless
America itself makes a pact to live in peace. War heroes, tank drivers, wives
and children remembered the battles on other shores, the war on cancer too close
to home, and my father, who worked in an airplane factory during World War II,
at night.

The terror of dying is over for us. The dark unknown has been faced and it is
surprisingly light. We asked ourselves different questions when we met again on
Veterans Day this year. Instead of ''Why him?  Why so young? Why before his work
was done?'' we considered the meaning of a single day lived without pain; or
what we can and should be doing to make the future peaceful, warless, fruitful
for our children and their children. For those of us who are children and
parents simultaneously - children with children of our own - it is hard to
answer our schoolchildren who worry ''there will be no world left by the time I
grow up. If pollution doesn't destroy the earth, then nuclear war probably
will.'' (As a writer who has worked in schools with children in every grade,
this theme of dark worry about the future is something that crops up
continually.)

Veterans Day forces us to consider the specialness and finite ways of human
life. The religious leader at the funeral for my father happened to be a
Canadian who vividly recalled the day as a stunning holiday in his childhood.

''At 11 o'clock in the morning on Nov. 11, everything stopped in the city,'' he
told us. ''There was one minute of silence as cars, people in the streets all
stopped. Even as a child, you were keenly and completely aware at that moment
that war created death. There was a relationship that made war unacceptable, an
intense realization that we had better be conscious of what we could do. It was
the most solemn holiday and meant something, even to children.''

A war holiday that literally stops one in one's tracks, I thought, as he spoke.
A war (World War I) that changed forever the way war was fought and the way
people would think about war. It took place on a scale unimagined before, a
scale that hardened people ''to anything and everything by the time it was
over,'' say its veterans.

For in this first world war, artillery, not men became most important. Howitzers
and poison gases broke down the traditional logic of what war was: a man with a
gun facing another man with a gun, one-on-one. Human life was hard to
extinguish; after World War I, it became easy. A man with a howitzer could kill
500 men instead of one at a time. Poison gases took lives by the cluster. The
battlefield expanded, the limits loosened and the definition of 'horrible'
changed. Poison gases led straight to atomic and hydrogen bombs, to Hiroshima,
to napalm and Vietnam. There was no longer a military fence around death. Women
and children could die as easily as soldiers.

''The true scale of human life was lost by the end of World War I,'' said a
veteran at the funeral. The scale came back for us when we chose Nov. 11 for my
father's burial. Veterans Day, after all, is a reminder throughout the world,
not just here in America, of the battles that can beat down the bravest men, of
the grandeur of a single life, of the dignity and peace bestowed by death upon a
welllived life.

The rituals of Veterans Day are as important to me, now, as those surrounding
Thanksgiving and Halloween. It is a time of reckoning, not only with the past,
but with the future. I will always think back to that Nov. 11, 1980, when the
leaves had fallen with that average but august man who was my father, my
children's grandfather. His measure must be taken on a human scale, the scale we
always used through history until World War I.

After the trip to the cemetery, the families gathered, reminisced, celebrated
the fact that life goes on. We played games, which my father always loved. Not
war games, you understand, but parlor games and sports. The children played
football until it grew dark and later, by the fire, Monopoly.

And I remembered my father's last game and how well he played it. I think it
ended in a tie, between his life and time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Sasha Cavander is a freelance writer who lives in Greens Farms.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHATEVER HAPPENED TO ALTERNATIVE SCHOOLS?

BYLINE: By SALLY REED

SECTION: Section 12; Special Section Page 27; Page 27, Column 1; Survey of
Education Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words


WHEN 150 students abandoned their classes in Philadelphia public high schools in
1969 to study their communities and use the city as their classroom, few thought
that such an alternative to traditional public education would last.

But Parkway Program - as this school without walls was named - survived and it
has now become a model for other urban school systems. And, more importantly, it
is now a national symbol for those who advocated options in public education.

Now, 12 years later, alternative public schools have increased from but a dozen
to an estimated 10,000 across the country, many of them in 80 percent of the
nation's larger school systems. They include schools without walls, magnet
schools, street academies, specialized career schools and the newest phenomenon,
schools that stress ''basic'' skills.

''Alternative schools are not only alive but doing well and growing,'' said
David L. Lehman, head of the Alternative Community School for 6- to 12-year-olds
in Ithaca, N.Y., which has a waiting list for admission. ''Schools have
succeeded because they met a need and parents have come to accept the notion of
diversity in education.''

There is convincing evidence that alternative schools are indeed ''live and
well'':

- The St. Paul Open School in Minnesota, which began in 1969, has expanded to
its third building site, for students from kindergarten to the 12th grade.

- City-as-School, one of 10 alternative public high schools in New York City and
modeled after Parkway, opened with 61 students in 1972 and now has 450 students
who take classes in dance studios or law offices throughout the city.

- Since 1972 public schools in Houston have evolved into 65 elementary magnet
schools and specialized high schools in the performing and visual arts,
engineering and health professions with an operating budget of $14.5 million in
the seven-year-old Department of Alternative Programs.

Additionally, there's a bilingual community school in Santa Fe, N.M., the John
Ball Zoo School for highly motivated sixth graders in Grand Rapids, Mich., and a
street academy in Atlanta. All were initiated in the early 1970's.

The alternative school phenomenon can be traced to the progressive education
movement in the 1930's through the civil rights movement in the 1950's and
1960's, which founded so-called ''freedom schools'' in the South and street
academies in the North.

But the big push came in the late 1960's during the Vietnam War era when many
students, parents and teachers felt regular public schools were too rigid and
authoritarian. Their goal was to establish humanistic schools with more
democratic decision-making.

By the mid-1970's, magnet schools evolved in response to courtordered
desegregation to attract both black and white students to select schools.

Finally, in the late 1970's, parents enchanted with the ''back-tobasics''
movement established so-called ''fundamental'' schools that stress what parents
feel other schools lack - basic skills, dress codes, required homework and math
drills.

There were, of course, casualties along the way to diversity. Some alternative
schools that appeared novel in 1970 lost their appeal by the end of the decade
once their practices - such as teen teaching, individualized instruction or open
classrooms - were adopted by neighborhood schools.

Other alternative schools discovered that the student population had changed and
thus developed more ''structured'' curriculum. The Santi School in Hartford,
situated in an old railroad station, suffered from a change in leadership and
lost community support as other alternatives evolved in the area.

The National Urban League once sponsored street academies for school dropouts in
16 locations throughout the country. But these were external to the public
systems and, when funds ran out in the mid-1970's, local school districts were
unable or unwilling to absorb the programs into their schools.

Regardless of the philosophy of each alternative school, there are still common
threads, according to Mary Anne Raywid, a professor of education at Hofstra
University in Hempstead, L.I., and director of a new national survey of
alternative schools.

''To be a true alternative school,'' she said, ''students must attend it by
choice and it must offer something different than what is already available in
the community.''

Susan McConaghy, director of a nine-month study by the Public Education
Association of the 10 alternative public high schools in New York City, has
found that what most alternative schools have in common is that they are smaller
than traditional schools, stress greater personal contact between teacher and
students and provide different approaches to teaching students with varying
needs.

Among such schools are Harlem Prep and Lower East Side Prep in Manhattan for
potential dropouts and Middle College High School on the La Guardia Community
College campus.

''In the early 1970's in New York City alternative schools developed as a
reaction to what was going on in the society at large,'' said Kenneth J. Tewel,
deputy executive director for instruction in the high school division of the New
York City Board of Education. ''The objective was to create small personal
alternatives for kids alienated from the larger environments. They tended to be
fairly middle-class institutions.

''Today the alternative schools tend to be oriented toward youngsters alienated
from the system politically and socially but who are basic nonachievers with a
basic inability to function in a larger school setting. The mission in the
future is to make them even more diverse. We have got to have them.''

''The public assumes that alternative schools are wild places where kids do
their own thing in storefronts,'' said Bernard McKenna, evaluation specialist
for the National Education Association. ''But studies have shown that the
strongest part of their curriculum is in the basic skills.''

Indeed, what few research studies exist on alternative schools have shown that
students from alternative schools do academically as well as or better than
their colleagues in traditional institutions.  They also show that those who
make the greatest gains are students who previously did poorly.

Gerald Smith, assistant director of the Alternative Education Program at Indiana
Univesity in Bloomington, argues that even if students didn't do as well
academically, alternative schools should be available to motivate youngsters,
improve self-concepts, or perhaps save the kid who is thinking of dropping out.

''People have a feeling that alternative schools are either elitist or else
dumping grounds for students,'' said Kenneth Osvold, principal of the St. Paul
Open School. ''But in many ways we are an old-fashioned notion of the common
school.

''Students today need the option, for example, of an open school that stresses
greater contact with teachers because students in our society today need greater
nurturing from the schools as the society draws resources away from the
family.''

''Alternative schools are much more needed than in the past,'' said Mr. McKenna.
''Parents today want different things for their children for different purposes
and feel they should have different alternatives for their children. I hope that
the alternative education movement becomes more healthy for the survival of the
public educational system.

''A discussion of vouchers and tuition tax credits show that the system is not
serving a full range of students. With a broader range of students in today's
schools, alternative institutions need to be nourished.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Sally Reed is a freelance education writer based in Chicago.  (ATTENTION: JOSEPH
MICHALAK, EDUCATION NEWS) -(TELEPHONE: 219 834-7863) In the New York City public
schools there are mini schools such as in District Four in Manhattan which offer
area parents and students options in their educational programs and specialized
junior high schools such as Mark Twain Junior High School in Brooklyn for gifted
and talented students or the Louis Armstrong Intermediate School in Queens which
pilots programs with Queens College.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Barnaby Wauters photo of Seth Hyman

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 924 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
THE KLEBER FLIGHT. By Hans Koning.  214 pages. Atheneum. $12.95.  THE LAST SCAM.
By David Harris. 364 pages. Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence.  $13.95.

A CURIOUS biographical note on the final page of ''The Kleber Flight'' informs
us that it is Hans Koning's ''first novel in his 'new life' as a novelist.''
Since Mr. Koning has published seven previous novels, among them ''A Walk With
Love and Death'' and ''The Revolutionary,'' in addition to six works of
nonfiction (''Love and Hate in China,'' ''The Future of Che Guevara''), one
assumes that this ''new life'' refers to Mr. Koning's recent return to this
country from a decade's ''self-imposed exile'' in London, presumably stemming
from his protest against United States involvement in Vietnam.

Certainly, the ''new life'' cannot mean a new order of thematic interests, for
''The Kleber Flight'' reflects Mr. Koning's old preoccupation (under the name of
Hans Koningsberger) with violence, revolution and martyrdom. Just as an earlier
novel, ''Death of a Schoolboy,'' sympathetically explored the brief transit of
Gavrilo Princip, the assassin of Archduke Francis Ferdinand of Austria, ''The
Kleber Flight'' recalls a number of such historical figures, including Princip
himself; an Italian pilot named Lauro de Bosis, who died after having flown over
Rome and showered the city with leaflets exhorting Italians to overthrow
Mussolini Fascism, and a student named Suleiman Alepin, who in 1800 stabbed
Jean-Baptiste Kleber, ''a general left behind by Napoleon to keep Egypt down.''

Radicals Get the Lines

All of these figures are recalled by David Chandler Lum, the middle-aged
American protagonist of ''The Kleber Flight,'' while he tries to learn about the
past of his lover, Jean More, who has died in a sabotaged attempt to bomb the
factory that had poisoned her and fellow workers with atomic radiation.
Eventually, his research complete and Jean's estranged daughter, Beatrix, having
been informed of her mother's heroism, David Lum steps onto the stage of history
with his own quixotic act of moral protest.

At first, it seems that the deck is stacked in the plot of ''The Kleber
Flight,'' that the radicals get all the good lines, that the contest of the
story is uneven, because the evil of the radiationpoisoning industry is
absolute, unexplored and simply given. By implication, the reader's opposition
to the American militaryindustrial complex seems to be taken for granted, which
even the most determined radical ought to resent in a novel.

But it soon becomes clear that the struggle in ''The Kleber Flight'' is not
between Jean More on the one hand and the nuclear industry on the other, with
David Lum in the middle trying to choose a side. Instead the contest is between
David and himself. For David is trying to settle that hoary old question,
whether violence is ever justified in a universe where man is so alone and life
so transitory.

Finally, David resolves himself into a decisive act, and in a satisfyingly
ironic ending, achieves the first moment of ''complete happiness'' ''ever in my
life'' at the very moment when he literally manages to cripple himself. I'm not
entirely confident that this particular irony is intended, though many others
clearly are, nor am I certain that ''The Kleber Flight'' is as vivid as a work
of the imagination as it is perplexing as a moral dilemma. Still, when all is
done, there is reason to be glad for David Lum's existence as a literary
character. And considering his dark preoccupation with death and violence, one
feels fortunate to have him end up alive.

Novel Without Heroes

If Mr. Koning has turned his radicalism like a gun to his own head, then David
Harris, who years ago exiled himself to prison for a while in protest against
the Vietnam War, has aimed the weapon of his radicalism at all society. There
are no heroes at all in his novel, ''The Last Scam,'' about smuggling marijuana
from Mexico. There are the Mexican and American authorities involved in a
crackdown project called Operation Condor, who in their violent viciousness make
the cartoon Roadrunner and Coyote seem like animals in ''The Peaceable
Kingdom.'' There are the various Mexicans and Americans involved in smuggling,
who are variously brutal, greedy, dumb, surly and treacherous.

So by default we have to root for Henry Amazon, an easygoing operator who has
decided to get out of the smuggling racket by pulling off one huge final haul
and whose escape from and triumph over the authorities is so predictable as to
be nearly ritualistic.  Henry is no bargain as a character to admire, but he's
clearly superior to the vicious establishment.

In Mr. Harris's knowing treatment, Henry's coup is hip, raw, exciting and
occasionally funny. But it is also mean, a story of grab what you can in vicious
and immoral universe. If I had a fight, I'd rather have Mr. Koning's David Lum
on my side than Mr. Harris's cynical operator. Even Lum's moral paralysis makes
life seem more worth living than Henry Amazon's unreflective opportunism.
Perhaps this says something about the old left compared with the new.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Too Quick on Yellow Rain

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 451 words


There's a serious gap between the weight of the evidence and the weight of the
charges made by the State Department in the ''yellow rain'' affair.

Yellow rain is the term used for chemical-warfare substances suspected of being
dropped in Laos and Cambodia. On the basis of four samples the State Department
is accusing Moscow, through its Vietnamese allies, of using Southeast Asia as a
testing ground and thus cheating on international treaties.

Refugees reaching Thailand have long reported being attacked by planes dropping
chemical substances that have hitherto defied identification. The new samples of
yellow rain turn out to contain four fungus-made toxins of a type known as
trichothecenes. Officials say these cause itching, vomiting of blood and death
within an hour.

Discovery of the new samples justifies the State Department's strongest concern
and the most exacting scientific investigation. But to make accusations on the
basis of such preliminary evidence sounds more like an attempt to indict the
Russians than to understand what is happening.

By the State Department's account, one sample was obtained by Soldier of
Fortune, a magazine for mercenaries. Another is said to have been furnished by
the Cambodian Communists. What company is the department keeping? With what
certainty can it assure the public that its samples are genuine? And if genuine,
where is the evidence that the toxin was not produced in, say, Hanoi?

The State Department has said that trichothecene toxins do not occur naturally
in Southeast Asia, a contention that is probably incorrect. It told a Senate
committee that the symptoms caused by trichothecenes in animals match perfectly
those reported by the victims of yellow rain. But apparently they do not. The
department has said yellow rain is so named because it patters on rooftops; yet
it does not explain how particles large enough to patter are also small enough
to breathe or to deliver a lethal dose to a clothed human.

The United States Government has the resources to conduct methodologically
significant interviews with refugees, to get its scientific facts straight and
to prepare a documented case that will withstand scientific scrutiny. Once that
has been done it will be time to press the search for the culprit and, perhaps,
to accuse the Soviet Union of violating the 1925 Geneva Protocol and the
Biological Weapon Convention of 1972. One official made that accusation last
week, claiming that ''We now have the smoking gun.'' Jumping the gun is more
like it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FORD FUND GIVES $848,052 TO 23 WRITERS AND SCHOLARS

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 900 words


The Ford Foundation has awarded a total of $848,052 to 23 scholars and writers
to support their writing of analytic books dealing with major issues and trends
in contemporary society.

The awards went to 19 Americans and four foreign writers and scholars. The
winners were selected by a panel of eight judges from among 1,500 candidates who
submitted proposals.

Franklin A. Thomas, president of the foundation, said the awards would assist a
group of gifted writers and scholars in producing ''works of substance and
quality.''

Federal Cuts Cited

Alluding to Federal cutbacks in financing for the National Endowment for the
Humanities, he asserted: ''We have been concerned for some time about the drying
up in Washington and elsewhere of financial support for humanistic writing.''

The proposed books will require prolonged investigation, he said, adding that
advances from publishers were rarely sufficient for writers to devote
uninterrupted time to such work. The prizes, which range from $24,000 to
$50,000, do not cover publication costs.  However, most of the writers already
have contracts with publishers.  A spokesman for the foundation, Robert Tolles,
said that the awards were taxable.

The 19 American winners are: Barbara Ehrenreich, a writer at the New York
Institute for the Humanities, $30,415, to trace changing male attitudes toward
marriage and the family.  James Finn, an editor of the journal Freedom at Issue,
$37,900, to analyze how the Vietnam War altered American attitudes toward
foreign policy issues.  Linda Flowers, assistant professor of English at North
Carolina Wesleyan College, $34,988, to examine the difficulties of poorly
educated young people in a region of eastern North Carolina.  Lawrence Goodwyn,
professor of history at Duke University, $50,000, to complete a two-volume study
of the crisis in modern government.  James S. Gordon, a psychiatrist at St.
Elizabeth's Hospital in Washington, $34,500, for a study of the attraction of
American youth to new religions and cults.  Irving Howe, professor of English at
the City University of New York, $30,000, to analyze the American left's failure
to gain widespread support.  Susan Jacoby, a New York freelance writer, $28,000,
for a study of justice and revenge in modern life.  Jerome Karabel, a researcher
for the Huron Institute in Cambridge, Mass., $46,700, for a study of the effects
of changes in Americn higher education.  Tracy Kidder, a Williamsburg, Mass.,
freelance writer, $30,000, for a study of conservationists' efforts to preserve
public lands.  Ann J. Lane, professor of history at the City University of New
York, $22,000, for a biography of Charlotte Perkins Gilman, a feminist leader.
Mark Reutter, a Baltimore, Md., freelance writer, $25,000, for a study of the
decline of the industrial complex outside Baltimore.  Richard Rhodes, a Kansas
City, Mo., freelance writer, $48,774, for a dramatic narrative of the
development of atomic energy.  Michael Sandel, professor of government at
Harvard University, $35,000, for a study of the changing role of the community.
Michael Scammell, senior fellow at Columbia University's Russian Institute,
$35,500, for a study of emigration by Soviet artists.  Thomas Sheehan, associate
professor of philosophy at Loyola University of Chicago, $50,000, for an
analysis of extreme rightwing groups in Europe.  Barbara Wertheimer, associate
professor at the New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations at
Cornell University, $43,915, for a study of the problems of women workers.
William J. Wilson, professor of urban sociology at the University of Chicago,
$49,396, for a study of race, class and public policy in America.  Thomas Yager,
senior research associate at the Center for Policy Research in New York,
$48,876, for a book comparing community ties in an Irish village and ties among
Irish immigrants in Holyoke, Mass.
Jorena Adams Weisbrod, a New York lawyer, $48,834, for a study of the treatment
of children in New York City's Family Court system.

The foreign recipients of awards are: Laxman Bapu Mane, a writer from India,
$24,000, for a study of nomadic tribes in western India.  C. S. Lakshmi, a
writer from India, $24,000, for a social history of women of the Tamil Nadu
region of India.  Emmanuel Obiechina, professor of English at the University of
Nigeria, $36,754, for a literary history of western Africa.  Sitor Situmorang,
an Indonesian poet, $35,000, for a history of a small highland community's
adjustment to modern life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 18, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GROUPS TRYING TO SWAY LATIN AMERICA POLICY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 906 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


As passions on the issue of United States policy toward El Salvador, Nicaragua
and the rest of Central America rise, so does the visibility of ''alternative''
policy groups, who oppose that policy. Watching them at work in Washington these
days is a laboratory lesson in the forming of public opinion.

Though the barrage of information comes from both ends of the political spectrum
- the Council for Inter-American Security, for example, takes a very strong
anti-Communist line - the liberal-left critics of United States policy seem to
outnumber the supporters. So successful has the campaign been that the
Salvadoran Government has begun to send top officials to Washington to ''talk to
the American people.'' And Pentagon officials say privately they are against
taking any military action in Central America because this country would never
support it.

The policy groups' methods are sophisticated. If the Government has its
intelligence-gathering functions, so does, for example, the Washington Office on
Latin America, a church-@ and foundationsupported human rights organization
founded in 1974. Its ''agents'' are missionaries, labor leaders, scholars and
dissident politicians. ''WOLA,'' as it is called by those who know of it, has a
staff of only eight people.

''The Government spends billions in gathering intelligence,'' Joseph T.
Eldridge, the organization's director, said the other day, ''but what is
gathered often presents a picture of how the world is perceived rather than how
the world is.''

Economic and Military Analysis

At the Council on Hemispheric Affairs, founded in 1975 and also supported by
labor and religious groups, a staff member, Mac Prichard, said the organization
was increasingly involved in preparing economic and military analyses.

The staff of five, and about a dozen interns, does the job on ''coffee, too many
cigarettes and 15 hours of work a day,'' Mr.  Prichard said. ''That doesn't
exclude Saturdays.''

Seeking primarily to influence the news media, the council turns out a blizzard
of press releases that keep up with news reports. ''We try to make them as
informative as possible,'' Mr. Prichard said.  ''Rhetorical press releases are
really of no value to reporters.''

Forty-nine such organizations have now joined the five-year-old Coalition for a
New Foreign and Military Policy. The coalition, like several of its member
groups, has its offices on Maryland Avenue, near the Supreme Court, close to
Congress and very far from the Department of State. Though the coalition's goals
are broader than the influencing of policy on Central America, it it now finding
itself focused more and more on that part of the world, a reflection of the
concerns of member groups, coalition officials say.

A Division of Labor

Organizations in the coalition have learned to divide the labor and stretch
resources: While the Council on Hemispheric Affairs works on reaching the news
media, Amnesty International concentrates on case studies of violations of human
and civil rights. The Washington Office on Latin America provides witnesses for
Congressional hearings and speakers for news conferences. The American Friends
Service Committee, meanwhile, organizes opposition to Administration policy at
the local level around the country. Others organize letter-writing campaigns to
Congress.

Leaders of several of the groups got their baptism in the Vietnam protest years
and have now moved on to a stronger organizational approach.

''This organization was founded,'' Mr. Eldridge said of the Washington Office on
Latin America, ''because a number of religious groups came to believe that their
ability to do their work abroad was affected by what happened in the White
House. They wanted to know how policy was made.

''Now we are in the business of monitoring the policy-making process, and of
trying to make available information and perspectives that ordinarily would not
get a hearing here.''

'Language of Diplomacy'

''We have come a long way in seven years,'' Mr. Eldridge continued. ''We have
learned to take experience and translate it into the language of diplomacy.''

An influential member of Congress like Michael D. Barnes, the Maryland Democrat
who heads the House Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs, would go directly
''to the source'' for information: the Administration, the El Salvadoran
Government, the Central American rebel groups or any other party involved. ''I
get briefings from the principal players,'' Mr. Barnes said. But Congressional
staff members draw on wider sources of information. These staff members say that
the new policy groups have a role to play in process of examining foreign
policy.

''They have first-hand information on Latin America,'' a staff member of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee said. ''We know most of them have a liberal-left
policy line, and they push that out. But they do make good people available to
us for subcommittee hearings, and subcommittees serve the purpose of putting the
information before the public.''

''These guys have learned how power works,'' the staff member said. ''Their
power is information.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of logo of Office of Latin America

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 18, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FUROR LOOMS AT HERBICIDE HEARING

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 426 words


A scientist chosen by the Veterans Administration to design a study of the
effects of the herbicide Agent Orange on humans will be the focus of a hearing
in Washington today by the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee.

The hearing comes amid growing pressure from both veterans and scientists who
say the approach proposed by the scientist, Dr. Gary Spivey, is vague, thin and
should be abandoned.

Dr. Spivey, an epidemiologist at the University of California at Los Angeles,
received a $133,951 grant from the Veterans Administration earlier this year to
design the protocol, determining what exactly to examine and how to examine it,
for an impartial study that was ordered by Congress in 1979.

Veterans Complain of Ailments

The purpose of the study was to determine if veterans had suffered lasting
damage from exposure to herbicides that were used to clear away jungles in
Vietnam to deprive the enemy of cover. Veterans have complained of a wide range
of symptoms, ranging from skin rashes to birth defects among their children to
cancer.

But last summer, veterans groups questioned Dr. Spivey's ability to conduct an
impartial study of the Agent Orange question. On July 31, months after receiving
the grant, he told a committee of the California Assembly he doubted that many
troops had been exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam and said there was little
evidence of any adverse health effects.

Vietnam veterans demanded that Dr. Spivey be dismissed, but the Veterans
Administration refused to do so. Dr. Spivey insisted he was being objective.

Meanwhile, his draft protocol was reviewed by a Federal advisory panel, which
included scientists associated with the Veterans Administration, the Office of
Technology Assessment and the White House. The panel complained in a consensus
statement of a ''paucity, and in some cases absence, of details'' from the
Spivey draft protocol.

One reviewer complained that in developing his approach, Dr. Spivey had no
access to Defense Department records that might indicate what exposure levels
among troops might have been. The reason stated is that the Veterans
Administration failed to get him the necessary clearance.

Another reviewer expressed concern about ''the complete lack of discussion of
any method which would be used to measure reproductive effects.'' Another said
''the document here submitted is superficial and cannot in itself be the basis
for a definitive study.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 18, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
REAGAN AND BREZHNEV

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


Before his meeting with Chancellor Schmidt in West Germany this coming weekend,
Leonid Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, sent a private letter to President Reagan
suggesting that U.S.-Soviet relations were getting out of hand and implying that
maybe they should get together and discuss the problem.

This is a dicey but maybe not a bad idea. Everybody else seems to be meeting
these days. Mr. Schmidt is going to London after his talks with Mr. Brezhnev to
tell the other Western European leaders what he heard. The Arabs are meeting to
discuss the Saudi plan for the future of Israel and the Palestinians. The North
Atlantic Treaty Organization's defense ministers will be meeting in Brussels on
Dec.  8 to talk about placing more American missiles in Europe to match the
Soviet SS-20 missiles, now targeted on every Western European capital. All are
meeting to talk about Washington and Moscow, who are not talking to one another.

And this is not all. The neutralists, pacifists, nationalists and moralists are
meeting in rebellion in Europe against all the reckless talk about the
possibility of nuclear war, and if we listen and look around it is not hard to
see that this protest movement among the young in Europe is gradually spreading
into the campuses and churches of the United States.

The Reagan Administration has finally begun to get the point: namely, that its
emphasis on military solutions of political problems, and its reckless talk of
''limited'' nuclear war (which the Europeans fear means ''limited'' to them), is
dividing the alliance and provoking a public protest, even a wave of
anti-Americanism, against the emplacement of missiles the White House thinks are
essential to maintaining the balance of power in Europe.

There has been a struggle about all this within the Administration, but
Secretary of State Haig, Larry Eagleburger, his assistant for European Affairs,
and others have finally persuaded the President that:

* He is losing the ''peace issue'' to the Russians;

* He is losing the NATO allies with his militaristic and careless comments about
nuclear war;

* The time has come for the President to speak for America on foreign policy,
rather than leaving it to the divided views of General Haig and Secretary of
Defense Weinberger on national television.

Accordingly the President, more than a year after his election and with 10
months in the White House, has finally agreed to make his first major foreign
policy speech, and has addressed the central question of world affairs - not El
Salvador, Cuba, Angola, or even Israel and Saudi Arabia -but the danger of the
arms race and the menace of war between the United States and the Soviet Union.

It would not be fair to assume that Mr. Reagan had no foreign or domestic policy
when he came to office. In fact, he had determined views that were clearer than
the truth. He thought, after Vietnam and Watergate, that we had gone ''soft'' in
America with the Russians abroad and the ''welfare loafers'' at home and that he
should make them ''shape up.''

So, in the first act of this drama of the Reagan Administration, he confronted
them with his supply-side economic theories at home and his big defense macho
budget abroad. His problem now is that the first act of his Administration was
not a popular success. The economy is drifting into recession, with alarming
production and unemployment rates, and his foreign policy has lost the
confidence of his allies.

Yet the President remains an interesting character. He had the courage of his
prejudices on economic policy for a while, but not the courage of his
convictions on foreign policy. But on both, he follows his Hollywood script. He
will raise taxes, if necessary, to avoid economic disaster, and forget
Afghanistan, to reach an accommodation on control of the arms race, if
necessary. But there is another side to Mr. Reagan. Once he has finally made
that speech on foreign policy and reached out to the Russians for a missile
truce in Europe, and if they reject him, he is likely to be very tough and
unforgiving. This is why, in this critical period of decision in both Washington
and Moscow, there may be something to Mr. Brezhnev's suggestion that maybe they
should have a talk.

The chances are that they would not agree on precisely what should be done about
European or strategic weapons, but they might just agree to lower the level of
cold-war rhetoric, and create a better mood for serious negotiations on the
reduction of nuclear weapons later on.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 18, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FOUNDATION PICKS GENETICIST AS ITS FIRST FELLOW LAUREATE

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words


A 79-year old geneticist regarded widely as having laid the basis in 1951 of the
modern chromosome theory of heredity was selected yesterday by a Chicago
foundation as the winner of its Prize Fellow Laureate Award. The award,
presented for the first time, gives her a guaranteed income of $60,000 a year
for life.

The geneticist, Dr. Barbara McClintock of the Carnegie Institution of
Washington's genetics research unit at Cold Spring Harbor (L.I.) Laboratories, ,
was honored by the the John D. and Catherine T.  MacArthur Foundation.. Her
discovery of ''transposable genes'' is said to have been a basis for today's
research in gene exploration, including gene splicing.

The MacArthur Foundation also named 19 other ''exceptionally talented
individuals'' to receive awards of $24,000 to $60,000 annually for five years
under its MacArthur Prize Fellows Program.  Earlier this year, 21 other prize
fellows were named by the philanthropy. All the awards are tax free.

Winners of the MacArthur awards are nominated by 100 educators, scientists and
artists.

Size of Stipend Based on Age

Officials say they look for individuals of exceptional talent and originality
and seek to free them from economic stresses for years.  ''The search is for
people at the frontiers of knowledge with the hope that, free of pressures and
distractions, they will cross the frontier,'' said John E. Corbally, president
of the foundation,

The amount of the stipend is based on the recipient's age at the time the award
is announced, with a $24,000 annual minimum for individuals 21 or under and a
$60,000 a year maximum for winners 60 and over, or $300,000 for five years. For
every year over 21, the awards increase by $800 increments.

The Chicago foundation, which has established a reputation for innovative
undertakings since it was established three years ago, lists its current assets
as $840 million. However, it is in the process of divesting its holdings, as
required by Federal laws, and investment specialists anticipate that its full
worth will reach $2 billion.

The foundation was created by the late John D. MacArthur, whose fortune was made
in insurance and real estate.

Other Award Winners

Following is a list of the other winners: Dr. Hugh John Cairns, 59, a
British-born molecular biologist specializing in cancer research, who is
professor of microbiology at Harvard School of Public Health. His books include
''Cancer: Science and Society.'' Joel E. Cohen, 37, professor in the department
of populations at Rockefeller University but currently at Stanford University.
His latest book is ''Food Webs and Niche Space.'' Richard P. Critchfield, 50, a
journalist and Vietnam War correspondent now writing books on village life in
various countries and working on a book about communities in the United States.
Howard E. Gardner, 38, a developmental psychologist and associate professor of
neurology at Boston University. His book ''Developmental Psychology: an
Introduction,'' is used widely as a college textbook.  John P. Gaventa, 32, a
political scientist and director of a sevenvolume study on land ownership in
Appalachia. He was born in New Jersey but raised in Nigeria, where his parents
were medical missionaries.  David Hawkins, 68, Distinguished Professor of
Philosophy at the University of Colorado. He wrote the official history of the
Manhattan Project, the story of the development of the atomic bomb. John P.
Holdren, 37, professor of energy and resources at the University of California
at Berkeley. He is the author of ''Ecoscience: Population, Resources and
Environment.'' Ada Louise Huxtable, 60, architectural critic and member of the
editorial board of The New York Times. She is the author of several books,
including ''Kicked a Building Lately?'' Robert W. Kates, 52, professor of
geography at Clark University, Worcester, Mass. A specialist in research in
natural and man-made hazards, he has studied earthquakes and droughts and
developed a disaster-reconstruction plan.  Dr. Raphael C. Lee, 32, a research
scientist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology specializing in
reconstructive surgery and tissue regeneration. He is also a resident at
Massachusetts General Hospital.  Cormac McCarthy, 48, a novelist, author of
''Suttree,'' published last year, and a recipient of the William Faulkner
Foundation award.  Richard C. Mulligan, 27, a research fellow in medicine at
Harvard Medical School, whose most recent work involves the study of genes that
control immune responses and development.  Elaine H. Pagels, 38, professor of
religion at Barnard College, author of several books, including ''The Gnostic
Gospels,'' and currently studying early Christian texts to examine the role of
women.  David Pingree, 48, professor of the history of mathematics at Brown
University. He has been focusing on ancient astrology and

astronomy, particularly in the Middle East.  Paul G. Richards, 38, professor of
geology at Columbia University and associate director of the Lamont-Doherty
Geological Observatory. He is a theoretical seismologist and the co-author of a
two-volume text, ''Quantitative Seismology: Theory and Methods.'' Richard M.
Rorty, 50, professor of philosophy at Princeton University and author of books
including ''Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature.'' Joseph H. Taylor, 40,
professor of physics at Princeton University and research specialist in radio
astronomy.  Michael Woodford, 26, a doctoral candidate in economics at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the recipient of a law degree from
Yale last year.  George Zweig, 44, a Soviet-born theoretical physicist who is
now an American citizen conducting research at Los Alamos National Laboratory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 18, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GRUMMAN'S VICTORY: THE HIGH PRICE TAG;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words


In the last eight weeks the Grumman Corporation has discovered just how
expensive fighting an unwanted takeover bid can be.  In its successful campaign
to defeat the LTV Corporation's $450 million tender offer, Grumman spent more
than $1.5 million in legal fees and $600,000 on newspaper advertising. The bills
from its financial advisers are also expected to be steep.

But Grumman's out-of-pocket expenses do not reflect the full price of rebuffing
LTV. After buying Grumman stock to keep it out of LTV's hands, Grumman and its
allies have had to swallow some $25 million in paper losses. And, in a
long-range sense, the battle with LTV has ended Grumman's aura of isolation on
Long Island, where the aircraft manufacturer is by far the largest employer.

''The question is, can they bring their earnings in line with the loyalty that
people have for them?'' asked Jerry Gilbert, a Chemical Bank economist. ''A lot
of the stockholders were ready to vote not to sell at 100 percent profit. Now
Grumman is going to have to live up to that loyalty.''

How Grumman Fought Back

The price of fending off an unfriendly takeover attempt is almost always high,
but Grumman's strategy for preserving the status quo pushed the price even
higher. Grumman says that no matter how high the bills run, though, every penny
is money well spent.

Grumman's pension fund - its three trustees are top company officials -spent
more than $40 million to purchase 1.16 million shares of Grumman stock when it
was selling at a record high of $39.  Grumman shares, traded on the New York
Stock Exchange, closed yesterday at 24 5/8.

And Grumman bought 709,800 of its own shares during the fight, according to
documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. These shares were
thus put safely out of LTV's reach - at an estimated cost of more than $20
million. The action also brought a legal challenge from the S.E.C., which says
that Grumman neglected to disclose that the reason it made the purchase was to
help block the takeover.

Grumman got a further boost when 635 of its employees bought 41,700 extra shares
through the company's employee investment plan at an average price of $33 a
share, making a total purchase price of $1.4 million. The plan is controlled by
three trustees who are also top Grumman officials, and the general feeling was
that shares held through the plan would not be tendered to LTV.

Expensive Campaign for LTV

LTV ran up some big bills, too. By one unofficial estimate, the Dallas-based
conglomerate may have spent as much as $5 million. About $1 million was the cost
of ''borrowing availability'' - making sure that the money LTV needed to borrow
would be ready if the deal went through. And $150,000 more went for
advertisements to counter Grumman's advertisements. LTV also paid a finder's fee
to the Merrill Lynch White Weld Capital Markets Group, which supplied a list of
potential takeover targets in September.

After Grumman spent so heavily to protect its paternalistic style of management,
what has the company gained besides preserving its independence? ''Not much,''
said Elliott Fried, an analyst for Shearson/ American Express. ''They won the
war, but it's like Vietnam - they did so at such an enormous cost to
stockholders and pension fund trustees.''

Grumman's success means heavy paper losses, now that the value of its stock has
returned to the former levels. In the month since a Federal district judge
imposed a preliminary injunction that effectively blocked the takeover, the
pension fund has incurred a paper loss of $17 million on the 1.16 million shares
it bought. The company's 709,000 shares are worth $7 million less than they were
a few weeks ago. And the employee investment holdings are worth $332,500 less
than when they were purchased.

Grumman's Big Goal Achieved

Grumman's viewpoint is that the benefits of remaining independent far outweigh
such figures. ''This company is not going to be depleted to meet the obligations
of a big steel company and a heavy debt burden,'' said Weyman B. Jones, a
Grumman vice president, at corporate headquarters in Bethpage, L.I. The Jones &
Laughlin Steel Corporation is one of LTV's properties.

Also Grumman's aggressive rebuttal of LTV's overtures seems to make it unlikely
that any other corporation will pick Grumman as a takeover target. That is
unusual because a company fighting off an unfriendly takeover is usually forced
to find a more congenial merger. Otherwise, it finds itself vulnerable to new
takeover efforts.

In Grumman's case, however, the stock purchased by the company and its pension
fund during the takeover struggle have given the company control of more than a
third of the 13.8 million outstanding Grumman shares. That virtually rules out
any changes in control that the company does not want. Grumman calculated that
LTV would get no more than 30 percent of the stock through its tender offer.

Expansion Strategy Studied

But analysts suggest that Grumman's victory over LTV has created a big challenge
for management. In the future, they say, the company will have to plan its
acquisitions outside the defense sector more carefully than it has in the past.
In the 1970's the company bought its way into solar energy, garbage recycling
and mass transit. None of these ventures proved to be as successful as Grumman
had hoped.

In the 1980's, some analysts suggest, Grumman might do well to strip away its
remaining ill-fated ventures while tightening its defense-contract operations, a
reliable source of profits in a decade of increased miltary spending.

''The big outcome of all of this will be to cause Grumman to be much more aware
of its balance sheet,'' said the Chemical Bank's Mr.  Gilbert. ''Though Grumman
is run paternalistically, they're living in a world of bears, and the last few
weeks have removed the concept of this billion-dollar company in its bucolic
setting over in Bethpage.  It's a valuable lesson. They're not going to forget
that they bought that stock at $39 a share and that it came down.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ORGANIZERS GO PROSPECTING FOR MINERS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1222 words

DATELINE: LOGAN, Ohio


They were a rough-cut, pleasant-appearing bunch of fellows, sitting or standing
in a large, chilly union hall. Many had beards that, with the work coats and
hats the men wore, made them appear as though they had stepped out of
photographs of coal miners a century ago.

There were thirty of them. Fifteen or so were workers from the Swan Coal
Company, at McArthur, 23 miles away; the rest, headed by Jim White and Jim Hepe,
union organizers, were from the United Mine Workers of America.

''Don't worry about the authorization cards,'' Mr. White told the miners, who
sat attentively, like schoolboys. He said Federal law insured the signatures on
the cards would be kept secret, adding, ''No one will know you signed unless you
tell.''

The miners showed no fear. What filled the hall, along with cigarette and cigar
smoke, was bravado. That and jokes about Ernie Bruns, the mine manager, whom the
men referred to as Ernie, as though he was a warm friend instead of the employer
from whom they hoped to wrench a contract. Swan is contesting unionization,
saying the increased wages and benefits that often come from organization would
jeopardize the company's financial position.

'Where Is Your Daddy?'

''Ernie called in one fellow and he said, 'Where is your daddy?'' a coal miner
said. ''The fellow said, 'Well, I don't know. He lives over in this other
county.' And Ernie, he said, 'I'm going to call your daddy up and tell him what
you are doing, trying to get a union at my company.' '' The miners laughed
uproariously.

Mr. White and Mr. Hepe are organizers for District 6 of the miners' union. They
have been trying to organize the 25 workers at Swan mine, a strip mine, since
mid-October, and now the campaign is heating up.  Monday night there was a
spirited rally at a mine site and Mr. White and Mr. Hepe hope to have an
election, in which a majority vote will determine whether the miners join the
union, by mid-December.

As union organizers, Mr. White and Mr. Hepe are among the most important people
in the American labor movement. While the leaders of that movement, gathered
this week in New York at the convention of the American Federation of Labor and
Congress of Industrial Organizations, receive much of the attention, it is
people like Mr.  White and Mr. Hepe who bring in new men and women. If the
organizers do their jobs well, the movement succeeds; if they do not, it fails,
or mopes along like a crone.

Organizers must drive tens of thousands of miles a year, often in old, run-down
personal cars. They mostly stay in lodgings that are modest, even decrepit.

Organizers' Pay Often Low

The salary is often small, although in the case of Mr. White and Mr. Hepe it is
not bad. At about $27,000 a year, they earn about the same wage as the highest
paid underground union miner. The organizer who drives, as does Mr. White in his
well broken-in Ford Bronco van, receives 10 cents a mile additional.

One problem for organizers, the kind of situation Mr. White and Mr. Hepe have
encountered, is that in America, perhaps 60 percent of the nation's workers are
employed at companies with fewer than 100 employees. That makes organizing
costly and time-consuming. Mr.  White, putting pencil to paper, figured it would
cost perhaps $20,000 to organize the 25 workers at the Swan mine and gain a
contract.

With 25 workers, who would pay an initiation fee to the national union of up to
$75 and about $30 a month in dues, it would take about two years before the
union broke even, Mr. White said. That assumes the organizing drive does not
drag on. Some drives last years and still do not end in contracts.

Another problem for Mr. White and Mr. Hepe, which mirrors problems that
sometimes develop at other unions, is that in recent years the leadership of the
miners' union has paid little attention to organizing. The United Mine Workers
president, Sam M. Church Jr., has increased the union's organizing budget
dramatically and added organizers. But organizing coal miners will be difficult.


Visit to Western Coal Fields

Mr. Church recently visited coal fields in the West, where much of America's
coal is mined but where only a handful of miners belong to the union. This was
the first time a U.M.W. president had visited the western fields on an organzing
drive since 1959.

Mr. White and Mr. Hepe, who were coal miners until they got their organizing
jobs last December, show promise of being effective organizers. Both are hard
working, dedicated, not afraid of a fight.  Mr. White, 35 years old, was a
sergeant in the Marine Corps with tours in the Dominican Republic and Vietnam,
and Mr. Hepe, 31, a former Army enlisted man who served in Vietnam. Two tough
guys.

They take pride in the hours and dedication the job requires.  ''They say you
have to be divorced to work for this union,'' Mr. Hepe said. ''I think that's
true.'' Mr. White and Mr. Hepe are divorced, although Mr. White has remarried.

History of Union Given

At the meeting, with the Swan miners, Mr. White and Mr. Hepe gave a history of
the miners' union, how it had had to fight brutal employers, thugs, hired guns
and Federal troops. Then they talked of the advantages they said would accrue to
the miners as union members.

Swan company miners make about $7 an hour, Mr. White said. If they worked at the
union wage, he said, they would receive $12 an hour.  The miners applauded
enthusiastically.

Swan miners often work 10-hours a day for five days a week plus eight hours on
Saturday, the miners said.  Union men work 40 hours a week, Mr. White said,
which brought cheers and some whistles from the miners.  The Swan miners pledged
solidarity. ''Ernie is going to do everything in his power to break us,'' one
said. ''But if we stick together we can do anything.''

Then Mr. Hepe, knowing that miners occasionally like to wet their whistles, came
in with some six packs of Miller beer. The men stood around chatting in the
hall. It was much like a group of men going off to war, with uncertainty
balanced by camaraderie.

Talk of Better Wages

The men talked of better wages, benefits and brotherhood. On this cold, dark
night in Ohio, unionism seemed a good thing.  The next morning, after a
breakfast of eggs and pancakes, the two organizers drove over to the Swan mine,
not so much a business establishment as a place, a large, bulldozed black spot
atop a group of hillocks. It is surrounded by farms and other mines, or the
large piles of mine waste.

The organizers drove up to the mine tipple, the wooden contrivance, rickety
appearing, where the coal is sorted and loaded into trucks.  They did not want
to be seen there, trespassing, so after giving the place the once over, noting
some working conditions they thought they could exploit in their talks with the
miners, Mr. White backed his truck around and the vehicle clattered up the road.

''Hepe,'' Mr. White said. ''Someday we're going to get the heck kicked out of us
doing this.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jim White photo of Jim Hepe

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DANIEL LANG, 66, CORRESPONDENT AND AUTHOR FOR NEW YORKER, DIES

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 599 words


Daniel Lang, a prize-winning author, wartime correspondent in North Africa,
Italy and France and a veteran writer for The New Yorker on moral, social and
scientific issues, died in New York City Tuesday evening. He was 66 years old.

Just before his death, Mr. Lang had completed the libretto for an opera,
''Minutes to Midnight,'' with Robert Ward, the Pulitzer Prize-winning composer,
on a theme that concerned much of his writing in recent years: the dilemma of
the scientist engaged in weapons research in the nuclear age. The opera will
open the season at Miami's New World Festival of the Arts next June.

Mr. Lang was a staff writer for The New Yorker for 40 years. He wrote his first
piece in April 1941, a Reporter-at-Large account of the British-American
Ambulance Corps. He wrote a total of 100 articles, about a third of them on the
atomic bomb, the hydrogen bomb, and various scientific, military and political
aspects of the nuclear situation.

'Steadfast and Talented'

William Shawn, editor of The New Yorker, commented yesterday: ''He was aware
from the beginning that human survival was threatened by the bomb and he kept
after the subject bravely and persistently through the years in a series of
Reporter-at-Large pieces and profiles. He did much to educate people about the
nuclear peril. He was one of the most steadfast and talented of our reportorial
writers; he never wrote a careless or superficial line; he was artful,
self-effacing, deeply responsible - a writer of moral purpose and extraordinary
literary powers.''

John Hersey, author of ''Hiroshima,'' novelist and fellowcontributor to The New
Yorker, said, ''Dan Lang was a scrupulous writer. In a time when the lines
between fact and fiction have been blurred, he made it absolutely clear what the
eye had seen and the ear had heard.''

Mr. Lang's first book, ''Early Tales of the Atomic Age,'' with a foreword by
Albert Einstein, appeared in 1948, and it was followed by ''The Man in the Thick
Lead Suit'' (1954); ''From Hiroshima to the Moon'' (1959); ''An Inquiry into
Enoughness: Of Bombs and Men and Staying Alive'' (1965). All his books were
based on articles he had written for The New Yorker.

One of his more controversial books, ''Casualties of War'' (1969), about the
rape-killing of a girl in Vietnam by American soldiers, gained international
attention. In ''Patriots Without Flags'' (1974), he wrote of latter-day
McCarthyism in the United States. And his ''A Backward Look: Germans Remember''
(1978) covered another of his moral concerns - the legacy of the Third Reich on
German youth.

He received a Sidney Hillman Foundation Award for his ''Casualties of War,'' and
a George Polk Award for ''A Backward Look.'' Mr. Lang was born in New York,
educated in the city's schools, and graduated from the University of Wisconsin
in 1936. Before joining The New Yorker, he was a reporter for The New York Post
for two years.

He is survived by his wife, the former Margaret Altschul, of Mamaroneck, N.Y.,
and three daughters, Mrs. Robert Labaree of Middletown, Conn., Niki Lang of
Berkeley, Calif., and Cecily Lang of Manhattan.

A memorial service will be held tomorrow at 11:30 A.M. at Campbell's Funeral
Home, 81st Street and Madison Avenue. Among Mr.  Lang's friends who will speak
at the service are John B. Oakes, former editor of The New York Times editorial
page, and Mr. Hersey.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Daniel Lang

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AMERASIAN BOY PLEADS FOR EASED IMMIGRATION

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 3; Home Desk

LENGTH: 360 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 18


A teen-age boy who lived on the streets of Korea for much of his childhood has
pleaded with Congress to help other children left by American servicemen in Asia
become American citizens.

''My life is really happy now,'' said John F. Keller, whose Korean name was Cho
Jae Huyn, ''but I am here today to tell my own story because I don't want my
brothers and sisters who I had to leave behind to be forgotten, and to live with
people always calling them names.''

The young man, who estimates his age to be about 15 years, told Tuesday of
living inside a wooden box, begging and working in a movie house for two small
helpings of noodles a day. He and other witnesses before the House Judiciary
Committee's subcommittee on immigration, refugees and international law said
prejudice in Southeast Asia against children left by American servicemen
condemns them to lives of destitution and misery.

The youth escaped because he eventually wound up in St. Vincent's Home for
Amerasians in Seoul, an orphanage run by the Rev. Alfred V.  Keane. He came to
the United States two and a half years ago and lives with adoptive parents in
Georgia.

''For the Amerasian, those forgotten American children of Asia, life is just
misery,'' Father Keane testified. ''The harassment never seems to end. Sometimes
they are beaten, stoned, kicked and reduced to a subhuman status in ways I could
never begin to describe.''

The priest and the boy testified in support of legislation introduced by
Representative Stewart B. McKinney, Republican of Connecticut, which would
provide preferential admission into the United States for children of American
armed forces personnel.

Under the bill, an alien born in Korea, Vietnam, Laos or Thailand after 1950 who
was fathered by an American citizen on active duty with United States armed
forces would be given preferential admission status by the Immigration and
Naturalization Service. The alien would have to show proof of financial
sponsorship in the United States to be eligible.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 19, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Gardening;
INDOOR PLANTS THAT THRIVE IN LITTLE LIGHT

BYLINE: By JOAN LEE FAUST

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 3; Home Desk

LENGTH: 809 words


DOES a dark room with little natural light mean a life without house plants? Not
necessarily. A number of plants will thrive indoors in low levels of light.

This elite group of exotic plants grow naturally under tall tropical forest
trees. Called foliage plants, they are grown only for their attractive leaves.
Flowers are the exception.

The key for plant selection is the amount of available light.  Conduct a simple
test to be sure there is enough. Select a naturally bright sunny day and raise
your hand above the area in the room where the plant will be growing. If a faint
but distinct shadow of your hand can be seen against the wall, this will be
enough light for several low-light-tolerant plants to thrive.

Don't forget that available natural light is never constant. In the winter when
the sun is lower, a room that seemed dark in summer may have more light. Also,
leaves are off the trees, which may allow more natural light to come through
windows.

Another point essential to the survival of these low-light-level plants: they
grow slowly. If leaves start appearing smaller and if the stems become rank and
elongated, then there is not enough light and the plant should be moved to a
brighter area.

Slow growth underscores another point: use less fertilizer.  Fertilizer must be
absorbed by roots to generate growth. If the plant is not putting out new leaf
and stem growth rapidly, overfeeding can be disastrous.

The first application of water-soluble fertilizer should be four to six months
after the plant is brought home. By that time it will have adjusted to a new
environment and set its own growing pattern.  Don't apply fertilizer again until
the plant appears to be slowing down in growth.

Here are some plants that will work in low light levels. The first group are the
never-failers, the second are easy to grow and offer a change of pace, and the
last group may be harder to find but are well worth the hunt.
Never-Failers

Chinese evergreens (Aglaonema): In appearance, they resemble small-leaved
dieffenbachia. Depending on the particular species the leaves may be speckled,
striped or all deep green. Some grow wild in southern China; others have been
brought back from tropical forests of the Malay Peninsula. Part of the arum
family, they may send up small flowers resembling the wildflower
jack-in-the-pulpit. It is followed by the fruit, a red berry. Grows equally well
in water or soil.

Peace lily (Spathiphyllum): This member of the arum family grows wild in the
tropical forests of Jamaica, Venezuela and Guatemala.  The potting soil should
be kept consistently moist. In stronger light, the flowers, peace lilies, will
appear.

Parlor palm (Chamaedorea elegans): This popular palm from Mexico grows quite
large and can do wonders to brighten up a dull corner.  Leaves soon become dusty
and should be wiped off with a damp soft rag.
Easy to Grow

Dracaena: There are 150 species in this group and a few hava won appeal for
their sculptural forms, particularly dragon tree (D.  marginata) and Massangeana
or corn plant. Smaller growing forms are popular, either swordlike D. sanderana
with striped foliage or the gold-dust spotted leaf (D. surculosa). All are
low-maintenance plants and tolerate neglect.

Cast-iron plant (Aspidistra): A relic from the Victorian era, this plant is not
very elegant. Leaves are dull dark green and ordinarily shaped, but as its name
indicates, it is durable and survives erratic care.

Ferns: Not every fern can be expected to thrive in low levels of light, but
three do. However, they do not look like ferns. Mother fern has beautiful
feathery, elongated foliage; holly fern resembles its namesake, and bird's nest
has long broad fronds. Look for them specifically, because most ferns require
much more light and high levels of humidity. Although they do need regular
watering, they are more tolerant of limited care.
Hard to Find

Arrowheads (Syngonium): From Central America, this group has been named for the
shape of its leaves. Succulent, they may be solid green, striped, yellow and
green or blotched, depending on the type.  They become rank and tall and
eventually need trimming back.

Red ivy (Hemigraphis): This may require more light than any other plant
mentioned. Its common name is confusing: it does not resemble ivy but grows in a
draping habit. Stems and crinkled leaves are wine red. Prune often and root
clippings in water.

Pellionia: This beautiful plant with patterned purple-green leaves is from
Vietnam, where it grows as a ground cover. Excellent as a hanging plant, it will
also drape to form an elegant centerpiece on a dining or coffee table.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of peace lily

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HIGH-TECH RIVALRY

BYLINE: By Robert B. Reich

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


Will Japan or the United States dominate world markets in high-tech products by
the end of the decade?  The odds favor Japan, but not because its high-tech
firms get Government subsidies while American firms must fend for themselves, as
commonly believed. Research and development is richly subsidized in both
nations. But only America systematically discourages marketing of ''high
technology'' - the term covers, loosely, commercial products that incorporate
advanced electronics.

Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, familiarly known as Miti,
and the United States Defense Department both are pushing their nation's
businesses into ''knowledge intensive'' industries. They are underwriting basic
research and development, paying a premium for technical reliability and
performance, providing seed money for new ventures, and encouraging firms to
enter into joint research projects under Government auspices. Miti finances 16
percent of Japan's research and development; the Pentagon, more than 30 percent
of ours.

Both bureaucracies are engaged in an intense race to develop: 1.  Industrial
robots. Miti is investing heavily; the United States Air Force is developing an
automated ''factory of the future.'' 2.  Lasers. Miti has spent $115 million
since 1975; the Pentagon, $130 million. 3. Aircraft. Miti is developing a
medium-range aircraft; the Pentagon, a vertical take-off and landing aircraft.
4. Computers.  Miti is investing $320 million to develop the world's fastest
computer, plus a futuristic ''fifth-generation'' computer; the Pentagon is
spending $250 million on advanced computer research. 5.  Semiconductors. Miti is
spending $150 million on three-dimensional integrated circuits, high-temperature
semi-conductors, and verylarge-scale integrated circuits; the Pentagon, $210
million on these technologies. 6. Fiber optics. Miti has invested $100 million;
the Army, $180 million.

Notwithstanding the near equivalence of these research and development
subsidies, Japan is likely to surpass America in each area within the decade.
Part of the reason is that Miti helps its hightech firms become more
internationally competitive, while the Pentagon does just the opposite.
Marketing of high technology is stimulated by domestic competition, which forces
firms to improve their performance and aggressively seek foreign outlets. Miti
allows firms to cooperate on specific basic research projects but ensures that
they are fiercely competitive in marketing. By contrast, the Pentagon awards
many large contracts without competitive bidding, and contractors'
inefficiencies often cause substantial cost overruns. Indeed, the Pentagon is
most comfortable with large, stable contractors who are relatively immune to the
uncertainties of competition.

Marketing also requires a long lead time, during which firms apply the new
technology to products and make sure they have adequate capital, labor, and
productive capacity to meet anticipated demand.  Many Miti projects span a
decade or more, but Pentagon contracts are subject to relatively sudden changes
in national-security needs and prevailing politics. Between 1967 and 1974, in
the wake of Vietnam, defense-related research and development declined by $3.7
billion (in constant 1972 dollars), drastically reducing the nation's demand for
scientists and engineers and retarding the development of various defense
spin-offs. The precipitous increase in defense spending planned for the next
five years will create shortages of engineers and scientists in advanced
electronics and machinery, and bottlenecks in the production of key
subcomponents and capital goods.

Efficient commercial production requires modern communications and
transportation facilities and semiskilled workers. Miti influences decisions
about where to build industry on the basis of local infrastructure and
availability of labor. But American defense contractors are concentrated in the
South and West, where infrastructure has not yet caught up with economic
development, and semiskilled labor is in short supply, while the industrial
Midwest suffers unemployment and an underused, crumbling infrastructure.

Marketing of high technology requires a global strategy. Miti encourages exports
through low-interest financing, subsidized insurance for risks overseas, and
subsidies to international trading firms for establishing new markets. By
contrast, Washington has imposed strict export controls on commercial high
technology, requiring that purchasers ensure against transfer of their products
to Communist countries.

Apart from the grave moral and political questions that surround America's
commitment to an enlarged defense industry, we should also understand its
serious long-term implications for business. Miti and the Pentagon are shaping
the development of high technology in two radically different ways, only one of
which will result in commercial success.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Robert B. Reich, former director of policy planning at the Federal Trade
Commission, teaches business and public policy at Harvard University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CAREY INTRODUCES NEW PLAN FOR ASSESSMENT OF PROPERTY

BYLINE: By RICHARD J. MEISLIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


Governor Carey introduced a new plan yesterday to revise New York State's system
of property tax assessment, dropping his longstanding insistence that all
localities reassess property at full market value by a definite date.

His plan would leave intact the legal requirement that all property be assessed
at full value, a requirement that has formed the basis of several successful
lawsuits against the property tax system.

However, his proposal would require a locality to assess all property at full
value only if the locality chose to do so or if a court ordered it. It would
give some latitude to local officials in deciding how to change the current
patchwork system of assessment.  And it would allow localities to protect
homeowners against rapid increases in taxes - although to a lesser extent than
the plan that was approved by the Legislature last month and vetoed by Mr. Carey
last week.

Mr. Carey's plan appeared unlikely to forestall the Legislature's efforts to
override his veto of its own assessment program. The Legislature's plan would
have prevented any major changes in the current assessment system.

Fink Denounces Plan

Assembly Speaker Stanley Fink, Democrat of Brooklyn, immediately denounced Mr.
Carey's proposal as ''a disaster,'' and said, ''I think it makes the possibility
of an override more likely, because there's no other place for anybody to go.''
He said it was ''the only bill I've ever read that's more difficult to
understand than ours.''

A spokesman for the Senate majority leader, Warren M. Anderson, Republican of
Binghamton, called the plan ''a wolf in wolf's clothing.'' And Richard A. Wiebe,
program secretary to the Senate majority, said the plan failed ''to assure
anybody that there will not be a shift'' of the tax burden to homeowners.

Mr. Carey's plan would offer incentives to localities that choose to reassess
property at full value, as the Governor wants, by giving them additional state
aid. And it would virtually force New York City to adopt a new system by 1984 by
removing some protections against lawsuits at that time.

Under New York State's current patchwork system of assessment, residential
property has traditionally been assessed at a lower percentage of its full value
than has commercial and industrial property. The Governor's plan includes
provisions to soften the major shifts from commercial and industrial to
residential property owners that might otherwise result from full-value
assessment.

Four Classes of Property

The program provides separate methods for dealing with New York City, Nassau
County and the rest of the state.  New York City would be permitted to set up
separate tax rates for small residential, apartment, utility and commercial
properties.  Under guidelines provided by the plan, each of these classes of
property would provide about the same portion of the city's property tax
revenues as it now does. But within each class, properties would have to be
assessed at full market value.

In the rest of the state, local governments that reassessed their property at
full value would be able to reduce by up to 25 percent the share of property
taxes provided by homeowners - including one-, two-and three-family homes - and
would be able to increase by up to 25 percent the share of property taxes
provided by apartment buildings, commercial buildings and industrial property.

In Nassau County, about 80 percent of which is residential, the share of taxes
provided by commercial and industrial property could be increased by up to 50
percent under Mr. Carey's plan.

Carey Asks 'Consensus'

The Governor's plan would, in addition, increase property tax protections for
low-income elderly people and for veterans, extending those protections for the
first time to veterans of the Vietnam War.

Mr. Carey, in a statement, said he hoped ''the modifications I have made to the
comprehensive real-property tax programs which I have advocated previously will
form the basis of a consensus with the Legislature.''

Mr. Fink said he would not support the plan. And he asserted that it would
weaken Mr. Carey's support among business groups, by allowing a greater shift of
property taxes to them, and among civic groups, by not requiring broad
reassessments statewide to eliminate inequalities in tax-assessing practices.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 21, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

INDIA AND CHINA TO OPEN BORDER TALKS ON DEC. 10

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 552 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Nov. 20


A high-level Indian delegation will go to Peking next month for four days of
talks that are to include discussion of the disputed Himalayan border between
India and China.

The announcement by the Foreign Ministry that the long-awaited talks would begin
Dec. 10 revived hopes of a border settlement and normal relations. These hopes
were raised when Foreign Minister Huang Hua visited Prime Minister Indira Gandhi
in June.

It was reported at the end of that visit - the first by a senior Chinese
official since Prime Minister Zhou Enlai came to India in 1960 - that the two
nations would try to resolve their 20-year-old border dispute and that
preliminary talks would open in September. At the same time, Mrs. Gandhi
accepted an invitation to Peking, although no date was specified.

Since then, the prospect of discussions has at times seemed remote. The Chinese
for a while withheld a visa for an Indian delegate to a world population
conference in Peking last month on the ground that he came from one of the
disputed frontier regions. On the other hand, the Chinese did permit small
groups of Indians to make pilgrimages to a holy lake in Tibet for the first time
in 22 years.  Permission for these trips was given by Mr. Huang as a good-will
gesture when he was here.

Border Is Main Issue

Demarcation of parts of the 2,500-mile border is the key issue between the
nations. In 1962, China crossed the mountains and seized large areas that had
been controlled by India. The Chinese withdrew from the eastern sector but still
hold a large part of the desolate land of Ladakh in the west.

During his three-day visit this summer, Mr. Huang gave the impression that his
Government was eager to sustain the momentum toward normal relations that was
created five years ago when India agreed to upgrade diplomatic relations.

Another step was taken in February 1979 when Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Foreign
Minister in the Cabinet of Prime Minister Morarji R. Desai, made an ice-breaking
visit to Peking. The step proved halting, however, when the Chinese attacked
Vietnam, a friend of India, and Mr. Vajpayee abruptly flew home.

Huang Trip Was Canceled

The next year Mr. Huang was to have come to India but canceled his trip after
the new Government under Mrs. Gandhi recognized the Soviet-backed Government of
Heng Samrin in Cambodia.

While here, Mr. Huang was asked about a basis for the settlement of the frontier
dispute. He replied that ''since the question involves a controversy, I would
not like to address myself to it.'' He repeated, however, that he felt ''a fair,
comprehensive and reasonable settlement'' could be reached. Some Western and
Asian diplomats have suggested that essentially China wants a legitimization of
the present lines and is willing to relinquish its claim to the area in
northeastern India.

Mr. Huang made it clear that his Government still sided with Pakistan in its
dispute with India over Kashmir. Peking has also denounced the absorption into
India in 1974 of what had been the autonomous Himalayan kingdom of Sikkim and
has refused to recognize the move.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of China-India border area

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONSERVATIVES OPEN AN ANTI-MOYNIHAN DRIVE

BYLINE: By MAURICE CARROLL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 57, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 574 words


A national conservative group has opened a campaign against Senator Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, labeling the New York Democrat in radio advertisements as
''the most liberal United States Senator.''

The campaign was instantly challenged by Mr. Moynihan's staff as ''an attempt by
the radical right to move into New York'' and as displaying ''close ties'' to
his probable Republican, Conservative and Right to Life opponent, Bruce Caputo,
a former Republican Representative from Westchester County.

In rapid-fire dialogue that sounds like a quiz show, the advertisement calls Mr.
Moynihan a big spender who ''helped develop our runaway welfare system.''

''And he voted against capital punishment, opposed the B-1 bomber, he supports
increased taxes, he even voted foreign aid to Communist countries like Cuba,
Cambodia and Vietnam,'' the advertisement continues.

''Wait, wait enough,'' says a woman. ''What would happen if the people knew
this?'' A man replies, ''He'd be defeated.'' There is applause.  ''Which,'' the
man goes on, ''is why New York State taxpayers are fed up with Moynihan and why
the National Conservative Political Action Committee has paid for this
commercial. Not authorized by any candidate or candidate's committee.''

Terms Moynihan 'Duplicitous'

John C. Dolan, head of the conservative group, played the commercial for
reporters at the Roosevelt Hotel yesterday and said Mr. Moynihan had been
''somewhat duplicitous'' in using a moderate image to mask a liberal voting
record.

He said Mr. Moynihan was among half a dozen Senators his group lists as 1982
targets. The others are Senators Lowell P. Weicker Jr.  of Connecticut, Paul S.
Sarbanes of Maryland, Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, Robert C. Byrd of West
Virginia and John Melcher of Montana. If the money can be raised, he said, the
anti-Moynihan campaign will spend $750,000 on broadcast and direct-mail
advertising.

He described the advertisement played yesterday as part of a $50,000 ''first
wave.'' In 1980, Mr. Dolan's committee ran campaigns against Senators George S.
McGovern of South Dakota, Birch Bayh of Indiana and Frank Church of Idaho. All
were defeated by Republican opponents.

Robin Martin, head of the local branch of the committee, New York State
Taxpayers Fed Up With Daniel Moynihan, said the group would ''expose'' the
Senator's ''liberal voting record.''

Some Call Him Neo-Conservative

Some of Mr. Moynihan's critics have called him a neo-Conservative.  He was
thought to be vulnerable to an attack from the left, and so months ago he called
attention to the planned assaults from the right, as a sort of signal that
liberals should rally to his defense.

It appears that Mr. Moynihan will not have to run against an opponent in the
Democratic primary, and he has been negotiating for the Liberal party line. Mr.
Caputo appears likely to be nominated by the other three parties.

Mr. Moynihan's office in Washington issued a statement saying that lawyers were
exploring a legal challenge concerning what it said were the ''close ties''
between the conservative committee and the Caputo campaign.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FREDERICK SMITH POTTER TO WED KATALIN SZULE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 82, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 156 words


Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs. Kalman Szule of Huntington, L.I., of
the engagement of their daughter, Katalin Elizabeth Szule, to Frederick Smith
Potter, son of Mr. and Mrs. Ralph Potter of Ormond Beach, Fla.

The wedding is planned for January at St. Vincent Ferrer Roman Catholic Church
in New York. Miss Szule, an art director at the Ogilvy & Mather advertising
agency, attended the Parsons School of Design. Her father is a research engineer
at the Brookhaven (L.I) National Laboratories.

Mr. Potter, a vice president of the investment banking firm of Merrill Lynch
White Weld, has an M.B.A. from Columbia University. He was awarded the Bronze
Star for service in Vietnam as a lieutenant in the Army. His father, who is
retired, was president of Gammons & Potter, insurance agents, in Palmer, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WAR IS A VERY PRIVATE AGONY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 173 words


To the Editor:

Your Nov. 11 editorial ''How to Remember Vietnam'' refers to a complaint by The
National Review that the focus of the planned Vietnam Veterans' Memorial on
names rather than the war ''makes them individual deaths, not deaths in a
cause.'' {erhaps} it is in the glorification of causes that we tend to forget
the individual losses. Each soldier suffers his own pain, his own fears and his
own dying. For each individual death there is the suffering of loved ones left
to mourn and live with their own anguish.

If we do not recognize war as personal involvement, we will forever continue to
sacrifice and waste the youth and promise of tomorrow in the ignorant pursuit of
past glories. If man is ever to know peace, we must always remember that all of
mankind is made up of individual lives, which, when taken, are individual
deaths.  HARRIS DINKOFF Valley Stream, L.I., Nov. 12, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A THREAT TO JOBS

BYLINE: By Emma Rothschild

SECTION: Section 4; Page 25, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


President Reagan greeted the autumn increase in unemployment with grim resolve -
"I will not be deterred by temporary economic changes or short-term political
expediency" - and with an affirmation of historic mission.

The forces of inflation and unemployment, in the Reagan view, confront each
other at last.  Eight percent unemployment, says his Council of Economic
Advisers, "reflects the unfortunate but natural short-term consequences of
unwinding the deeply rooted inflation that is embedded in the American economy."
Once the unwinding is concluded, it suggests, a weaker but purer America will
move forward again into the medium-term sunlight of "economic recovery."

This "Pilgrim's Progress" vision is familiar.  But it is also deceptive. It
obscures the real transformation of the work Americans do, the real dangers
ahead, and the ways in which the Reagan policies could bring a far greater
collapse in employment, above all in industries where jobs grew fastest in the
1970's.

Since 1973, employment in America has increased rapidly - more rapidly than in
other large industrial countries.  But three-quarters of the new jobs created -
10 million positions - were in services, retail trade, and state and local
government.  New private-sector employment was further concentrated in health
services, business services, and eating and drinking places (including fast-food
restaurants).  These "big three" labor-intensive industries generated almost
five million new jobs between 1973 and 1980: more than the total employment in
the automobil, steel, computer, electronic-components, aircraft, and petroleum
industries combined.  It is this structure of employment, these sources of new
work, that Reagan policies may jeopardize.  For three trends, each ominous for
employment, are likely to coincide in the years ahead.

The first is the recession itself, and the effects of restrictive monetary
policies.  Inflation is likely to remain high next year, particularly given the
effects of tax cuts and increased military spending. It is hard to believe that
the Republicans, faced with inflation plus unprecedented Federal-budget
deficits, will soon abandon their hope of redemption through hard times.  They
are far more likely to maintain existing monetary policies, and even to tighten
fiscal policies.

The second trend has to do with long-term developments in the new boom
industries.  Employment in the "big three" has been growing much slower in 1981
than it did from 1973 to 1980 - in eating and drinking places, the rate of
growth this year has been a little more than 2 percent per year, compared to 8
percent per year between 1973 and 1980.  The growth of demand for services and
meals may be slowing down; the boom industries may be investing in processes
that are less labor-intensive. A deep recession, moreover, might devastate
small, recently established service businesses.  Employment in trade and
services increased rapidly in the 1920's but was far from immune to the
recession of 1929 to 1932.

The third trend is the Administration's assault on nonmilitary public spending.
This will have direct concsequences for employment.  State and local government
is no longer a source of new work: From April to October, this sector actually
lost 350,000 jobs, on a seasonally adjusted basis.

The effects of spending cuts are also unlikely to be counteracted by eventual
defense-related employment.  Even at the time of the Vietnam War, military
spending created less employment than other public spending. The new boom -
buying research, accurate missiles, a communications system that would survive a
nuclear war - would provide still fewer jobs, above all for unskilled and
unemployed workers.

The indirect consequences of the Reagan cuts may be even more ominous. For the
private health services, on which so much new employment depends, grew up in the
interstices of public-health spending.  Like certain business services that
supply government, they will be hurt by cuts in public expenditure.  Recent
suggestions by Richard S. Schweiker, Secretary of Health and Human Services - to
cut reimbursement of "ancillary hospital services," and to limit Medicaid
payments for long-term care - could end the growth of jobs in the private
hospitals and nursing homes so important in the 1970's boom.

The transformation of employment in the United States makes it essential to find
ways of creating new jobs in industries where productivity is high; of creating
jobs with possibilities for advancement and creativity; of increasing quality
and efficiency in private and public services.  These needs are obscured by an
economic vision that looks only at the behemoths of overall inflation and
overall unemployment. The chance of long-term growth in productive work may be
lost for many more years to come - if the Reagan policies bring a collapse in
employment in services, in government, and throughout the economy.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Emma Rothschild, author of "Paradise Lost: The Decline of the Auto-Industrial
Ago," teaches in the Science, Technology and Society Program at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of man draped over a hanger

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE SEEDS OF TERROR

SECTION: Section 6; Page 35, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6671 words


Lucinda Franks, a freelance writer and former Times reporter, covered the
antiwar movement and won the l971 Pulitzer Prize for national reporting for a
series written with Thomas Powers for United Press International.
By Lucinda Franks

It is a warm August night in Ann Arbor, Mich., in l970. The house I have come to
visit looks like so many other houses built for the returning heros of World War
II: a rambling split-level, with a flagstone path that leads to the front door.
Beyond that door, however, the lighting is dim, mattresses are scattered about
on the dusty floor. The smells are reminiscent of a bazaar: overripe fruit,
marijuana, baby formula, gasoline from freshly mixed Molotov cocktails that are
lined up on the bookshelves like soda pop in a grocery.

Men, women and children wander about the rooms as aimlessly as house cats. They
eat when hungry, sleep when tired. On this night, however, two of the men have a
purpose. They have backed me so close against the wall that I can count the
whiskers in their beards. To my right and to my left is a photo gallery of
F.B.I. agents and policemen across whose faces have been scrawled: ''Off the
pigs. ...  Mash the pigs. ... Stick the pigs.''

This suburban house is the commune of a radical organization known as the White
Panthers. It also happens to be an occasional hideout for fugitive Weathermen,
self-proclaimed revolutionaries who had their beginnings in the student movement
of the l960's. At age 23, I am considered sympathetic enough to gain entrance to
the house, but I am also a reporter and it is unclear whether I'll be found
politically pure enough to leave. If you are not part of the solution, they like
to say, you are part of the problem. They search my briefcase. They fire
questions at me, one after another. In the flickering candlelight, I watch their
shadows moving across the ceiling like gunmen stealing through an alley.

There were no guns in those days, of course. They would come later. There were
the bombs, however - crude, amateurish devices - and just five months before my
visit to the house in Ann Arbor, one of them had gone off by mistake in a
Greenwich Village townhouse, killing the three Weathermen who had been making
them. I had come to the White Panther house in quest of the story of one of
those casualties, Diana Oughton. My interest was personal as well as
journalistic: Diana had come from the same kind of Middle Western background I
had and had believed many of the same things I did. Yet in the end, her goal had
been to destroy everything we were both brought up to love and value.

At age 28, Diana succeeded in destroying only herself. But one of her comrades,
a woman who, like Diana, had been an honor student at Bryn Mawr College, escaped
from the rubble of that townhouse to continue what she had begun. Her name was
Kathy Boudin, and a month ago, in Nyack, N.Y., she was arrested for armed
robbery and the murder of two policeman, one of them black, and a Brink's guard.
Arrested also were Judith Clark and David Gilbert, Weatherman fugitives who were
thought to have given up their revolutionary war; instead, they had joined
forces with black guerrillas to wage a new campaign of terror.

After the townhouse explosion, I spent six weeks tracing the life of Diana
Oughton, spending time with her family and ducking in and out of her
revolutionary underground like a fugitive myself. Since then, I have continued
periodically to meet with sources close to the Weathermen and to write about the
evolution of the movement whose history came to such a cataclysmic end in the
sleepy village of Nyack.

The underground back in l970 was not so much a place as a state of mind. The
term encompassed everyone - fugitive and nonfugitive - who believed that a ''New
Nation'' was being born and the revolution was coming. They stood apart, as if
at the edge of a highlands lake where only two kinds of folk, the People and the
Pigs, existed and ''Amerika,'' the embodiment of evil, rose up and haunted their
lives like some Loch Ness monster. Most, in the passage of time, gave up this
antivision, but some, like Kathy Boudin, did not.

She and the other white radicals involved in the Nyack massacre traveled down a
long spiral: from idealistic students to peaceful protestors to rioters trashing
the streets to revolutionary cadres bent on shedding their ''white-skin
privilege'' to fugitives planting bombs in empty buildings to women and men
accused of assasinating the very ''people'' they said they were fighting for.

Their odyssey is a very American one where numerous elements - guilt, rage,
idealism, delusion - come into play like characters in an classic tragedy. And
like all tragedies, it has its roots in the past.

A windmill that you can see from miles away guides you to the estate of Jim and
Jane Oughton in the tiny Illinois town of Dwight.  The driveway takes you past
woodlands full of deer and exotic trees.  This is a family as American as the
2,000 acres of corn-fields which they have owned for generations. One of Diana's
ancestors founded the Boy Scouts of America; another built the first institute
to treat alcoholism as a disease. The Oughtons paved the village streets, built
the waterworks and furnished land for the schools and the cemetary.

Jim Oughton, a liberal Republican and a former Illinois legislator, wanders from
room to room looking for clues to the mystery of who his oldest daughter really
was, who she had really been. His wife keeps seeing Diana stalking the halls,
waving her hands and saying, ''It's the only way, Mummy; we've got to bring the
war home.''

Since her death five months before this summer evening in l970, they have not
had the heart to touch her room and it remains filled with the mobiles and
painted desk of her childhood. Photographs of her seem to be all over the house.
Diana, the child, sitting proudly on a tractor with her father: ''She was always
a farmer at heart, like me.'' Diana, with long blond hair, giggling on the couch
with her nanny, Ruthie: ''When her friend from across the tracks had to be sent
away because her family couldn't feed her, she cried for a week. 'Why do we have
to be so rich, Ruthie?' she asked.'' Diana, home from Bryn Mawr, in suede skirt
and sandals. ''Sending her there was the worst mistake of my life,'' says her
father. ''She wouldn't go to deb parties. She went Bohemian.'' Diana, home from
Guatemala, where she slept on a dirt floor, worked with peasants and finally
came to believe that American aid was going into the pockets of the rich, who
kept the poor poorer. ''When she came back, she gave away her fancy clothes and
took some old ones from the attic. The fun was gone out of her,'' says Ruthie.
Diana home for her final Christmas, her toothbrush in a paper bag. ''Her arms
were no thicker than her wrists and she didn't have presents for anyone,'' says
her mother. Diana, in her last picture, a mugshot, hair shorn, a blank look in
her eyes.  Fingerprints taken at the same time at a Chicago police station were
the only thing that could identify her remains in the Greenwich Village
townhouse.

We are sitting around the dining table, eating the first sweet corn of the
season. I have come to Dwight to find answers from the Oughtons, but it is they
who want answers from me. ''You remind me of Diana,'' says Jim Oughton. ''If you
were she, sitting here two or three years ago, we could talk about anything -
Communism, the war, poverty. I was proud of her idealism. But near the end, she
just wouldn't talk to me anymore. Why was that, do you think? She wouldn't come
home for very long and when she did, she would bring a coterie of radical hairy
friends to protect her. Let the old Diana laugh and she would suddenly close up.
Her friends would counter my theories, if they listened to them at all, with a
sarcastic 'Oh, wow, man.' They surrounded themselves with an invisible barrier.
She loved us deeply, but her revolution said we were her greatest enemy. What is
this revolution? Does anyone know?''

I was born in a small town not far away called Kankakee, and a close mutual
friend, Jean Alice Small, a local newspaper publisher, had brought me together
with the Oughtons. Although I had never known Diana, we had gone to similar
Eastern colleges and had followed the same path, common to our generation, from
civil-rights advocates to participants in the anti-Vietnam war movement. My last
year of high school had seen the assassination of President Kennedy, and my last
year at college, the gunning down of Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy.

In anger, I left the country. While I was making my way as an expatriate
reporter for U.P.I., Diana was taking up clubs in the streets of Chicago. I
could explain to Jim Oughton the frustration we experienced over our inability
to end the war, the shame we felt at being labeled imperialists by our European
peers, but I was unable to explain to him what made his daughter take that final
step from idealistic reformer to violent and implacable foe.

One month before Diana's death, Jean Alice Small had paid a visit to Jane
Oughton. ''We have lost our daughter,'' Jane said, sitting ramrod straight. Jean
Alice volunteered to invite Diana over for a talk, if Jane thought it might
help. ''Sure, she'll come over to your house,'' Jane said, ''to blow it up.''

On a quiet street in Greenwich Village, Jean and Leonard Boudin live in a
townhouse that is warm, comfortable and cluttered with mementos from trips
abroad. Jean is a poet, and Leonard, a civil libertarian and devoted
constitutional lawyer who defended more targets of Joe McCarthy's witch hunt
than any other member of the bar. Their home has always been a salon for leftist
intellectuals, and their daughter, Kathy, grew up immersed in their ideas. She
also frequently saw the inability of her father's beloved law to help the
victims of injustice.

In her junior year at Bryn Mawr, her parents received a collect call from the
Chester, Pa., jail, where she had been incarcerated for demonstrating against
conditions at a local black school. Jean was furious at her for neglecting her
studies and for acting upon her parents beliefs at the expense of her own
well-being. In response to criticism from her fellow students at Bryn Mawr, who
said she had brought disgrace on the college, she replied in the school paper:
''If desired ends cannot be achieved within the law ... then new methods must be
adopted.'' About this same time, she told her father that she wouldn't be going
to law school after college.

Diana was a year older than Kathy and the two girls were never good friends at
college. Her junior year, Diana went to Munich, where she encountered
anti-Americanism for the first time. Kathy went to Moscow for her senior year,
and wrote afterward that although she found Soviet society repressive, it made
her realize that the American system was no better, because freedom of speech
and the press could not rid the society of racism and imperialism.

Following graduation, their routes were startlingly similar. After her two years
in Guatemala, Diana taught in a Federal literacy program in Philadelphia; her
apartment contained only a bed and a table, and her cupboards were generally
bare, save for the caviar and other delicacies sent by her mother.

Kathy worked in a Cleveland slum with welfare mothers; when Jean Boudin visited
her, she shuddered at the roaches and rats.  Both Diana and Kathy soon came to
the conclusion that their efforts in community service were being stymied by
government bureaucracy. Diana was particularly bitter over her failure to get a
Federal grant to continue the experimental unstructured children's school she
had founded with her boyfriend, Bill Ayers, in Ann Arbor.  Ironically, it was
the black parents who killed the grant; they wanted their kids to learn to read
and write, just like whites. In l969, both Kathy and Diana, by then close
comrades, went to Cuba as part of a Students for a Democratic Society (S.D.S.)
delegation. And both came back starry-eyed about Castro and his educational
reforms.

Cuba had been a shaping force in Kathy's life for some time. She had gone there
in 1961, during her freshman year, and chose to stay with Cuban students rather
than with her father, who happened to be in Havana representing Castro's new
Government. In an underground film made about the Weathermen, Kathy described
how she watched a parade celebrating the Cuban revolution. Suddenly, she
realized that, along with the crowd, she was ''cheering for tanks and guns,
which was something completely opposite to what I had been brought up to do.''
Her Cuban friend saw her eyes fill up with tears and told her that it was her
country which made them have such a parade. ''Three months later, the Bay of
Pigs invasion occurred,'' she said, ''and I understood what he meant.''

White-skin privilege. Rich bitches. Spoiled kids. Bourgeois liberals. The young
radicals of the Vietnam era set out to prove that such phrases did not apply to
them. Not all had come from rich homes. Some were middle- and even
lower-middle-class. But all had the illusion of great - and shameful -advantage.
Once, when Kathy and Diana visited a married school chum in a comfortable but
simple apartment in Chicago, Kathy - whose father did too much pro bono work
ever to get rich -looked around aghast: ''The only people I know who live like
this,'' she said, ''are friends of my parents.'' The notions of morality and
social responsibility that came out of the more radical segments of the
civil-rights movement dictated that if you were not black, poor, hungry and
homeless, your conscience should be burdened.

As important to the development of the Weathermen as their economic backgrounds
were the political environments which nurtured them. Many of their parents were
leftists or at least liberals. Children need to surpass their parents. Diana
could not become richer than her father, but she could become poorer - and
purer. Kathy, who grew cynical about the law, had to go one step farther than
her radical father; she had to find a more powerful - and forbidden - way to
fight injustice.

The news of the antiwar riots at the 1968 Democratic National Convention were
splashed in red across the London newspapers. In the Fleet Street U.P.I. office,
we all imagined that wide-scale roundups and curfews were imminent. The British,
as down on America as the rest of the world in those days, portrayed the
American police as storm troopers bent on extinguishing an entire generation. I
remember thinking guiltily that I should have been there. I was a member of
S.D.S.; I had helped organize a Vietnam teach-in at Vassar; I should have been
there in Chicago along with my peers, putting my head in the path of a
nightstick.

Over the next year, the S.D.S. slowly disintegrated. All those bloodied heads,
the arrests and indictments and trials, had not ended the war, and a more
militant group bent on making an impact by whatever means took over the
organization. June 1969 saw the birth of the Weatherman (the name was taken from
the lyrics of a Bob Dylan song: ''You don't need a weatherman to know which way
the wind blows''). Its 25,000-word manifesto declared that white radicals would
bring about a worldwide revolution by fighting in the streets of the ''Mother
Country.''

The organization, which initially claimed some 400 members, committed acts of
''revolutionary violence'' across the nation.  Weathermen tried to impress and
recruit working-class youths by going into drive-in hamburger joints and picking
fights with police; they burst into schools and broke up classes, yelling:
''Jailbreak!'' A delegation that went to Cuba that July met with representatives
of the Vietnamese National Liberation Front, who advised them to build a
street-fighting guerrilla force.

Within a very short time, that is exactly what they did. Separating into
collectives of 10 to 20 persons each, they attempted to create what they called
a ''Red Army.'' One Weatherman would later tell me that in order to rid the
members of their bourgeois habits, the collectives forced couples to separate,
required homosexuality, drugtaking and round-the-clock sessions of
self-criticism. One time, they skinned and ate an alley cat. My contact, thin,
trembling and glassyeyed, said that the houses were full of dirty dishes, rancid
food and stinking toilets. Often rising at dawn, they would practice karate,
train at rifle clubs, and enact scenarios to work out how they would grapple
with police and where they would kick them. Part of the day was devoted to the
study of radical literature, from the anarchist Kropotkin to Mao to Che to
Malcolm X. Their communes were often rented houses, which they redesigned by
fencing off back yards, putting chicken wire over the windows, blacking panes
and padlocking doors. They cut themselves off from family and friends, and gave
all their money to a common fund which was used to purchase shields, helmets,
and weapons. The money the Boudins sent to Kathy never put shoes on her feet or
new strings on her guitar. The dividend checks from Diana's share of the Oughton
farm also went to finance the revolution. The gasoline credit card her father
had given her was used to fill the tank of many a getaway car.

In October l969, their basic training complete, some 200 Weathermen descended on
Chicago for what they named the four ''Days of Rage.'' Wearing helmets and
brandishing chains and pipes, they traveled through the Loop and Gold Coast
areas, indiscriminantly smashing windshields and store windows and beating up
passers-by. About 70 members of a women's militia marched into Grant Park; Kathy
Boudin, her hair cropped and face pressed into an expression worthy of Joan of
Arc, carried the Viet Cong flag on a heavy pole. Diana, gritting her teeth,
charged through police lines and was immediately overpowered. They were both
hustled into police vans with several others, and the rest of the women, some of
them crying, were escorted to a nearby subway station.

Later that day, Jim Oughton picked up his attorney and had his chauffeur drive
immediately to the Chicago jail where Diana was being held in $5,000 bail. He
paid it and then tried gently to coax her home. But Diana, who seemed subdued
and resigned, asked to be driven instead to a church in Evanston, where all the
Weathermen were staying. When she got out of the car, her friends rushed over
and crowded around her and she did not look back at her father.

Desperate not to lose his daughter completely, Jim Oughton never failed to come
through for her. He was always there with more money, shelter and support when
she needed it. Leonard Boudin went even farther; he openly fought on Kathy's
behalf. He defended the documentary-movie director Emile de Antonio, who had
secretly filmed the fugitive Weathermen, including Kathy, and who was refusing
to cooperate with Government investigators trying to locate the fugitives. He
tried to help Cathy Wilkerson, one of the Weatherman fugitives, when she
recently surrendered. And when his daugther was arrested after the Nyack
murders, he was there by her side. Other former radical fugitives, such as Jane
Alpert, who conspired to bomb eight New York Government and corporate buildings
in l970, have told of similarly helpful parents.

Having suffered the hardships of war and depression themselves, parents in the
l960's catered to their children's every whim. This indulgence the Weathermen
treated with contempt and wanted to obliterate in their quest to become true
revolutionaries. Ironically, it may have been the one thing that allowed them to
continue being revolutionaries long after there was any possibility of
revolution.  They lacked a good healthy fear of life, having received few of its
blows. Sheltered and protected for so long, they felt invincible.  Even when
they went underground, as much as they liked to deny it, they felt they could
always go back.

If the Days of Rage were meant to convince the world that the Weathermen were
not summertime soldiers but serious warriors, it had just the opposite effect.
The Black Panther leader Fred Hampton called them ''adventuristic, masochistic
and Custeristic.'' It is ironic that, two months later, the Weathermen convened
a ''War Council'' in Flint, Mich., and covered the walls with red and black
posters of Hampton, who had by then been shot dead by police. They were
determined to plug themselves into the black revolution, whether the black
revolution wanted them or not.

''All white babies are pigs,'' one Weatherman shouted during the council, in
which some 400 people crowded into a large hall hung with signs reading ''Piece
(that is, guns) now.'' Bernardine Dohrn, who later took control of the
organization when it went underground, made a speech accusing the left of being
scared ''honkies'' for not burning down Chicago when Hampton was killed, and
urging her audience to take up arms and be ''a fighting force alongside the
blacks.'' The Weathermen were to become as savage as Charles Manson, who
massacred Sharon Tate and her friends in her Beverly Hills home. Dohrn said:
''Dig it, first they killed those pigs, then they ate dinner in the same room
with them, then they even shoved a fork into a victim's stomach. Wild!''

These words, which sounded so powerfully and evilly sick then, today seem only
pathetic - like the child in a temper tantrum who tries to think of the worst
possible names to call his mother. The talk of using guns in armed struggle was
then no more than rhetoric.  What lurked behind the words was far more menacing,
however, and prepared the ground for the events in Nyack 11 years later. It was
not just a revolution from the inside out the Weathermen wanted, but one from
the outside in. They were the white-pig babies, the seed that the white
establishment had planted in the soil of ''Amerika,'' and they wanted to dig it
up and cast it to the wind. It was themselves as individuals that they wanted to
destroy.

After the Flint War Council in December, the Weather Bureau, recognizing that
their lack of widespread popularity boded ill for building a mass movement,
decided to form a secret guerrilla army immediately. They split up into affinity
groups of four or five and worked at a manic pitch to assemble and construct
bombs. Only about 75 were chosen for this mission, and the rest were purged, or
dropped out of their own accord. The organization obliterated what was left of
S.D.S., which had mobilized thousands to protest the war through the 1960's, in
the same spirit as they wiped out their pasts. A contingent shredded and burned
all the records at S.D.S.  headquarters in Chicago; there were to be no groups
in the future who would rival their own way of doing things.

The New York cell contained two Weather leaders, Kathy Boudin and Cathlyn
Wilkerson, as well as Diana, and two other active Weathermen, Terry Robbins and
Ted Gold, and was located at the West 11th Street home of Cathlyn Wilkerson's
father, who was away at the time. After firebombing the home of the judge in the
conspiracy trial of the Black Panther 21 - a group of militant Black Panthers
charged with bombing a long list of targets including department stores and
police stations - the Weatherman cell decided more dramtic and damaging action
was needed. On March 2, one of the Weathermen purchased two 50-pound cases of
dynamite in New Hampshire for a planned random bombing of buildings at Columbia
University, the site of student uprisings in the spring of 1968. The 11th Street
cell members debated whether to use antipersonnel bombs and the appropriateness
of the proposed target. Kathy Boudin reportedly favored it. Diana had doubts.
Arguments went on day and night, sleep was lost and nerves were frayed. Finally,
the militants won out, but by the time they did everyone was so exhausted - and
still so inexperienced with explosives - that they had not properly equipped
what was once Mr.  Wilkerson's work room, and now was a bomb factory.

On Monday, March 2, 1970, the same day the dynamite was bought, Diana called her
sister, Carol, and asked, in a voice tinged with urgency, if the family would
support her no matter what happened.  Two days later, the sister received a
packet containing Diana's address book, farm documents, correspondence and
anything else that could identify her. On Friday, Diana, reportedly
heavy-hearted and shaky, went down to the cellar to put together the wire,
clock, batteries and dynamite that, just before noon, would explode and kill
her.

Cathlyn Wilkerson and Kathy Boudin, on the floors above, scrambled out of the
townhouse that was collapsing around them. They were practically naked; their
clothes blasted to shreds. They ran down the street to the house of a neighbor,
who let them wash and change. That night, when Jean Boudin arrived home, Kathy
was standing in the kitchen. For almost a year, she had come in and out of the
house like a phantom, and whenever she showed up, her parents would try to talk
to her, to re-establish some kind of rapport. Jean began chattering about a fire
on West 11th Street that she had passed that afternoon, about the all the fire
engines and about how angry it make her that they rushed in force to the
townhouse of some rich person while letting tenements in the ghettos burn away.
Kathy didn't reply. Jean finally went to bed. And that was the last time, until
several weeks ago, that she saw her daughter.

After the explosion, the Weathermen went on the lam. They ''demilitarized''
their units, and reappraised their tactics. Kathy Boudin was reportedly removed
for a time from the leadership, and a more moderate strategy -emphasizing the
symbolic bombing of empty buildings -was adopted. Three months later, following
a warning, the New York City Police Headquarters on Centre Street was bombed. No
one was injured.

Although their photographs hung in post offices around the country, they boasted
that they ''moved freely in and out of every city and youth scene in the
country.'' They derided their parents for saying that ''the revolution was a
game for us'' and they swore they would never go home.

How did so many of them evade capture for more than a decade? They developed
what one called ''a new pair of eyes and ears.'' They dyed their hair, wore
colored contact lenses, altered driver's licenses or other I.D.'s. Once they
assumed an alias, they always used it to refer to one another. They set up a
network of urban safe houses and rural farm communes and moved from one to the
other. Contact with one another, friends and relatives was made through
post-office boxes, and sometimes telephone answering services. But the pay-phone
system of America was their most trusted accomplice. At prearranged times, they
would call each other from different booths in different cities; they charged
the calls to false or stolen credit-card numbers; they would never let a phone
ring too long or use the same one too many times. Their rendezvous were right
out of a spy novel: Buses were taken to the end of the line; subways then
doubled them back; then two or three different taxi rides landed them a mile or
more from the meeting place. They never returned to a place where they had been
when above ground.

Although the Cuban mission in New York acted as a liaison (a few Weathermen were
known to have gone to Cuba), by far the greatest asset of the Weather
Underground was located up on the surface.  Poets, artists, lawyers of the far
left, the monied radical chic, the legions of yippies, S.D.S.'ers and
sympathizers formed a web of overground support that was always good for instant
cash, instant havens and instant message drops. Deserter organizations in Canada
also helped with border crossings and bogus identification papers.

When I returned to the United States in 1970, it was not the same country I had
abandoned two years before. A ''New Nation'' really did seem to be forming
within the old. Its inhabitants actually looked different, for the over-30's did
not yet wear jeans and long hair.  There were whole neighborhoods that belonged
only to them, in the same way I had seen the Falls Road in Belfast belong to the
I.R.A.  There were alternative newspapers, people's parks, free health centers,
and agitprop theaters. In Chicago, I saw notices warning against the ''Red
Squad'': ''Agent, blue eyes, blue Cortina, black hair to shoulders,'' or ''Pig
posing as writer, red beard, calls everyone 'friend,' often seen around Armitage
Street.'' After asking questions about the Weathermen for a few days, I half
expected to see my own name and description pinned to brick. Once I ''passed,''
however - as I had done at the White Panther house - I was trusted by one and
all. It was exhilarating. This ''underground'' network that existed right out in
the open provided a sense of hope and power that is hard to describe. It seemed
that some kind of historic change was in the air.

As I continued to scribble notes about Diana Oughton, I kept hearing the words
that she had said to a professional friend who shared her political views: ''But
if you feel that way, don't you think you have a duty to act on it?'' White-skin
privilege. I had it too. Like many other young people in those days, I felt
uneasy about building a career, about living like a normal privileged person in
normal privileged times, while others were dodging the draft and throwing blood
on the Pentagon and getting arrested to protest a war that was decimating our
generation. I was letting others put their lives on the line for my beliefs.

Out of these frustrations the romantic fantasy of Weatherman was born. With the
Vietnam War getting bigger and bloodier, the presence of an outlaw people's army
was a source of catharsis. Its tactics might have been widely condemned on the
left, but its exploits conjured up the tales of Robin Hood and his Merry Men. In
September l970, the Weathermen arranged the escape of Timothy Leary, the LSD
guru, from a California prison where he was serving a term for possession of
marijuana. Any group that could do that had the adulation of the youth culture.
(A knowledgeable underground source now says that the Weathermen charged $20,000
for the favor, a fact that, had it been known then, might have slightly sullied
the Weathermen's image.) The fact that they could make a small part of the
Pentagon and the Capitol building crumble under their dynamite, gave new meaning
to the same old antiwar slogans. They were the band and banner that kept the
movement from retreating from the battlefield.

By 1974, however, the Weathermen demonstrated that they were fast losing touch
with the real world: 25,000 copies of a book-length document called Prairie
Fire, actually printed with gloved hands to avoid fingerprints, were released
from the underground and it was without doubt one of the most boring political
manifestoes ever written. The war was finally ending, Richard Nixon was being
booted out, and the last thing anyone wanted to read was a paean to black
terrorism combined with a tired lecture on dialectical materialism.

That same year, one Weather Underground fugitive, Jane Alpert, gave herself up,
and in the days while she was waiting to be sentenced, she chose me, by this
time a reporter for The Times, to speak with.  She told me of her travels
underground and of how Weathermen fugitives lived joyless, determined lives,
existing on yogurt and endless political debate, spending the night here and
there in sleeping bags.

In the spring of 1975, I received a manila envelope stamped with the return
address of a company in New York I had never heard of.  Assuming it was junk
mail, I almost discarded it when I noticed it was a magazine called Osawatomie -
very professionally printed by none other than the Weather Underground. Like
other selected members of the media who received issues of the bimonthly
publication, I always tore up the envelopes in case of a visit from the F.B.I.
The magazine claimed that the Weather Underground had carried out a total of 25
bombings since the beginning of the year, some of them ''in support of Black
Liberation,'' and revealed that Weather fugitives had been surfacing in
disguise. One cell, for instance, claimed to have infiltrated the meetings of
ROAR, (an acronym for Restore Our Alienated Rights) a rascist antibusing cabal
in Boston. The magazine also contained poetry, short stories and articles
written on the lam.

But after 1975, the organization took credit for no more bombings, and the
magazine stopped coming. The last official word from it came in May 1976, when
Weathermen startled everyone by walking across movie screens in theaters all
over the country. Filmed in a safe house in Los Angeles, Emile de Antonio's
documentary, ''Underground,'' featured a conversation with Kathy Boudin,
Bernardine Dohrn, Cathlyn Wilkerson, Bill Ayers and Jeff Jones.  (Jones was
recently charged in conection with the bombing of a factory in Hoboken, N.J.)
They were shot through a gauzy scrim or from behind, so that the effect was a
collage of titilating fragments: Bernardine's graying hair, her thin, veined
hands pouring a pot of steaming tea, Jones's floppy hat, Kathy Boudin's hunched
blue back. They spoke so gently and tentatively that you might have thought they
were the local P.T.A. -until they said they were as committed as ever to
revolution through violence. In one moving part, Kathy Boudin talked about being
inside the townhouse explosion: ''... the rumble of it, it's that kind of time
that can't be counted on a clock ... that seems to go on forever. And you have a
chance to see your whole life in that moment, and also the lives of your
friends.''

Some two and a half years ago, the Weather Underground reportedly broke into two
camps: the Prairie Fire collective, which favored resurfacing (most of the
charges against the group had been dismissed because Federal agents used illegal
methods, such as wiretapping, to obtain them), and the May 19th Coalition, which
wanted to become part of a black terrorist army. The former is said to have
included Bernardine Dohrn and Bill Ayers, and the latter, Kathy Boudin and
Judith Clark. A pact was made at the time prohibiting any Weathermen from
publicly speaking about the split - or about anything else connected with the
underground. And so far no one has. Since then, several have surrendered: Cathy
Wilkerson, now serving three years for possession of the dynamite that caused
the townhouse explosion; Bernardine Dohrn, who was fined on local Chicago riot
charges and put on three-year probation, and Bill Ayers, against whom charges
had been dropped but who had been living with Bernardine Dohrn and their two
small children in Manhattan under an assumed name.

Friends of Bernardine Dohrn and Cathlyn Wilkerson say the children that they had
borne underground were a deciding factor in their surfacing. Both Kathy Boudin,
who had only a minor charge similar to Bernardine Dohrn's outstanding against
her, and Judith Clarke, who was in the clear, also had babies to concern them
but they opted to remain underground. In fact, Kathy Boudin, who always wanted
to be identified with the poor, registered for welfare under an alias (Lydia
Adams); she gave her baby's name as C. Jackson Adams, and called him Chesa,
after her heroine, Joanne Chesimard, ''Queen of the Black Liberation Army.''

All her life, Kathy Boudin, like Diana Oughton, had been an unbending person,
determined to finish what she started. During the last two years, while the
radical underground was dwindling into irrelevance, Kathy and other white
members of the May 19th Coalition reportedly became more and more rigid,
refusing to shake hands with anyone, for example, until they knew the person's
politics. They lived in a constant state of deprivation and existed in a vacuum;
unable to mix freely in society, their measure of the world might have been
taken in large part from doomsday headlines in the tabloids. From such isolation
comes a kind of paranoia. Although most of the charges against them had been
dropped (much of the evidence against them had been gathered illegally, it
turned out), they felt hunted, and like a wounded bear, they eventually turned
to attack those they saw as their hunters. When the public and even the F.B.I.
cared nothing about them, it was the Black Liberation Army with its automatic
weapons and reckless abandon that gave them a purpose: a way to make good on
years of rhetoric, once and for all to prove that they were not just rich kids
playing at revolution.

In the end, however, the degree of rage that sustained them for so long had its
roots in more than social conscience. The young are angry almost by definition,
and it is natural for them to want to save the world. But as one matures, the
world narrows and grand designs give way to personal goals. The Vietnam War
ended. My rage abated as did the rage of thousands of others of my generation.
But those white radicals who massacred innocents at Nyack never seemed to move
forth from that moment in time when they blindly assembled antipersonnel bombs
on West 11th Street. In the end, they froze into a tableau that was a chilling
perversion of every purpose they had ever had: the children of the rich killing
the less privileged in the name of revolution. It was clear that their rage had
become psychosis, their struggle was with self-hatred, and the only revolution
they would fight was the one taking place in their own minds.

On Tuesday, Oct. 20, the romance between the Weather Underground and what
remained of its public came to an abrupt end. An off-duty corrections officer
named Michael Koch drove into the midst of a gun battle between police and the
assailants fleeing from the Nyack robbery. He jumped from his car and went off
in pursuit of a woman who turned out to be Kathy Boudin. ''It was a firefight,
like I was back in Vietnam,'' Koch said. He struggled to subdue Kathy Boudin and
as he did so, the Weatherwoman looked back at her fleeing B.L.A.  accomplices
and, in childlike indignation, screamed: ''I didn't shoot him! He did!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Diana Oughton with her nanny in 1967 photo of
Diana Oughton in 1969 photo of Kathy Boudin in 1964 photo of Boudin's wanted
poster photo of New York apartment house Bounin lived in photo of Brink's guard
Peter Paige, who was shot in Nyack photo of scene in Nyack photo of Nyack
policeman Waverly Brown, killed in

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Nonfiction in Brief

BYLINE: By Charles Kaiser

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1923 words


THE COSMO REPORT By Linda Wolfe.  416 pp. New York: Arbor House. $14.75.

Last year Cosmopolitan magazine asked its readers to complete a remarkably
detailed 79-question survey about sex, and 106,000 American women, aged 14 to
70, responded. While purists may question the accuracy of this self-selected
sample, what it lacks in statistical orthodoxy it surely makes up for in sheer
diversity.

A 31-year-old Texas housewife dreams of making her 16-year-old stepson her
sexual slave. A New Jersey schoolteacher fantasizes about taking the role of the
dead partner in an act of necrophilia. Five percent of the women surveyed
fantasized about an animal during intercourse. Read this book and know that,
whatever you're thinking, you are not alone.

The statistical results (fascinating in themselves) were supplemented by letters
from thousands of women who wrote to elaborate on their multiple-choice answers.
The excerpts reproduced here are in turn funny, sad, moving, prurient and, on
the subject of fatherdaughter incest, absolutely terrifying.

For the most part, the author, Linda Wolfe, analyzes this cornucopia of
experience in a tone that is neither judgmental nor voyeuristic, in admirable
contrast to some of her predecessors.  Though she admits to daydreaming that
''contributing'' to the ''sexual knowledge'' of the American woman in 1981 might
be akin to ''lending one's best dress to Nancy Reagan,'' she concludes that as
long as there are women who still don't know how to achieve orgasm (one
respondent had her first at age 69), there is still room for one more book of
this kind.

Among the statistical highlights: Only 5 percent of these women had their first
sexual experience with their husbands (versus 50 percent in Kinsey's day); more
than one-fifth had sex before they were 15, more than 90 percent by the time
they were 25; 90 percent did not achieve orgasm during their first experience;
70 percent ''always or usually'' achieved orgasm after that, although only
onethird ''usually'' achieved orgasm during intercourse. The author reports that
the New York Hospital/Cornell Medical Center Sex Therapy Treatment Center no
longer considers women who ''have orgasms during partner sex but not during
intercourse as 'dysfunc-tional.' '' Such a woman is, ''in effect, considered par
for the course, eminently functional, altogether normal.''

The single most searing letter comes from a 15-year-old girl in New York City,
who writes that her father began raping her regularly when she was 12. ''When I
told my mother what was going on, she shocked me with the comment: 'You know
perfectly well that he beats me, so why should I care about you?' ... Counselors
didn't care. They felt sorry for my father, saying he was sick.''

While sexual norms have certainly changed dramatically over the past three
decades, these women report that the tyranny of the majority remains very much
with them: ''It turned out that a great deal of what today passes as uninhibited
sexual behavior is in fact the result of new inhibitions, is in fact conformity
to new sorts of sexual tyranny. ...'' Many believed that, ''like the heirs to
political revolutions, they had been betrayed. They had participated in the
overthrow of one tyranny only to see another installed in its place.''
THE GERM OF LAZINESS Rockefeller Philanthropy and Public Health in the New
South.  By John Ettling.  263 pp. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
$18.50.

In 1910, about 43 percent of the population of North Carolina and more than six
million residents of eight other Southern states were suffering from hookworm, a
particularly debilitating parasite whose effects were first identified 10
centuries before Hippocrates.  Entering its victims in the South
''unobtrusively, usually through the tender skin between the toes,'' it
transformed them into what Robert Penn Warren called ''gaunt, barefoot, whiskery
scarecrows,'' and often made them listless - thus its nickname, ''the germ of
laziness.''

Because hookworm was so pervasive, and because a cheap and effective cure
costing less than 50 cents per dosage was readily available, the disease was an
ideal target for an early Rockefeller philanthropic effort. For only $800,000,
dramatic results were possible practically overnight. John Ettling, an assistant
professor of history at the University of Houston, has written an elegant
account of this early medical campaign whose principals imbued it with an
evangelical fervor.

First to make the cause his own was Charles Wardwell Stiles, the son of a
Methodist minister. Stiles idea of ''subverting'' his father was to respond to
his command to master the Bible by learning to read it in five foreign
languages. A pioneer American public health scientist educated in Europe, Stiles
was an early advocate of improved outhouses (essential to the prevention of
recurring outbreaks of the disease) and quickly earned the sobriquet of ''The
Privy Councillor'' from a Government colleague in Washington.

The reluctance of the Treasury Department to invest in Stiles schemes forced him
to seek private funds to promote the cause of public health. He persisted even
after the shock of having persuaded one philanthropist to contribute $2 million
to his campaign, only to read his obituary two weeks before the scheduled
announcement (and formal confirmation) of the gift.

He finally succeeded when he attracted the attention of Frederick Taylor Gates,
John D. Rockefeller's first full-time philanthropic adviser, who had prepped for
his role with the oil magnate with an unusually successful flour manufacturer in
Minnesota named Pillsbury. Gates convinced Rockefeller that he should
appropriate $1 million for the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission, which performed
more than a million examinations in new dispensaries throughout the South and
treated more than 400,000 patients ($200,000 remained unspent at the end of the
commission's five-year life span).

The author hints at the suspicion the Rockefeller name could inspire early in
this century by quoting an Arkansas legislator. The lawmaker charged that the
commission's campaign to get hookworm victims to wear shoes (to prevent
reinfection) was the result of a conspiracy between ''the doctors' trust'' and
the ''leather trust,'' who together ''invented the great bugaboo of the hookworm
so that poor people had to wear more shoes.''

While rejecting that view, Mr. Ettling does associate himself with the findings
of other scholars who have concluded that Rockefeller's philanthropy was
motivated at least in part by ''a broader concern for the permanent economic and
social viability of capitalist society.''

The violence inspired by labor disputes at Colorado mines in which the
Rockefellers owned a substantial minority interest culminated in the notorious
Ludlow massacre in 1914, provoking a new outcry against the Rockefellers'
activities. One result, writes Mr. Ettling, was to make the ''prospect of
overseas work among submissive colonials increasingly more attractive.'' Four
months after Ludlow, John D.  Rockefeller suddenly announced his decision to
terminate the Sanitary Commission's activities in the South, in part to make it
possible to pay more attention to such ''submissive colonials.''

Mr. Ettling's book has already won the Allan Nevins Prize of the Society of
American Historians. The habitual reader of American nonfiction is gradually
numbed into an unwilling acceptance of the pedestrian prose styles that usually
confront him. That fact makes this gracefully written and beautifully researched
book particularly welcome.
OFF THE COURT By Arthur Ashe.  With Neil Amdur.  Illustrated. 230 pp. New York:
New American Library. $13.95.

Arthur Ashe grew up knowing ''I was a Negro, colored, black, a coon, a
pickanniny, a nigger, an ace, a spade, and other less flattering terms.'' He was
nurtured by a loving father and driven by a desire to ''make up'' for the loss
his father suffered because of his mother's early death. He is opposed to the
minimum wage (because he thinks it discourages black employment), he believes
blacks ''have become too psychologically dependent on the U.S. Government,'' he
admires Arnold Palmer's merchandising ability, he lends money easily, and he
thinks the Vietnam War was unnecessary, although he also regrets that he was
never in combat.

In this ''as told to'' autobiography, written with Neil Amdur, a veteran sports
reporter for The New York Times, Mr. Ashe is generous about giving credit to
others who helped him become the first black man to win both Wimbledon and the
U.S. Open, particularly Dr. Robert Johnson, his first important coach. ''I
survived,'' says Mr. Ashe, ''because I had someone holding my hand, I didn't do
it myself. Dr.  Johnson was one of a kind.''

Dr. Johnson taught Mr. Ashe in the 1950's that there were ''maxims meant only
for little black Southern boys: When in doubt, call your opponent's shot good;
if you're serving the game before the change of ends, pick up the balls on your
side and hand them to your opponent during the crossover. Dr. Johnson knew we
were going into territory that was often hostile, and he wanted our behavior to
be beyond reproach. It would be years before I understood the emotional toll of
repressing anger and natural frustration.''

Mr. Ashe acknowledges his image problem - ''a lot of people think of me as
detached, aloof, cold'' - and he tries to combat it here with relentless
frankness. ''I am detached somewhat,'' he concedes, ''and maybe a little aloof,
but I'm not cold.'' To humanize the public Arthur Ashe, we learn about his
''first time'' in Richmond's Byrd Park, his first white girl at U.C.L.A., his
visit to a Saigon whorehouse and even his views on sex during a tournament: ''If
you're married or have a longtime girlfriend and you make love for 20 minutes
the night before some match but still sleep eight hours, there's no problem. But
if you are up half the night ... that's got to hurt you. The body can't take too
much of that.''

But despite these self-conscious attempts at openness, Mr. Ashe rarely gets
below the surface of his own psyche - or of the tennis world in which he
excelled. His biggest win came in 1975, when he electrified the tennis circuit
by upsetting Jimmy Connors in the Wimbledon final. Yet he says, ''I don't want
to be remembered mainly because I won Wimbledon.'' Perhaps that's one reason why
his account of his single greatest triumph is surprisingly undramatic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FICTION BRIEFS

BYLINE: By Mel Watkins

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1212 words


TRADITIONS By Alan Ebert.  With Janice Rotchstein.  597 pp. New York: Crown
Publishers. $14.95.

The backdrop for this first novel is the theatrical world -from Broadway to
Hollywood to the London stage. The story begins as aspiring teen-age actresses
Margaret and Carolyn Tiernan leave New York aboard the Super Chief in 1934 to
rendezvous in Los Angeles with their parents - successful stage performers who
are motoring to California to begin their film careers. But the elder Tiernans
are involved in a fatal auto crash, and when Margaret and Carolyn arrive in
L.A., they are left to fend for themselves.

Journalists Alan Ebert (writer) and Janice Rotchstein (researcher) provide a
detailed blueprint of the ingenues' meteoric rise to stardom as well as a
melodramatic account of their personal entanglements. During her climb from bit
parts to Oscar-winning leading lady, impetuous Margaret is impregnated by a
stagehand, forced to marry a homosexual western star to protect her screen
image, then consoled in a torrid but frustrating affair with a studio head
before she marries a staid banker. More sedate Carolyn weds a handsome studio
public-relations man and has three children while she molds a dignified career
as a stage actress.

The authors trace the lives of the sisters, their paramours and offspring
through the World War II years and on to the Vietnam War, the revolutionary 60's
and the early 70's, when, after many crises, the Tiernan brood finds tentative
serenity and legendary status as one of America's premier theatrical families.
Told in neardocumentary style, this sober mini-saga lacks the vitality and
evocative quality of the best commercial fiction, but it does offer four decades
of theatrical lore as seen from one family's perspective.
NIGHT SANCTUARY By Monique van Vooren.  448 pp. New York: Summit Books. $14.95.

It's no surprise that Monique van Vooren's ''Night Sanctuary'' reads much like a
tabloid gossip column. The author is an entertainer whose name is often linked
with the jet set. And in this, her first novel (she is the author of ''The Happy
Cooker,'' a cookbook), real luminaries move in and around the lives of her
fictional characters.

Center stage in this rambling guided tour through the haunts of the superrich is
Vladimir Volodin, a Russian defector and ''the most spectacular ballet dancer
since Nijinsky.'' And flitting about him are three glamorous women: Mariela
Koenig, a former courtesan and dominatrix who marries an automobile tycoon and
ascends to the governor's mansion in Michigan; Mattie Maxwell, a singer-actress
whose drug habit is the most formidable obstacle to her rise to stardom; and
Denise Cunningham, a sharecropper's daughter whose ''elusive, astounding
beauty'' and ruthless ambition have led her through affairs with the likes of
Juan Peron and marriage to a Roman prince, to imminent social status as the wife
of ''America's leading aeronautical magnate.''

Although international financial skulduggery, blackmail and murder enter into
this glittery tale, the plot is nearly irrelevant. The main focus of this novel
is on the accouterments and boudoirs of the elite. As she traces the converging
lives of Vladimir and the women who pursue him, Miss van Vooren details both the
spectacular settings in which they move and the liaisons in which they are
constantly involved. When the amorous pyrotechnics are concluded and Vladimir
has taken his most sensational leap, however, one is left with the disheartening
sense that life in the fast lane is not that intriguing.

''Traditions,'' as Miss van Vooren has said, offers a ''look through the keyhole
of the bedrooms of the most extraordinary people in the world.'' But in this
instance the view is more gamy than entertaining. Perhaps, though, as Norman
Mailer notes in the jacket copy, ''It's safe to predict that no best seller this
year will be written by anyone more beautiful than Monique van Vooren.''
NO TIME FOR TEARS By Cynthia Freeman.  411 pp. New York: Arbor House. $14.95.

Best-selling author Cynthia Freeman has chosen an exceedingly wide canvas for
her sixth book. Spanning three generations, this impassioned novel follows its
heroine, Chavala Landau, from turn-ofthe-century Russia to Palestine and on to
the United States, where she carves out a financial empire in the diamond
industry before returning to Jerusalem in 1948. But ''No Time for Tears'' is
more than a generational saga; Miss Freeman has attempted to depict the struggle
for a Jewish state in Palestine through the lives of her characters.

The tale begins in the Jewish ghetto of a small Russian village near Odessa as
Chavala's mother dies during childbirth. Forced to take responsibility for her
family even though she is only 16, Chavala marries Dovid, a friend of the
family. They remain in Russia for a time, but after a bloody pogrom Chavala uses
the family jewelry to finance passage to Palestine. There Chavala and Dovid join
the growing number of immigrants fighting to establish a Jewish state. Then, in
1920, Chavala goes to America, leaving Dovid, who is absorbed in the Zionist
movement, behind.

Living on Manhattan's Lower East Side with her son and her sisters and brother,
Chavala saves enough money to open a pawnshop on Mott Street. The business
grows, and soon she has opened a jewelry store on Fifth Avenue as well as shops
in Miami and Los Angeles. By the 30's she has established a small financial
empire. Aldhough she remains in America, Chavala provides financial support for
Dovid and the Zionist cause, even smuggling gems into Palestine. Then, in 1948,
when the state of Israel is established, she returns ''home'' to reunite her
family.

Miss Freeman relates this tale of struggle and courage in heartfelt, almost
inspirational prose and, in those scenes in which she focuses on the personal
struggles of Chavala and her family, the novel has some poignancy.
Unfortunately, in attempting to depict the history of the Zionist struggle in
Palestine, Miss Freeman is forced to resort to narrative gimmicks such as short
historical sketches and synopses of the ongoing conflict among the Jews, Arabs,
Turks and British. The story of Chavala, by itself, unadorned by journalistic
asides, might have made a better novel. As it stands, ''No Time for Tears'' is a
fictional saga critically bowed by the weight of bathos and historical summary.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Behind the Best Sellers;
HOWARD FAST

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section 7; Page 50, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 682 words


Howard Fast and Bette, his wife of 44 years, moved back to Connecticut from
California last year because - as he puts it - ''my wife wanted to and because
I'm very fond of her.'' He still misses California, though, and it is easy to
understand why. It is the setting for his hugely successful multivolume saga of
the Lavette family, the fourth volume of which, ''The Legacy,'' is No. 5 on this
week's fiction best-seller list.

Mr. Fast lived in southern California for six years, but it is San Francisco
that is the setting for his saga of the Lavettes, the Italian immigrant family
chronicled in ''The Immigrants'' (1977), ''Second Generation'' (1978) and ''The
Establishment'' (1979). ''No more perfect city exists as a background for a
novel,'' he says.  ''It's the one jewel-like city this country has, and what's
more, it has structured its history in terms of a novel. So while my characters
are fictional, I tried to make my history reasonably good history.''

The new novel, centered on Barbara Lavette, the family patriarch's daughter, is
filled with events culled from recent history, including a civil rights lynching
in the South, anti-Vietnam War protests, the Six-Day War between Israel and
Egypt, and the women's movement. ''I chose Barbara's birth date to be the same
as mine,'' Mr. Fast says, ''so that, as I followed her chronologically through
life, I could reflect on her experiences.''

A native of New York, Mr. Fast has himself had enough interesting experiences in
his 67 years to fill several lifetimes. He has written almost 60 books,
including a novel published when he was 18. This despite the fact that for about
eight years, during the 1950's, no major publisher would touch him - even though
he had made a name for himself years before with such books as ''Freedom Road''
and ''Citizen Tom Paine.'' He became a publishing pariah after he served three
months in prison for refusing to give to the House Un-American Activities
Committee the names of contributors to an organization on the Attorney General's
list, and after he was awarded the Stalin International Peace Prize in 1954.

During the years of the blacklist, Mr. Fast self-published ''Spartacus,'' a
novel about slavery in ancient Rome, and later several other books, including
''The Passion of Sacco and Vanzetti.'' The stigma of the blacklist gradually
faded after Mr. Fast publicly repudiated communism in 1956, following Nikita
Khrushchev's denunciation of Stalin. ''Spartacus'' was reprinted in paperback
and made into a motion picture starring Kirk Douglas.

''I was a part of a generation that believed in socialism and finally found that
belief corroded and destroyed,'' Mr. Fast says.  ''That is not renouncing
communism or socialism. It's reaching a certain degree of enlightenment about
what the Soviet Union practices.'' But he acknowledges that his earlier writings
were often dogmatic. ''To be dogmatic about a cause you believe in at the age of
20 or 30 is not unusual,'' he says. ''But to be dogmatic at age 55 or 60 shows a
lack of any learning capacity.'' Yet even when he was a Communist, he says, ''my
books were attacked constantly by the Communist Party for not hewing to the
Party line. I have never hewed to a Party line of any kind.''

These days Mr. Fast is interested in Zen - not as a substitute for the god that
failed, ''but as a form of meditation and a very nice way of looking at the
world. I think that of all the religions known to man, Zen is probably the
gentlest.''

Mr. Fast's family includes three other writers - son Jonathan, a novelist,
daughter-in-law Erica Jong and brother Julius, who has written on body language.
Mr. Fast continues to write several hours every day. ''The only thing that
infuriates me,'' he says, ''is that I have more unwritten stories in me than I
can conceivably write in a lifetime.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Howard Fast

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOUR ISLANDS A LA CARTE

SECTION: Section 10; Page 15, Column 3; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 3207 words


CRAIG CLAIBORNE is the food editor of The New York Times.

By CRAIG CLAIBORNE

It has been a custom of mine to visit the Caribbean for the Christmas holidays
for the last 15 years and more. Over this period of time, I have sampled a great
variety of restaurants, and have come to one unwavering conclusion about them:
Almost all alter, sometimes drastically, from year to year. Changes of
management are not uncommon, changes of staff are frequent and chefs, in
particular, move on to other establishments, or other islands, or back to France
or the United States or wherever they originally came from.

It is thus necessary to reassess any Caribbean restaurant pretty frequently.
What fol-lows is an account of recent dining experiences on four islands, two of
which I had known from earlier visits and two of which were unknown to me until
this year.
St. Martin

In each of the last several years, I have looked forward to drinks and lunch on
St. Martin at an establishment for the well-heeled known as La Samanna. The
hours I have spent there have been consistently rewarding. There is a fine
terrace overlooking a large pool, where you may sip your rum punch, Bloody Mary,
Perrier or what you will, while contemplating your choice of foods from an
imaginative and impressively varied menu. There is no more conscientious kitchen
to be found on the entire island.

My most recent lunchtime visit was nearly as felicitous as ever.  The meal, in
the com-
This is the first of a series of special reports that will appear from time to
time on dining in the Caribbean. Next week: the restaurants of Guadeloupe.
pany of three friends, was an almost total delight. It began with an excellent
gazpacho, a very good vichyssoise and a laudable cold terrine of vegetables,
layers of pureed artichokes and pureed carrots, surrounded by an impeccable
light tomato sauce and made slightly peppery with fresh chilies. A bowl of
minestrone - the soup du jour - was innocuous, but seemed a curious item for a
tropical menu.

La Samanna has a roofed-over but otherwise open dining room, surrounded by
bougainvillea and offering a spectacular view of the ocean. Among the main
courses was a platter of grilled red snapper served with, according to the
waiter, sauce Creole. (The sauce, which is made with oil, chopped onions and
peppers, is more often referred to in the Caribbean as sauce chien, which
translates inelegantly as dog sauce.) One of the best foods we sampled was the
meaty wild mushrooms known as cepes, which were sauteed.

A dish of chicken salad was a palatal joy -although the guest to whom it was
served found it a trifle oily. That oil, a hazelnut oil, was of the finest
quality. I also admired the salad accompaniment, field greens (known in French
as mache) and that fine Italian lettuce known as radicchio with its bright, red
leaves, crunchy texture and slightly bitter flavor. I was told by the kitchen
that much of the fresh food is flown in from that bastion of fresh luxury
ingredients, the Rungis Market outside Paris. Thus the cepes, radicchio and
mache.

The desserts were impressive, a vivid assortment of miniature tortes, glazed and
topped with fresh fruits and berries. There was also a cake constructed of
ladyfingers and filled with a slightly grainy chocolate mousse, as well as what
may be the finest coconut sherbet imaginable. With the meal we drank a dry white
Burgundy - a very good Meursault - priced at $30. Other wines at La Samanna are
about $25 to $60.

I was left with one regret about this season's visit to La Samanna. Some of
choice items from the past, notably two salads, one of pigeon wings and another
of sweetbreads, have been deleted from the menu.

La Samanna's menu is entirely a la carte, with luncheon dishes priced from about
$12 to $28; main evening courses from about $21 to $48. Credit cards accepted.
Service charge not included. La Samanna is fairly close to the airport.
Telephone: 87-51-22. Comfortably cool. Since a visit to Saigon several years
ago, I have come to believe that the traditional cuisine of Vietnam ranks among
the ten greatest on earth. It is also one of the most difficult to re-create
elsewhere because of the many fresh herbs required. I was therefore delighted to
find a stylish Vietnamese restaurant on St. Martin, close by the hotel where I
stayed, the Grand Case Beach Club.

The restaurant is the Hoa-Mai, named for the Vietnamese woman who is proprietor
and chef. I was taken there by friends of hers, and my host ordered a veritable
banquet, a sampling of all the dishes on the menu. The fare was pork cubes with
pineapple, a curry of shrimp, bits of red snapper with chopped preserved ginger,
shrimp fritters with a sweet-and-sour sauce, beef with vegetables delicately
seasoned with cardamom, pieces of chicken with peanuts, chicken with Vietnamese
spices and pork with slices of bamboo shoots. The food was excellent, but the
most interesting item was a first course of pork meatballs on skewers, served
with rice-flour doilies and an assortment of sauces ranging from a sesame seed
and soy sauce to a hot chili sauce. With the meal we were served a nondescript
house wine - a white burgundy - that was not well chilled.

The cost of a complete dinner at the Hoa-Mai is $18. The a la carte main courses
are priced from about $9.50 to $10.70, wines from about $8.50 to $24. The
Hoa-Mai is on the main street in the Grand Case section of the island. It is
open seven days a week; dinner only.  Telephone: 87-56-85. Credit cards not
accepted. Comfortably cool. La Vie en Rose, a handsome upstairs establishment on
the harbor in Marigot, the principal town on the French side of St. Martin, is
one of the finest of the island's many fine French restaurants. The decor
(mirrors, arches, ceiling fans and candlelight) and views are impressive.

Although almost all the French restaurants on the island offer dishes built
around puff pastry - that thousand-layered, buttery, lighter-than-air substance
that can be baked in various shapes - the best we sampled was La Vie en Rose's
pastry-enclosed fillets of red snapper on a bed of spinach. The meal began with
puff-wrapped white asparagus in a delicate cream sauce with herbs, a fine fish
soup, with sauce rouille and crusty croutons, and a good onion soup au gratin.
Main courses were sliced, rare breast of duck - magret du canard - with herb
butter and an outstanding dish of sauteed medallions of veal in a light cream
sauce. We drank an excellent Beaujolais, 1979; the food and wine service was
attentive.

There were one or two flaws in the preparation of the meal. The sauce for the
duck was too vinegary, the cheese on the onion soup too stringy. The asparagus
was from a tin, but it was excellent. The coffee at the end of the meal was
insipid.

La Vie en Rose is closed Sundays until Dec. 1. After that it will be open for
lunch and dinner seven days a week. The cost of main courses at midday is from
about $12 to $19.50; in the evening
from about $15 to $21.50, wines from about $15 to $110. Telephone: 87-54-42.
Comfortably cool. L'Auberge Gourmande, also in Grand Case, may not have the most
innovative menu outside France, but the dining room is comfortable and the
kitchen is more than competent. We were present on opening night a week or so
ago, and our party of four began a most agreeable meal with two excellent
salads, a cream of carrot soup and frogs' legs dijonnaise (in a light, hot,
mustard, cream and herb sauce). The salads were substantial and dressed with a
well-seasoned vinaigrette; one was made with grated carrots, sliced egg, tomato
wedges and shrimp in the shells, the other with salad greens, walnuts, bits of
cheese and ham.

Among the main courses was cubed langouste - the clawless Caribbean version of
lobster - in a baked, fish-shaped puff-pastry shell. We also had fillet of beef
with the tasty wild mushrooms called morels and red snapper served two ways,
with sliced toasted almonds and with blended seafood in a cream sauce.

Not a single main course was faultless; there were bits of bone in one serving
of fish, the puff-pastry shell was a trifle burned, and the beef seemed a bit
tenderized. We drank a chilled Chablis, one bottle of which was slightly
madeirized (its somewhat brown aged flavor is something I have noted with many
white wines in the Caribbean). A dessert of crepes with crunchy apple slices and
a dash or two of Calvados was capital.

All dishes at L'Auberge Gourmande are a la carte and range from about $9 for
fish dishes to $13 for beef, wines from about $9 for a Cotes de Provence to $30
for a bottle of Beaune. The restaurant is closed Wednesdays until Dec. 1, then
open for dinner only, seven days a week. To make a reservation you must stop by;
there is no telephone. Credit cards not accepted. Service charge included. No
air-conditioning. La Nacelle, a stylish, handsome, rustic but elegant restaurant
where I feasted with great pleasure last year, was closed for the season. An
enterprise of Charles Chevillot, who is also proprietor of two restaurants in
Manhattan, Le Tournebroche and Le Petite Ferme, it is to reopen Nov. 28.

The menu runs along the lines of salade ni,coise, avocado vinaigrette, omelets,
entrecotes and lobster. I recently spoke with Mr. Chevillot, who said that the
cost of complete dinners this year will be in the vicinity of $22.

La Nacelle is in Grand Case, about a 10-minute ride from Marigot.  Telephone: 87
53 63. St. Barthelemy

For more than a decade my favorite island in the Caribbean has been St.
Barthelemy, or St. Barts, and for several years my preferred restaurant has been
Castelets, a fine retreat -with a few rooms and suites available - high atop a
hill with a magnificent view. The quality of the kitchen may vary, but it is
generally first rate, and the dining room delights with elegant silver, proper
glassware, nice napery and good service. The restaurant and its adjacent hotel
are owned by a New Yorker, Justin Colin, former president of the American Ballet
Theater Foundation and currently chairman of its executive committee, and the
clientele has included Mikhail Barishnikov and Gelsey Kirkland as well as
Jessica Lange, Tennessee Williams and Valery Giscard d'Estaing.

My most recent meal there, a week or so ago, was shared with friends. It began
with tender local clams served hot on the half shell with a garlic tartar sauce.
We also had an excellent nouvelle cuisine creation, listed as salad Aphrodite,
made of cubed langouste in a delicate mayonnaise with morsels of peach, and an
exceptionally good, meaty but delicately flavored fish mousse on a bed of
spinach with a light hollandaise sauce. Among the main courses were a local fish
called cola, cooked en papillote and served with a langouste sauce and shrimp,
as well as noisettes of lamb and a ballotine of chicken (boned and poached in
the skin), also served with whole shrimp. The menu also offered goose giblets.

Desserts included a wedge of hot apple tart with freshly made vanilla ice cream,
an excellent chocolate mousse made with bitter chocolate and a lime sherbert.
The meal was not without its faults: The lamb was of excellent quality and
cooked to the rarest taste, but it was a touch fatty; the ballotine was
overcooked to the point of being mushy, and the sherbert tasted a bit
artificial. With the meal we drank a nicely chilled bottle of Muscadet.

Castelets menu is a la carte, with main courses ranging from about $12 to $20,
wines from about $10 to $80. The restaurant is closed Tuesdays. No credit cards
accepted. Telephone: 87 61 73. Windswept.  Air-conditioning unnecessary. One of
the pleasantest and most casual places to dine on St. Barts is Chez Francine on
St. Jean Beach next to the Eden Rock Hotel. It plays host to numerous
celebrities each summer (recently among them were Raymond Oliver, who owns Grand
Vefour Restaurant in Paris, Sylvester Stallone, Lino Ventura and Alain Delon,
the actors, and Lee Radziwill).

On my own recent visit, the blackboard menu listed crudites, grilled chicken,
black pudding, steamed lobsters, grilled steak, cheeses, ice creams and a tarte
maison. The food was exceptionally tasty. Among the crudites were grated
carrots, grated cabbage (white and red), tomatoes and cucumbers, all with a
fine-flavored vinaigrette sauce. The lobsters, offered lukewarm or cold
depending on how long they have been out of the kettle, were served with fresh
mayonnaise and salad. With the meal I had a glass of Tavel rose.

Prices range from about $8 for the grilled chicken to $12 for steak. The
lobsters range from $12 to $24 depending on size. Wines are $7 a bottle for
white, $8 for rose and $9 for red. Service not included. Credit cards not
accepted. The restaurant is closed on Mondays. Telephone: 87 60 49. Each
December over the years I have occupied a rented cottage at Village St. Jean in
the area known as St. Jean. The cottage has an admirable view of the harbor and
a reasonably spacious kitchen where I have prepared many a meal, including
Christmas feasts. When I have felt like dining at home, principally at midday
but without cooking, or when I have felt like taking a picnic to the beach, I
usually go to the Rotisserie at Rue La Fayette and Rue Oskar II in the heart of
Gustavia.

It is a small, whistle-neat place where the owners, a young couple, Pierre-Marie
L'Hermite and his wife, Evelyne, turn out a variety of interesting foods cooked
on the premises. There is pate de campagne and pate of liver (both about $7 a
pound) and pate of duck (about $10), as well as black puddings, onion tarts and
other tarts, pissaladieres (French pizzas) and first-rate roast chickens. The
Rotisserie also offers an interesting assortment of salads. At Christmas time
they offer Brittany oysters flown in from France and fresh foie gras.

The Rotisserie is closed Sunday afternoons and all day Monday. It is also closed
each day from 12:30 to 4 P.M. The bakery across the street has excellent French
bread, croissants and pastries.
Saba

For more than a decade I had had two reasons to want to visit the island of
Saba, which I had often gazed at from a distance. First, I had been told that it
is one of the most beautiful islands in the Caribbean, and second, I had heard
praises for the food of the Captain's Quarters.

I made a one-day visit there recently, and I can testify that Saba, an
English-speaking, Dutch-owned island (pronounced SAY-ba in English and SAH-ba in
Dutch), is as close to an earthly paradise as anything I have seen. It is a tiny
island with oleanders and orchids and flamboyant trees, a towering rain forest
and constant light breezes. I am told that there are no racial tensions and
little if any unemployment, and crime is almost nonexistent.

The Captain's Quarters is a bit paradisical itself, with glorious foliage, and
it boasts the only swimming pool on the island - which is an enormous asset, for
there is only one sand beach on the island and that single bit of beach is only
20 feet long.

We dined in a simple, pleasant, roofed-over open-air room. The meal began with a
decent clear beef and vegetable soup, which, although a bit salty, was
acceptable. The remainder of the meal was patently, almost studiously,
pedestrian. The portions were gross and the service hurried and impersonal.

The main courses consisted of a fried fillet of grouper, (at its best, one of
the finest of Caribbean fishes) smothered in an oily Creole sauce of tomatoes,
green peppers and onions. It was accompanied by canned green beans, overcooked
carrots and overcooked macaroni in a tomato sauce. There is a word pertaining to
salads called fatigue, meaning wilted. The salad that came with this meal was
fatigued in the most labored sense of the word: bits of wilted greens and
overcooked beets topped with a nondescript blue cheese dressing. The dessert was
a leaden, too-sugared slice of jellyroll.

The only wine to be had - there is no wine list - was that thin, third-rate,
white Bordeaux known as Entre Deux Mers. The cost of the wine was $9 a bottle.

Meals cost $5 for breakfast, $9 for lunch and $15 for dinner. The dining room is
open every day throughout the season. Telephone: 2201. Windswept. Mustique

The most celebrated thing about Mustique is that it is the island home of
Princess Margaret of Britain. For anyone interested in gastronomy it may be more
important to mention that Michel Guerard, one of the greatest chefs of France
and the creator of cuisine minceur, spends a week or so here each summer at the
Cotton House.  The native-born chef of the Cotton House (the ''house'' actually
consists of a distinguished and handsome group of cottages, with a pool dining
room and a principal roofed, open-air dining room) apprenticed in Guerard's
kitchen at Eugenie-les-Bains in France.

While Mustique is English-owned, the dishes on which I recently dined with
friends constituted some of the best French-Caribbean food that I have eaten. By
the pool I sipped the best fish soup that I had on this trip, full-bodied and
fresh tasting. (Many fish soups that I have tasted in these tropical environs
smack of having been in the kettle longer than a day.) There was an impressive
first-course omelet made with fresh wild mushrooms. The grilled langouste - and
I must here say that I am not all that keen about Caribbean lobster, and my
appetite is easily surfeited by it - was excellently cooked and served with a
first-rate white butter sauce with finely chopped shallots.

There was a dish on the menu labeled fish Michel Guerard, and that chef would
have approved. It consisted of broiled fish with a hollandaise sauce flavored
with lime juice in lieu of lemon, very thin slivers of lime skin and finely
shredded lettuce. My only criticism of the meal was that the omelet was well
done and not soft and runny in the center.

With our meal we drank a well-chilled bottle of Tavel rose. Chilled roses go
exceedingly well with Caribbean food.  Cotton House has lodging accommodations
for 38 guests, but it will accept reservations at meal time from outsiders. The
cost of lunch for nonguests is from about $15 to $22 and in the evening from
about $25 a person. Wines are from about $15 to $22. Telephone: 84-621. The
dining areas are windswept. The Cotton House is the only hotel and the only
serious dining establishment on the island.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Chez Francine on St. Barthelemy photo of clams
on the half shell

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHAPLAINS ASSAIL RUTGERS CUTBACK

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE KLING

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 16, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words


NEW BRUNSWICK CAMPUS chaplains and religious leaders throughout the state are
trying to get the Rutgers University administration to reverse a decision
abolishing the Office of the Coordinator of Religious Affairs.

The termination was ordered in late September by Dr. Edward J.  Bloustein,
president of the university, as one of several budget cutbacks that officials
said were necessitated by a $6 million shortfall resulting from insufficient
state appropriations.

The closing of the office will save $40,000 and is consistent with a ''pattern
of decentralization of administrative services that is well established,'' said
Nathaniel J. Pallone, acting executive vice president of the state university.

Critics of the decision, including members of the campus ministry, contend that
the office and its coordinator, the Rev. Robert J.  Tanksley, have played a
crucial role on campus that should not be treated simply as a student-affairs
function.

''This man has a very, very unique ability to relate to all kinds of groups and
to build trust in a religious community where there is frequently contention and
mistrust,'' said Rabbi Gerald Serotta, associate director of the Rutgers B'nai
B'rith Hillel Foundation. ''I think he's irreplaceable.''

Mr. Tanksley's responsibilities end officially on Dec. 31. They will be assumed
by the provosts at each of the university's three campuses - in Camden, Newark
and New Brunswick.

The provost is the chief administrator and academic officer for his campus and,
as such, oversees all aspects of academic and student life there. To exclude
religious activity from the provosts' oversight is wrong, Dr. Pallone said.

The university also terminated the Office of Personnel Development, which
provided in-service training for nonfaculty employees. In addition, the Office
of Special Studies has been merged with the Office of Institutional Research.

These measures will save the university about $100,000, a spokesman said.
''Given the state of the university's financial picture, it has become
absolutely necessary that we eliminate or sharply reduce expenditures in every
area but instruction and academic programs,'' Dr. Pallone wrote in answer to
Rabbi Serotta and Rabbi Julius J.  Funk, Hillel director at Rutgers. ''The
question is not whether, but only by how much, support for nonacademic programs
is to be reduced.''

But critics argue that the Religious Affairs Office and Mr.  Tanksley should be
spared. Rabbi Serotta described the termination as symptomatic of
''administrative short-sightedness.''

''I don't think it's malicious,'' he said, ''but I think it's genuinely a
disaster for the quality of life at the university.'' The 49-year-old Mr.
Tanksley, a minister of the United Church of Christ, has held the post for seven
years. The position requires contact with 45 chaplains serving the university in
Newark, Camden and New Brunswick.

Mr. Tanksley's activities have included sponsoring conferences and forums
addressing such topics as ''Prayer in a Technological Age,'' human sexuality,
black-Jewish relations and the academic reorganization of Rutgers. He also has
helped in meeting student, faculty and staff needs for services.

Mr. Tanksley said he viewed himself as a ''traffic cop'' who mediated disputes
or misunderstandings between sects and ethnic groups.

He and some others attribute his termination in part to a recent appeal by Dr.
Edward J. Bloustein for research funds from corporations and the Department of
Defense. In a speech in Washington before the National Association of State
Universities and Land Grant Colleges, Dr. Bloustein called the declining
research base of American universities ''the unlisted, unknown casualty of the
Vietnam war.''

And in testimony last spring before the House Armed Services Subcommittee on
Research and Development, Dr. Bloustein said: ''The university research base for
defense preparedness is in some considerable disrepair because of substantial
underfunding. This disrepair in America's research base must be forcefully and
promptly addressed if we are to provide for our common defense.''

''Dr. Bloustein sounds more like a Reagan Cabinet member than the president of a
university dedicated to seeking ways and means to promote peace and to avoid
nuclear holocaust,'' the Rev. Sebastian L. Muccilli, Roman Catholic chaplain at
Rutgers, decalred. ''Thus it becomes accommodating and expedient for (him) to
eliminate from his administration the voice of conscience (Mr. Tanksley), which
he invited to Rutgers seven years ago.''

Some faculty members, too, have voiced their concern with Dr.  Bloustein's new
tack in fund raising.  ''Bloustein is seeking funding wherever he can get it
without regard to the moral underpinnings of those funds,'' said Sherry
Gorelick, associate professor of sociology at the university's Livingston
College in Piscataway.

''It is important that Tanksley raise questions about how the university
functions in the modern world. Those questions have to be asked, and they have
to be given a forum that people will respect.''

Mr. Tanksley himself has not been silent on the issue of approaching industry
and the military.  ''How that can be done without sacrificing the independence
of the university is impossible,'' he said in an interview.  As for his job, Mr.
Tanksley said he believed that Dr. Bloustein was trying to set an administrative
precedent by allowing no consultation or appeal of his decision to elminate the
office.

The issue has engaged the interest of the Coalition of Religious Leaders of New
Jersey. Rabbi David H. Panitz, the coalition's vice president, and the Most Rev.
John C. Reiss of Trenton are among those who have urged Dr. Bloustein to retain
the Religious Affairs Office.

As part of their effort to accomplish that, the campus clergymen requested an
informal meeting with the Rutgers Board of Governors, the university's top
policymaking body. However, their request was denied.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

UNINVITED GUEST IN MANY WORKERS' HOMES: UNEMPLOYMENT

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1737 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, Nov. 22


The end sometimes comes in a pay envelope with a slip of paper titled ''Notice
of Reduction in Force,'' a euphemism for a layoff.

The worker fills out an unemployment benefit form and heads for the parking lot
with the unfamiliar sensation of having no place to go tomorrow and of knowing
that the paycheck will be the last one for a while.

As the recession continues, more and more people are finding themselves in this
predicament. The national unemployment rate stands at 8 percent, the highest
level in six years, meaning that 8,520,000 men and women are out of work and
looking for jobs, and Government economists predict that it could rise another
percentage point.

These are the stories of a handful of them: ''You remember the American dream?''
Claude W. Williams asked casually. ''Work hard, save your money, get an
education, get ahead?  I'm kind of discouraged in all that now.''

The phone rang, and Mr. Williams was up with a bound, moving his large frame
quickly around the furniture, snatching up the receiver before the second ring
had died. But it was not a job offer, and he returned slowly to the task of
feeding Justin, his 22-month-old son.

Mr. Williams is 33 and unemployed, laid off last August from the Ford Motor
Company's huge Flat Rock foundry south of here. He is one of the tens of
thousands of jobless automobile workers in this area.

He grew up on 12th Street, the cockpit of Detroit's old black ghetto and the
center of the city's deadly riot in 1967, and he thought he had come a long way
from there to the big brick house in northwest Detroit where he lives with his
wife and two young sons.

''I didn't want to work in a factory,'' he said, ''but the money was too good to
pass up.'' A summer job at Ford between terms of teaching school 10 years ago
gave way to full-time work at the hot, dirty foundry.

Mr. Williams finished his higher education at Wayne State University. Ford
recognized his ability and paid for him to get a master's degree in industrial
relations. His income rose from $8,000 to $16,000, and then to $49,000 one year
when he joined management and worked weekends at the height of the boom in the
late 1970's, before things started to go sour, before he was demoted back to
laborer, before the layoffs began.

Prospective employers have sent him form letters saying they ''cannot use your
services at this time.'' Even his master's degree is in the wrong field. ''They
want marketing and retailing skills,'' he said, ''not industrial production. Or
else they say I'm overqualified. I feel like I'm falling backwards.  You climb
up to heaven, and fall back to hell.''

He looked around his big living room, at the chrome and glass, the African art.
''I'm surrounded by all the things I've ever wanted,'' he said.  ''I wanted to
escape from 12th Street, I wanted a big house with a big sofa to lie back in, I
wanted a family and two cars and an educational background, and now I've got it
all, but I don't have a job.''

At first, years ago now, Valora Hamburg's job at the Pantry Pride food store
north of Philadelphia brought a welcome supplement to the income of her husband,
a telephone company employee. She also loved the job and getting out of the
house every day.

But then, four years ago, her husband suffered a stroke that has kept him from
working since, and the $311 weekly Pantry Pride paycheck became crucial to her,
her husband and her son.

But Pantry Pride began to founder, and eight months ago the last store closed,
ending her job and her 21 years with the company.  ''It's really frightening,
being out of work,'' said Mrs. Hamburg, who is 58. ''When you've worked all your
life, it's pretty hard. I did a little work around the house, some gardening and
repairs, and tried not to think about it.''

Mrs. Hamburg exhausted her 30 weeks of unemployment benefits ''going from place
to place, looking for work.'' But there was none, and she says she knows why.

''It's because of my age, I know, that I couldn't get work,'' she said. ''Oh, I
know they're not supposed to ask your age, but some application forms ask what
year you graduated from school. 'You're not going to trick me,' I thought, so I
started leaving that blank.''

The Hamburgs got a wood stove, to avoid the expense of oil, and put the
television nearby. ''The TV gets a lot of use,'' she said.  ''You can't go out
with gasoline prices what they are, so we stay home.''

She paused, then said: ''It's a frightening feeling when you can't advance your
income. It's an awful feeling that makes you sick in your stomach.''

Rod Wymore's grandfather was a logger, as was his father. So after a tour of
military service in Vietnam and a year as an inspector for a trucking concern,
he pulled on a pair of spike-soled ''cork boots'' in 1969 and went to work in
the deep forests of northwest Oregon.

''I've done just about everything there is to do in logging,'' Mr.  Wymore said
in his soft, steady voice. Starting out setting dragchains on felled trees, he
worked his way up to feller, the toppaying job of cutting the trees. His
take-home pay reached $350 a week.

Then, as the economy worsened and the building industry began to slow, Mr.
Wymore's career began to slide - to laborer, and then to a night job fixing
tires on logging machinery.

''Every whack, every time they switched my job, I went down a notch in pay,'' he
remembered, until last July 31, when he was laid off.  Unused vacation pay and a
$3,400 lump-sum severance payment went to pay off as many bills as Mr. Wymore
and his wife could manage, and to buy a side of beef for the freezer in a kind
of battening down for hard times. The money has carried the Wymores and their
five children this far, but their savings are starting to dwindle.

''The bills you don't pay with your unemployment check you pay with your
savings,'' he said, ''and you just about sit there and cry because it took so
much work to put that money in the bank in the first place. It's just as
depressing as hell.''

Many of Mr. Wymore's friends are in the same bind, ''out there scratching and
kicking with the rest of them.'' He has scoured Molalla, his little town, for
jobs, and has begun to branch out to neighboring areas, but with no luck.

''When you go out looking to apply, sometimes they won't even take your
application,'' he said. ''They have too many already.'' He has begun to sense
the stigma of unemployment, the way ''it just takes the wind out of half the
people you talk to,'' the looks he gets when he proffers a credit card, looks
that say ''I wonder how he's going to pay for this.''

Word has it that men may be needed for a power line that is being built across
Montana, he said, but that would mean moving, so he keeps looking closer to
home.

''I've gotten to spend a whole lot more time with the kids,'' he said, looking
for the bright side. ''When I worked nights in the tire shop I would never see
them. Yeah, that's about the only good thing that's come out of it.''

''Anyone in construction deals with layoffs periodically,'' said Jesse Brown, a
33-year-old carpenter from Baldwin City, Kan. ''It's a fact. When the job's
over, you've got to find a new one.''

Yet Mr. Brown is starting to feel apprehensive, even though his year-long,
$14.05-an-hour hospital construction job in St. Joseph, Mo., ended just over a
week ago.

''As many job sites as I've hit, I should have had some luck by now,'' he said.
''I didn't think I'd have this hard a time finding a job - I really didn't.''

The slump in the construction industry that threw Mr. Wymore out of work in
Oregon has idled Mr. Brown in Kansas. Unemployment insurance will carry him and
his wife and two young daughters for a while, but the expense of building his
new ranch house is a heavy drain that will have to be stopped for a while.

''You have to decide which bills you're going to pay first,'' Mr.  Brown
reflected. His wife, Becky, added, ''I'm not one of those who takes this too
well. I'm just calling up and telling them that my husband doesn't have a job
and I'll pay as much as I can.''

Meanwhile, Mr. Brown burns precious gasoline scouring the region for work.
''Sometimes if you approach a foreman or a superintendent in a face-to-face
situation, you have a better chance,'' he said, ''but a lot of them are saying
they're going to have to lay off men.''

Later, he added, ''I'm not an economist or anything, but the whole picture seems
to be getting worse, not better. I guy can get a little concerned over that.''

''I go to sleep worried and I wake up worried,'' Paul Mihalcin was saying. ''It
sure is tough.'' Mr. Mihalcin is a coal miner, or was a coal miner until last
March 27, when the United Mine Workers went on strike. The walkout was settled
in June, but because of a slowdown only 28 of the 300 men who had worked
Republic Steel's Banning No. 4 at West Newton, Pa., were called back, and Mr.
Mihalcin was not one of them.

Although he comes from a family of miners, Mr. Mihalcin stayed out of the mines
until 1978, when, at the age of 36, he doubled the wages he was making as a
welder by going into the mines.

Now 39, he cannot even get a welder's job. He has applied at other mines, but
the coal industry is depressed, and so is steelmaking and everything else, it
seems.

''I'm a steady worker,'' he said. ''I would go into work when I was sick. But
when I go in to apply for a job, they don't even look at me. They just show me a
big stack of job applications.''

He has been supporting his wife, Juanita, and two children on $183 weekly
unemployment insurance, augmented by $22 a month in food stamps. These stipends
will end the second week in December, and after that, they will apply for
welfare, hoping to get a little extra money to heat the three-bedroom trailer
they live in.

''I can't even find a part-time job,'' Mr. Mihalcin said sadly.  ''Christmas
looks very dim.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Claude W. Williams and his son photo of Jesse
Brown

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIRGIL FANS FIND HIS PEDESTAL SECURE

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 977 words


In an auditorium at Princeton University they were talking about Virgil. Their
language danced from Old French to Middle English, from Latin, of course, to
Greek, and from Italian to German to English - an English heavy with such words
as redactions, vernacularizations and texts.

They had gathered Friday and Saturday to commemorate the death of the Latin poet
Publius Vergilius Maro - traditionally misspelled Virgil - who died in 19 B.C.;
2,000 years, two months and two days ago today.

One curious visitor to the symposium, attended by 100 devotees of Virgil, called
herself ''a serious reader but no classicist.'' She stumbled dumbstruck from the
chamber at McCormick Hall after an hour.

A Delight to Those Present

But most of those present seemed delighted, especially by the fresh research
that was coming to light, and they cozied up with the ancients as whistles
tooted and a drum boomed faintly from across the campus. Few of the devotees
flinched even when somebody asked, ''Is it possible that it is because these
poems are dead that people can differ so much over what they mean? I mean, like
a cadaver?''

Cadaver, indeed, the Spirit of the Meeting responded. Back to the text.  ''Arma
virumque cano, Troiae qui primus ab orbis ...'' So begins Virgil's ''Aeneid,''
an epic about the mythological origins of Rome, which seemed for centuries
afterward the greatest Latin poem and maybe the greatest poem, period; the
summation of antiquity and a prophecy of Christianity; the dearest manual of
Latin teachers and their students' nightmare. A monthlong exhibition of rare
European editions of the ''Aeneid'' and other works of Virgil is under way at
the Firestone Library at Princeton to mark the 2,000th anniversary.

''Interpretations of Virgil keep changing,'' said Dr. Glenn W.  Most, a young
assistant professor of classics at Princeton and the organizer of the symposium.
''During the Vietnam War, for example, the epic's positive treatment of the
'destiny' of imperial Rome came in for criticism. Then during the mid-70's, a
lot of papers began appearing about the 'Eclogues,' '' - Virgil's early pastoral
poems - ''which seemed to fit the environmental thing.''

In recent years - as the study of Latin in the United States rose slowly after
decades of decline - interpretations of what Virgil meant to say in the
''Aeneid'' have become increasingly pessimistic, Dr. Most added.

Consider Virgilian theory circa 1918: The classicist Ward Fowler, as described
in a talk by Prof. J. Arthur Hanson, said that he had found great solace in the
way the ''Aeneid'' ends - with signs of justicia and fides at last, after the
bloody battles in which the survivors of Troy establish a home in Italy. Even to
a world destroyed by World War I, the ''Aeneid'' meant peace, Fowler believed.

And yet, in the epic's final scene, Aeneas, his brain buzzing with revenge for a
slaughtered comrade, sticks a sword through the warrior Turnus, a noble native.

How has theory changed? Quoting a 1976 essay by the scholar Ralph Johnson, Dr.
Hanson said that such cruelties in gods and heroes must have impressed even
Virgil as dark threats to human freedom and to the order of the universe.

Other theories were simpler. For T.S. Eliot, august epic and pious hero almost
defined a ''classic.'' For Robert Graves, Virgil's subservience to his emperor -
a quality that had first commended him to government service - had, through the
''Aeneid,'' instructed students in similar values ever since. (Graves and others
have liked Homer a lot better.)

Yet Prof. James E. G. Zetzel put his finger on one of Virgil's problems with
posterity: The poet's major commentator from antiquity, Servius, wrote 400 years
after Virgil's death. Servius frequently did not know what he was talking about,
and he wrote in any case for 12-year-olds.

Other Princetonians swam lovingly into Virgil's influence on later Latin and
Medieval authors - from Ovid, to 12th-century French romances and to Dante (who
has Virgil escorting the Italian through Hell and Purgatory), on to Chaucer and
Spenser in English. Robert Hollander said that Dante saw Virgil as ''the
greatest pagan and therefore the greatest and most touching failure.''

Virgil became amazingly popular among Christians, partly because his apocalyptic
''Fourth Eclogue'' had prophesied the birth of a boy who would usher in an age
of peace and sinlessness. The poet was probably talking about the child of
Antony and Octavia. Yet legends of Virgil as seer, sorcerer, supreme allegorist
and font of knowledge persisted for centuries.

American educators noticed a few years ago that the study of Latin was becoming
more popular in high schools. And last summer, officials in Massachusetts and
elsewhere started worrying that colleges might not be producing enough teachers
to meet the demand.

A Princeton senior named Richard Bleiberg, a classics major, provided one
explanation: ''They take Latin in high school so they can score better on their
College Boards in English. Better English scores mean they get into better
colleges. Better colleges mean more money.''

Virgil's legacy is probably closer at hand in Italy than elsewhere, and
Professor Most said the poet's 2,000th death-month - September - had been
commemorated first near the poet's birthplace, at ancient Mantua. The Germans,
he said, will wait until next year, and he expected other celebrations elsewhere
now that the third millennium has begun.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Nathan Congdon (page D14) photo of audience
members examining some of Virgil's works photo of a bronze statue

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 24, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. TEAM IN DOUBT ON 'YELLOW RAIN'

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Nov. 23


A group of United Nations experts says that it can neither verify nor refute
charges that Communist forces have used poisonous chemicals in Southeast Asia.

Secretary General Kurt Waldheim is due to report Tuesday that his team of five
specialists ''found itself unable to reach a final conclusion as to whether or
not chemical warfare agents had been used.''

The study says that refugees from Laos and Cambodia, who were interviewed in
Thailand, ''related stories similar to those appearing'' in documents submitted
by the the United States. The United States contended that chemical attacks,
which villagers described as clouds of ''yellow rain,'' caused nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea and death. American authorities say that they have collected samples of
leaves, stems, water and rocks from the sites of the attacks and that the
samples bear traces of deadly toxins.

The State Department, which has been trying to prove since 1976 that chemical
weapons are being used in remote areas of Southeast Asia, announced two weeks
ago that it had ''physical proof'' of such activities, but the evidence is
considered less than conclusive by experts outside Government. (Page C1.)

'Unable to Detect Signs'

The United Nations report says ''all the cases interviewed related alleged
chemical attacks which occurred several months earlier, and consequently the
group was unable to detect signs and symptoms which would be suggestive of
exposure to chemical warfare agents.''

Blood and urine tests of refugees who said that they had walked through a
contaminated area 23 days earlier ''yielded no significant abnormalities.'' The
team also interviewed three doctors in the refugee camps, and none said they had
''come across cases which could be attributed to chemical agents.''

The United Nations group said it had been given ''physical samples'' - a leaf, a
stem and some powder - that were said to be linked to the use of chemical
weapons. These are now undergoing laboratory analysis, the document says. But no
firm conclusion can be drawn from the samples, the report says, because there is
no way of determining where they were found.

The chairman of the group was Maj. Gen. Esmat A. al-Ezz, an Egyptian doctor and
a specialist in chemical and radiological defense. Reached by telephone in
Cairo, General Ezz said that the leaf and stem samples had been given to the
team by an American working for a voluntary agency that coordinates medical care
in Bangkok. He said an anonymous note was attached to the material. The powder
came from a refugee, he said.

Need for More Study Is Implied

The report implies that the inquiry should be continued. It said that the team
hoped ''an appropriate procedure will be devised in the future for the impartial
collection and analysis of any samples.'' But in order to establish whether
poisonous substances have been used, the report says, the team ''would require
timely access to the areas of alleged use.''

The United States and other nations hope to win General Assembly approval for a
resolution extending the investigation's life.  The United Nations group visited
three Thai camps from Oct. 31 to Nov. 10. The team interviewed 28 refugeees and
3 doctors. It is evident from the findings that the experts believe the issue
will go unresolved unless they can visit sites in Cambodia, Laos and Afghanistan
where chemical attacks are said to have occurred.

Laos Rejects the Report

The Laotian Government has told the United Nations that it rejected the inquiry.
Pakistan has said that the experts can visit Afghan refugees, but its letter
arrived at the end of October, too late for the report.

Cambodia presents a special problem because the guerilla war is still going on
there. The chemical attacks are said to have been made in the northwest, an area
contested by the forces of Pol Pot against the regime installed by Vietnam and
backed by the Soviet Union. The Pol Pot forces are still recognized as
Cambodia's Government by the United Nations.

The experts, however, did not ask Pol Pot officials for permission to enter
territory that his forces say they control. ''There was some question of the
security of the group,'' General Ezz said. ''The group felt there had to be a
guarantee of security.''

The team asked the United Nation's Center for Disarmament to provide such a
guarantee, but General Ezz said there was no reply to the request. The
disarmament center reports to an Under Secretary General, Vyachslav A. Ustinov
of the Soviet Union. Moscow has been accused by the United States of supplying
the toxic agents, and Moscow has strenuously opposed the United Nations inquiry.


'A Question Was Raised'

Asked about the team's entry to Cambodia, Mr. Ustinov said, ''A question was
raised of control of the territory.'' He said that the decision against going to
Cambodia was made by the team.

The team's other members were doctors and scientists from Kenya, the
Philippines, Peru and France. Two disarmament center officials, Sohrab Kheradi
of Iran and Wlodzimierz Wieczorek of Poland, served as secretaries.

Chemical warfare was outlawed by a 1925 treaty and biological weapons under a
1975 convention. The United States and the Soviet Union signed both documents.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 24, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NATO AND A-ARMS

BYLINE: By Cecil A. Currey

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: TAMPA, Fla.


Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. recently said: ''There are contingency
plans in the NATO doctrine to fire a nuclear weapon for demonstrative purposes
to demonstrate to the other side that they are exceeding the limits of
toleration in the conventional area.'' Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger
replied that there ''is absolutely nothing in any plan that even remotely
resembles that, nor should it.''

Much of the uproar since then has focused on the horror of exploding a bomb as a
warning to the Warsaw Pact to show that America will resist any westward thrust
with all available force.  Opinionmakers and worried Europeans, seizing upon
that prospect, object to ''Euroshimas'' on the Continent.

Mr. Haig said precisely what he meant, for when commander of NATO he had
intimate knowledge of alliance plans.  When would a ''demonstrative''
contingency plan become operative? Mr. Haig tells us: If the Warsaw Pact
exceeded the ''limits of toleration in the conventional area'' - that is, if it
became clear that NATO forces no longer could continue a ''conventional''
battle.

What sort of nuclear demonstration? Mr. Haig made this clear.  Planners use such
phrases as ''to explode,'' ''to drop,'' ''to use'' when referring to nuclear
bombs. But he said the plan was ''to fire'' a nuclear weapon. This phrase
denotes use of artillery in some form.  For many years, nuclear-tipped artillery
shells have been pre-positioned in Europe. ''Nuclear-capable'' artillery dates
to September 1953 when the 85-ton, 280-mm. atomic cannon was deployed there;
also deployed was the XM-28 mortar, which could fire a nuclear projectile up to
one and one-quarter miles. Then came surface-to-surface shortrange missiles:
Regulus, Honest John, Corporal, Sergeant, Lance, and Pershing. We also rely on
nuclear shells available for 155-mm., 175-mm., and eight-inch howitzers.  There
are also nuclear land mines, ready for pre-positioning along avenues of enemy
approach.

Security surrounding use of nuclear artillery is tight, but by 1976, NATO had
1,000 ''nuclear-capable'' 155-mm. howitzers with 3,000 plutonium-fission shells,
with a range of more than 10 miles, for them.

If NATO forces have no contingency plans for the use of the nuclear weapons I
have mentioned, there would be no point in prepositioning them. For Secretary
Weinberger to say ''there is absolutely nothing'' that ''even remotely
resembles'' their use is to deny the existence of NATO doctrine established
since the 1950's.

Defense plans were made largely because of West Germany, which urged that any
''conventional'' invasion be met early by tactical nuclear weapons, and the
British, who argued for ''sample'' use of tactical nuclear arms - two positions
not much different from Mr.  Haig's ''demonstrative purpose.'' Both sets of
arguments have the same end. NATO argues that tactical nuclear arms can
substitute for conventional ground forces, allowing European garrisons to use a
minimum amount of troops yet maintain a ''deterrent posture'' against the Warsaw
Pact.

Student officers at Fort Leavenworth's Command and General Staff College have
long studied tactical nuclear arms. Such weapons favor the defense because
attackers expose massed troops who must cross radioactive ground. Teachers at
the college pose the following questions: When should a commander request
permission to fire nuclear rounds? What strength should he use - 0.1 kiloton?
0.6 kiloton? 2 kilotons? Should he use ground or aerial bursts? Should he fire
if in danger of being overrun? What would be the effect of changing from a
nonatomic to a nuclear battlefield? What should NATO's response be if Warsaw
Pact troops used nuclear weapons first?

Whether such use involved pre-positioned nuclear land mines, nuclear-tipped
artillery shells, or surface-to-surface missiles, a basic question remains: What
do military officers think about such weapons? Nuclear-control officers in
Europe often argue that a nuclear round is simply another form of artillery
shell, to be used when necessary. Unsure whether tactical use would escalate
into strategic confrontation, most know that they will follow orders, believing
that those in command are best able to make decisions: ''If it has to be done,
we're ready to do it.'' They continue to conduct field training, patrol
constantly, and continuously maneuver atomic artillery from place to place in
order to survive and use their weapons should ''the balloon go up.''

They mark large-scale terrain maps with nuclear-fire zones - areas relatively
free of farms and villages -avoiding large concentrations of civilians and
population centers. Computers help determine what strength shells should be used
to ''canalize'' enemy attacks into killing zones - knowing all the while that
friendly villages are often only one or two kilotons apart.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Cecil B. Currey, using the pseudonym ''Cincinnatus'' (after the Roman general
Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus), wrote ''Self-Destruction: The Distintegration and
Decay of the United States Army during the Vietnam Era.'' He is professor of
American military history at the University of South Florida and a lieutenant
colonel and chaplain in the Army Reserve.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 24, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ARE THE RUSSIANS USING 'YELLOW RAIN' IN ASIA? EXPERTS DEBATE THE DATA

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1832 words


THE United States has been trying since 1976 to verify reports that chemical
weapons, known popularly as ''the yellow rain,'' are being used against remote
villages in Laos, Cambodia and, more recently, Afghanistan. In September,
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  announced the first ''physical
evidence'' to buttress the charge. It was a sample of vegetation from Cambodia
that contained three toxins produced by fungi.

Two weeks ago the State Department announced three more pieces of physical
evidence - a water sample from the same village in Cambodia plus rock scrapings
from two locations in Laos. State Department officials called the samples a
''smoking gun,'' the first ''physical proof'' that chemical warfare is being
waged in Southeast Asia, almost certainly under the control of the Soviet Union.

They also said that detection of the toxins solved a long-standing mystery as to
what chemical agent could cause the range of symptoms reported by victims of
yellow rain attacks. The victims typically suffer from violent itching,
vomiting, dizziness and distorted vision. Within a short time, many vomit blood
and die, apparently of shock or blood loss.

But the physical and medical evidence is considered less than conclusive by
experts outside the Government. Some find it persuasive; others deem it
meaningless or misleading.

Knowledgeable scientists disagree over whether the toxins were clearly dropped
by chemical weapons or might have conceivably resulted from natural processes.
They say it is a matter of probabilities, not of absolute certainties.

And if weapons were used, as most think likely, leading experts say they are a
primitive form of poison, a ''peasant's chemical,'' that could have easily been
produced in large quantities by Vietnam or any number of third world countries,
rather than by the Soviet Union.

The issue has enormous political and military implications. If the Soviet Union
has been waging chemical warfare in violation of international treaties, then
its good faith in professing willingness to negotiate other arms control
agreements would be suspect. And if the Soviet Union is experimenting with new
classes of chemical and biological warfare agents, then pressure will mount to
develop similar weapons in this country.

''In such an important situation, one looks to our government for a very high
standard of evidence,'' says Matthew Meselson, a Harvard University biologist
who is a leading academic expert on chemical weapons. ''But in some respects,
official Government statements have contained demonstrable and serious
scientific errors which damage our credibility and raise doubts about our
case.''

''The only conclusion I can draw at the moment is that you can't conclude
anything,'' says Julian Perry Robinson, a British authority on chemical weapons.

All four samples were collected in early 1981 from areas said to have been
attacked by chemicals. Analysis of the samples at first showed no detectable
traces of any known chemical warfare agent. But then chemical warfare
specialists began to suspect that a new class of agents, the trichothecene
toxins, produced by certain species of a common fungus, might be involved; they
retested the samples and found four different poisons.

The State Department's case relies heavily on a belief that these poisons could
not have been put there by natural fungal activity. The vegetation sample from
Cambodia contained 109 parts per million of nivalenol toxin and 59.1 parts per
million of deoxynivalenol, both roughly 20 times the amount found in natural
outbreaks, according to the department, plus a smaller dose of T2 toxin. The
water sample from the same village contained 66 parts per million of
deoxynivalenol, also deemed very high. One scraping of yellow powder from a rock
in Laos contained 150 parts per million of T2; the other, too small to be
accurately weighed, contained a toxin known as diacetoxyscirpenol.

The State Department has argued at various times that the toxins do not occur
naturally in warm climates like that of Southeast Asia, that the concentrations
detected are far above known natural levels, that the combinations found
together do not normally occur and that rocks and water are not naturally a
medium for high levels of toxins.

But skeptical scientists have searched through the scientific journals and found
instances where almost everything that the department says is unnatural has, in
fact, occurred. Dr. Meselson says three of the four toxins are produced best in
warm climates, and even the fourth, T2, has been found in warm parts of India.
Dr.  Robinson says that the three toxins found together in the vegetation from
Cambodia were also found together in a French crop a few years ago. And a paper
recently published in the journal Science reported that a Brazilian shrub
contained levels of another class of trichothecene toxin that reached 200 to 300
parts per million, far higher than those found in the State Department's
samples. The shrub absorbed the toxins, which were apparently produced by a
fungus, from the surrounding swampy debris and water, where concentrations may
have exceeded 1,000 parts per million, according to the senior investigator.

Dr. Meselson suggests that it is thus possible that vegetation in Southeast Asia
also takes up toxins and leaches them out onto surrounding rocks and water, much
as trees drip chemical substances onto cars parked beneath them. So little is
known about the natural ecology of fungal toxins in Southeast Asia that it is
difficult to be sure what is natural there and what is not, he says.

In an effort to forestall some of the criticism, the Government arranged to have
control samples of vegetation and soil collected from an area a few kilometers
away from the Cambodian village that was reportedly attacked with chemicals six
months earlier. None of the four vegetation samples or two soil samples
contained any trichothecenes, reinforcing the State Department's contention that
the toxins do not occur naturally in the area.

The adequacy of these controls is considered crucial to resolving the issue. The
State Department says they were collected by a man trained in what to look for
and how to package it. But other scientists wonder if he was really
sophisticated enough to pick exactly the same species of plant as the one
originally tested. One species may absorb the toxins, another may not.

James Bamburg, professor of biochemistry at Colorado State University, who first
identified T2 toxin years ago, believes the State Department ''really went out
on a limb'' in its assertions about what can or cannot happen in nature. ''You
need a lot of control samples to find out,'' he says. ''If their controls are
good, the chances are pretty good that these compounds were applied.''

The issue of medical symptoms is also in dispute. The State Department claims
the toxins produce all the symptoms reported by yellow rain victims and no
others, providing a ''perfect'' fit. And Col. Charles Lewis, of Brooke Army
Medical Center in San Antonio, who headed a mission to investigate the symptoms
in 1979, agrees that the toxins offer a ''plausible'' explanation for ''many or
most all of the symptoms we were told about.'' The most puzzling symptom was the
bleeding, which could not be accounted for by other chemical agents. But
skeptics point to scientific papers that make it difficult to understand why the
toxins would cause such rapidly fatal bleeding.

In the absence of certainty, knowledgeable scientists express a spectrum of
opinions on the likelihood that the toxins were dropped by chemical weapons.
Sharon Watson, of the Army Surgeon General's office, calls it ''inescapable''
that weapons did the deed. Chester J. Mirocha, professor of plant pathology at
the University of Minnesota, who conducted the tests on the samples, says there
is ''absolutely no question in my mind'' that the toxins were ''of some origin
other than natural,'' largely because of the high levels and combinations found.

Bruce Jarvis, professor of chemistry at the University of Maryland, who found
the high levels of trichothecenes in the Brazilian shrub, considers it ''most
unlikely'' that the toxins would occur naturally at high levels in all three
villages in Southeast Asia. ''I'm not convinced our Brazilian experience will be
a general experience,'' he says.

Even Dr. Meselson acknowledges that the evidence is ''suggestive'' and
''consistent with the possibility of weapons.'' But he says it is ''by no means
conclusive'' and must be supported by better evidence before a final conclusion
can be reached.

The question of who might be responsible for spreading any toxins is even more
difficult to unravel. The State Department acknowledges that local forces are
apparently using the weapons but charges that the Soviet Union is ''advising and
controlling'' the activity. The department says that production of toxins in
large enough quantities for warfare requires ''large scale biological
fermentation facilities similar to those needed to produce pharmaceutical-grade
antibiotics.'' It says no such facilities are known to exist in Southeast Asia,
whereas they do exist in the Soviet Union, some under heavy military guard.

But Dr. Bamburg, who produced T2 in his own work, says, ''You don't need a
first-class pharmaceutical industry. You can do it in your basement or a
converted dog kennel.'' And Eugene Smalley, professor of plant pathology at the
University of Wisconsin, says the toxins are ''cheap to produce.'' ''A third
world country could produce them by the ton,'' he continued.

He said such a country could simply take crude corn, pressure cook it, inoculate
it with fungus, incubate it for several weeks, then extract the toxin with
simple technology described in scientific publications. The military value of
the toxins, which are far less lethal than traditional nerve agents, is not
wholly clear. Some scientists speculate that their chief attraction may be ease
of production.

Further tests on samples are now underway in this country and the findings of a
United Nations investigation will soon be made public.  But skeptics believe the
issue will not be resolved until the State Department publishes full details of
how its samples and controls were collected and its chemical analyses conducted.
Only then will independent scientists be able to judge for themselves what the
evidence proves.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 25, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MCCARTHY PONDERS RETURN TO POLITICS

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: WOODVILLE, Va., Nov. 24


In an 18th-century farmhouse at the end of Holim Hollow, Eugene J. McCarthy is
hearing the drums again.  He has lived here for four years, working at an
electric typewriter before a great stone fireplace. His neighbors beyond the
next hill ride motorcycles or ride to the hounds. The other day a black bear
stepped out of the pines and birches and stopped at the pond beside his house.

He still lingers over a volume of e.e. cummings and pauses to write, just for
fun, a magazine piece on country mailboxes. But Mr.  McCarthy, the former
Senator from Minnesota whose challenge to President Johnson and the Vietnam War
moved a generation of young people into politics, is getting restless.

His retreat into the Virginia countryside, to a spot closer to Washington, Va.,
than to Washington, D.C., and beyond the range of the capital's radio stations,
may be over. He has spoken in Minnesota three times in the past month and now
openly talks about running next year for the Senate seat now held by David
Durenberger, a Republican.

'The Issues I Want'

''I don't know,'' he says. The fire crackles. He rubs his eyes.  ''The Democrats
aren't offering any kind of worthwhile programs. If I could raise the issues I
want - nuclear arms and confrontation with the Russians, the economy, resource
use - I might run. I don't want to discredit the issues, or myself.''

Mr. McCarthy ran for President as an independent in 1976, but spent more time in
court challenging the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Election
Commission than he did on the hustings.  Since then, he has done little in
politics besides addressing a local rally to prevent the Woodville Post Office
from shortening its hours.

But the lure of politics is still there, and so is the passion that prompted Mr.
McCarthy to lead troops of college students through New Hampshire towns like
Contoocook, Conway and Canaan in a drive to remake the world, or at least the
Democratic Party. This time Mr.  McCarthy, who is 65 years old, is out to remake
the Senate.

''One of my disagreements with Lyndon Johnson, well before the war, was that he
was degrading the Senate,'' he says, recalling Mr.  Johnson's years as Senate
majority leader. ''He treated the Senate like the House of Representatives: lots
of roll-calls, lots of subcommittees, lots of votes. The Senate shouldn't vote
more than 50 times a year. It should be dealing with basic problems.''

'Ambassadors, Not Career Men'

He wants to transform the Senate from a band of technicians into a firm of
architects: ''The Senate should be a deliberative body. It should not be
hurried. It should concentrate on foreign policy and the general administration
of Government. Senators should be ambassadors, not career men. You don't send
astronauts and basketball players there. You shouldn't build a reputation in the
Senate; you ought to have one when you come in.''

Mr. McCarthy's campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination nearly 14
years ago gave him a reputation as something of a mystic and a maverick, but in
Minnesota, where politics is nearly a secular religion, it gave him a reputation
as something of an apostate. Many elements of the powerful
Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party still have not forgiven Mr. McCarthy for his
failure to work strenuously for the 1968 ticket headed by Senator Hubert H.
Humphrey, the patron saint of Minnesota politics.

''Maybe that's passed now,'' he says, running his fingers nervously through his
white hair. ''There's a young group of voters who, if they know about 1968 at
all, are on my side. There's an older group of voters who are more concerned
about other issues.''

But no matter the topic, the conversation turns, always, to 1968 and the images
that year conjures for Mr. McCarthy: his startling showing in the New Hampshire
primary, the withdrawal of President Johnson, the assassination of Senator
Robert F. Kennedy, the Chicago convention.

'We Added the Moral Component'

''It was something someone had to do,'' he says. ''It was a challenge to a
conception of the Presidency and to the idea that military confrontation was the
best answer to foreign policy difficulties. Now I think the war would have ended
the way it did even if we didn't enter the race. But we added the moral
component.  It was better to have the moral judgment about the war. But the
worst thing you can do in politics is to be right and to lose.''

Now he sits in the beef and orchard country of Virginia, his wall hung with
pictures of Abraham Lincoln, wondering if his crusaders in blue jeans haven't
been co-opted by a society that favors designer jeans. He quotes Plutarch on
politics: ''It is not a public chore, to be got over with. It is a way of life.
It is the life of a domesticated political and social creature who is born with
a love for public life, with a desire for honor.''

And he wonders if his old supporters will be too complacent to respond to the
call if he issues one again in Minnesota next year.  ''I'd be disappointed if I
do something this time and they don't respond,'' he says. ''I want to believe
that what they did in 1968 was motivated by more than not wanting to be drafted.
What happened wasn't their fault. Their cause was lost and their symbols were
taken from them. I'm not disappointed in them. I understand what's happened to
them, and I still think they're out there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Eugene J. McCarthy

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 25, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IN JERSEY SCHOOL, U.S. AND SOVIET LIFE ENTWINE

BYLINE: By ROBIN HERMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: MONTCLAIR, N.J., Nov. 24


Preaching peace among nations, Raisa Smirnova and Ludmila Kondrakhina met the
eighth graders of Glenfield School today. By the end of the afternoon, the two
middle-aged women from the Soviet Union had the abashed teen-agers clasping
hands, swaying and singing American antiwar songs from the 1960's.

Both women are fairly high-ranking members of the Communist Party and are
visiting the United States for the first time under the auspices of the Women's
International League for Peace and Freedom.

They had wanted to see a public school -Mrs. Kondrakhina was once a school
principal - and so they found themselves in Philip Stern's classroom facing a
social studies class in participatory democracy.

The children, who had been preparing for the visit for a week, asked some
ticklish political questions. Mrs. Smirnova, editor of Women of the World
Magazine, thought it was ''unusual of children this age'' to ask such things,
implying that they had been coached.  But the women answered deftly.

Einstein in Translation

''How do you feel about the talks about the nuclear bombs possibly pointed to
Europe?'' one student asked.  Mrs. Kondrakhina said she would quote ''a great
son of the United States,'' Albert Einstein. With Mrs. Smirnova as translator,
she said, ''It is not possible for me to imagine what kind of weapons we should
use in the third world war, but I know if the third world war starts, the fourth
world war will be a war of bows and arrows.''

''We shouldn't let the next world war to start,'' said Mrs.  Smirnova. ''So far
as the neutron bomb is concerned, it is madness to invent it. We grownups are
doing the best we can. We have a strong movement in our country against this
bomb.''

Tracy Sturdivant, who is 13 years old, raised her hand, stood and then asked,
''What is your opinion about abortion?'' As her classmates tittered, Tracy sank
in her chair and put her hands over her face.

Mrs. Kondrakhina gave a matter-of-fact answer: ''It is our point of view if you
are pregnant for the first time you shouldn't do that -you might never have
children. If you want to be alone, it's up to you. But it's permitted. Abortion
is free in our country.''

Who is your favorite author? the Russian women asked. ''Judy Blume!'' many of
the children shouted, referring to the author of books for adolescents that deal
boldly with such controversial subjects as teen-age sex.

Your favorite games?  ''Monopoly,'' said a few students, citing the board game
in which players buy and sell property with play money in a very capitalist
manner.

Mrs. Smirnova laughed, then said, ''It is very popular in our country as well.''
A discussion about Russian songs culminated with the two women breaking into a
melodic soprano version of a song with a lyric that translates into ''let there
always be sun; let there always be peace.''

Then they asked the students to sing one of their favorite songs.  This request
immediately split the ranks into the disco lovers and the rock and roll fans.
The teachers worked out a compromise - a song that no one liked - and the eighth
graders reluctantly began singing ''I've Been Working on the Railroad.''

When it was over, Mrs. Smirnova asked, ''This is a song of trade unions?'' She
then made another request. Would the teen-agers sing ''Last Night I Had the
Strangest Dream,'' a song she had heard at the international league's conference
at Bryn Mawr College the week before?

The generation gap yawned, for this was a song of the Vietnam War era. But Mr.
Stern, who is 26 years old, and a few other younger faculty members led the way.
As they sang, Mrs. Smirnova walked about the room, entwining the students'
hands.

The next request was to see some teen-age dancing.  ''Everett, Everett,'' the
students called out, turning to Everett Jackson, 13, who had a large transistor
radio. Disco music began to pulse as Everett stepped to the front of the room
and clasped Anne Gayle, a fellow student, close to him. With his right leg
pressed to the inside of Anne's left leg, he began to gyrate to the music, and
the teachers looked away, slightly embarrassed.

The Soviet women smiled and asked, ''What is this dance called?'' ''Disco!'' the
students answered enthusiastically.  Some more political questions followed.
What do the Soviet people think of capitalism? How do you feel about Solidarity
and the current situation in Poland? If your President said you needed to use
nuclear power, what would you think of it?

The women turned nearly every question of this sort into a plea for ''peaceful
coexistence,'' emphasizing the value of cultural exchange.  ''The people who are
narrow-minded are not able to do anything for their people,'' said Mrs.
Smirnova.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Raisa Smirnova and Ludmila Kondrakhina photo of
the eight grade class photo of students demonstrating modern dances

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 26, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NO U.S. HELP FOR VIETNAMESE IMPERIALISM

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 313 words


To the Editor:

Gareth Porter's advocacy of accommodation with the Vietnamese (Op-Ed Nov. 11)
fundamentally conflicts with the realities of Indochina. North Vietnamese
imperialism, first directed at South Vietnam and Laos and then at Cambodia,
remains the basic problem in Indochina, and such imperialism only understands
the language of force.

he Hanoi regime, which has driven hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese people to
their death on the high seas or in concentration camps, really cared nothing for
the plight of the Cambodians under Pol Pot, whom it installed in power. Instead,
Hanoi, in tandem with Moscow, has proceeded to set up its own Marxist empire in
Indochina, the Soviet's East Asian proconsul. But as with the Soviet empire in
Eastern Europe and Afghanistan, the people have rebelled against their
overlords.

Rather than rescuing the oppressors in either case, the United States should
help those resisting the new colonialists. Indochina and Afghanistan are both
draining Soviet resources that might otherwise be directed at either new
aggression elsewhere or even larger strategic expenditures.

Gareth Porter suggests that we should provide aid to Hanoi if it withdrew its
occupation forces from Cambodia. That would simply reward aggression. It would
be more appropriate for Hanoi to withdraw its occupation armies not only from
Cambodia but also from South Vietnam and Laos. Only then could peace and the
possibility of accommodation of all forces in Indochina begin.  JEFFREY B.
GAYNER Director, Foreign Policy Studies The Heritage Foundation Washington, Nov.
17, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 26, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Briefing

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 950 words


T HE scene was a White House Cabinet meeting the other day, and one ranking
official was telling President Reagan that Congress would probably work late
into the night on the budget bill. Mr. Reagan leaned over to his counselor,
Edwin Meese 3d, and said in a stage whisper: ''You will wake me, won't you?''

A S if David A. Stockman didn't have enough problems, along comes David E.
Bonior. Mr. Bonior, a liberal Democratic Representative from Michigan, is
pressing his legal suit against the Budget Director, a suit that Mr. Bonior says
seeks to define who has the final control over the nation's purse strings:
Congress or the Office of Management and Budget.

At issue is Mr. Stockman's decision, when the Reagan Administration took office
Jan. 20, to freeze the hiring of Federal employees, including the staff of
Vietnam veterans' counseling centers. Mr.  Bonior, an activist on Vietnam
veterans' issues, said the hiring freeze at the centers was illegal because
Congress had specifically approved two measures dealing with Vietnam veterans.
One of them, in 1979, said that the staffing levels set by Congress for Veterans
Administration medical care were binding on the budget office. The other one, in
1980, approved $6 million for the counseling program.

Mr. Bonior, supported by key Democratic Congressmen, and the Vietnam Veterans of
America, eventually got the Senate formally to disapprove Mr. Stockman's action.
Moreover the Senate last June went a step further and declared that it should
not have to resort to such a step because the 1979 law had the effect of barring
the budget office from withholding the funds.

At this point, Mr. Stockman's legal aides say that the issue is moot because the
funds have been released. But Mr. Bonior, pressing the suit, says, in effect,
that unless the budget office is proved to have broken the law, it will do so
again.

''O.M.B. continues to assert that its actions were lawful and can be repeated in
the future,'' said Mr. Bonior. ''The fundamental principles of Congressional
control over spending are now at stake in this suit.''

A hearing on the issue by the Federal District Court is now expected within the
next few weeks. ''Only judicial action can rein the budget office in,'' said Mr.
Bonior, whose uneasy relationship with Mr. Stockman dates back several years
when both men represented separate Congressional districts in Michigan.

Competition between the men reached a peak each year when their staffs played a
softball game, the ''Bonds'' versus ''Stocks.'' ''David's a Wall Street
person,'' said Mr. Bonior with a laugh. ''I'm a bond person.''

T HE emotional issue of abortion, mostly kept off the Senate floor this year, is
expected to come up early next year, although conservatives seeking to bar the
right of women to terminate pregnancies remain firmly divided on the subject. On
the one hand, Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, is sponsoring a
bill declaring that human life begins at conception and allowing states to pass
anti-abortion laws. Aides to another conservative, Senator Orrin G. Hatch,
Republican of Utah, argue, however, that such a measure would probably lead to a
Senate filibuster by opponents of the bill. Mr. Hatch says he thinks this
proposal may be unconstitutional and has offered, instead, a proposal that would
give Congress and the states joint authority to restrict or prohibit abortion,
and would declare that no right to abortion is secured by the Constitution. The
disagreement among conservatives has buoyed, at least for the moment, abortion
advocates who hope that the controversial question will be kept away from the
Senate floor.

D IVISIONS within Republican Party ranks are leading to the departure of Chuck
Bailey, the deputy chairman of the Republican National Committee. Mr. Bailey's
exit has a convoluted backdrop that seems to reflect not so much dissatisfaction
with the deputy chairman as a certain unhappiness with Richard Richards, the
chairman.

Over the past few months some key Republicans have criticized Mr.  Richards,
partly because the chairman had focused most of his attentions on raising money
for the party at the expense, they say, of other issues and problems facing the
Republicans. There has also been some sniping at Mr. Richards for his vocal
attacks on independent conservative fund-raising groups, such as the National
Conservative Political Action Committee.

With President Reagan making clear that he supported Mr. Richards, the internal
attacks then veered to his deputy, Mr. Bailey, who finally decided to quit,
rather than face the ongoing, and what he felt were unjustified, criticisms. Mr.
Bailey is now scheduled to work for some Republican senatorial candidates next
year, and may also advise the Osmonds, Donnie and Marie, (who are two of
President Reagan's favorite entertainers) on politics and whom to support over
the next few years.  Francis X. Clines Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THR PROPER PARENT FOR THE PEACE CORPS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 279 words


To the Editor:

Your Nov. 1 news story ''Peace Corps Asks a Review of Cuts'' contained a number
of inaccuracies on the issue of the Peace Corps' separation from the Action
agency.

he article stated that there have been moves in Congress to ''restore the
independence of the Peace Corps.'' But the Peace Corps has never been
independent. Fbom 1961 to 1971 it was under the State Department; in 1971 it
became a part of Action.

The article also declared that the ''Peace Corps has a strict prohibition
against former intelligence agents within its ranks.'' This is not true. In
fact, the deputy director of the Peace Corps from 1969 to 1971, Tom Houser,
served in Army counterintelligence in the mid-1950's.

It is true that some supporters of separation have attacked the appointment of
Tom Pauken as Action director because he served in Vietnam in military
intelligence. The obvious question arises: Why is a Vietnam veteran being
treated differently from a 1950's veteran with an equivalent background?

It is significant that the Reagan Administration strongly opposes the separation
of the Peace Corps from Action because such a move would cost the taxpayers more
money. New independent agencies always require additional funds. To create
another Federal agency during a period of budget cuts makes no sense whatsoever.
DONALD THORSON Assistant Director for Legislative Affairs, Action Washington,
Nov. 6, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TOM LEHRER RENAISSANCE IN 'VILLAGE'

BYLINE: By EDWARD ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1206 words


Tom Lehrer was the balladeer for the 1950's, singing his wickedly iconoclastic
ditties around the country during that decade of manicured lawns, psychoanalysis
and beat poets. In Mr. Lehrer's songs the Wild West was first perceived as
radioactive; a sweet old gentleman turns out to be the Old Dope Peddler; the
South of ''whuppin' slaves and sellin' cotton'' is nostalgically recalled, and
spring is a time for poisoning pigeons in the park.

The singer-songwriter continued pouring out jarring lyrics to genteel genre
melodies through the 1960's, but then his productivity seemed to come to a halt.
He hasn't performed or written much during the last 14 years. But now, as if
coming into their majority after a long hibernation, Mr. Lehrer's songs of
satire, his sardonic smiles and salacious sneers are making their return in a
theatrical revue at the Top of the Gate, 160 Bleecker Street (982-9292).
Performances this weekend are tonight at 8, tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M., and
Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.; tickets $12.95 and $14.95 (after Wednesday, $16.95
and $18.95).

Mr. Lehrer does not actually appear in ''Tomfoolery - the Words and Music of Tom
Lehrer,'' but his personality does. The publication of the music and lyrics of
34 of his songs by Pantheon Books in ''Too Many Songs by Tom Lehrer''
complements the revue, recalling, as the show's narration puts it, that
''although Mr. Lehrer is now 53 years old, he prefers to think of it as 11
Celsius.''

Production Requires 4 Performers

Four performers - MacIntyre Dixon, Joy Franz, Jonathan Hadary and Donald Corren
- are replacing Mr. Lehrer's familiar, conversational singing voice in the
songs, while cavorting about in nearly adult style under the direction of Gary
Pearle and Mary Kyte. Mr. Lehrer's musical material is also expanded through
Chris Walker's and John McKinney's arrangements and Eric Stern's direction. It
is a far cry from the days when the lanky Harvard-educated
mathematician-turnedsongster sat at his piano in dark, smoky nightclubs,
crooning his ballads for a ''small but diminishing group of fans.''

''The show came about,'' said Mr. Lehrer, in town to see it begin, ''because of
a wonderful, young, talented, marvelous, may-he-liveforever British producer
named Cameron Mackintosh. In 1978 he had just produced 'Side by Side by
Sondheim.' He was looking around for other ventures of that type - small cast,
low budget, proven material. As you know, every songwriter has had a revue. They
got to the bottom of the barrel and there were only a few of us left. Cameron
wrote me and said, 'What do you think of this?' My response was, 'It's all right
with me -it's your money.' '' The English production ran for a year in London
and was reproduced in Canada, Australia, Hong Kong and South Africa. Another
version opens in January in Washington.

Political Songs Also Included

Mr. Lehrer's most tasteless work of the early 1950's will be presented,
including ''The Masochism Tango'' (You can raise welts Like nobody else); ''Be
Prepared'' (Don't solicit for your sister, that's not nice, Unless you get a
good percentage of her price), and ''I Hold Your Hand in Mine'' (''The night you
died I cut it off ...  ''). The later political songs will also be included -
''National Brotherhood Week'' (Be nice to people who Are inferior to you);
''Send the Marines'' (When someone makes a move Of which we don't approve Who is
it that always intervenes?), and ''Pollution'' (Just two things of which you
must beware: Dont drink the water and don't breathe the air) - as will the songs
of the Apocalypse: ''So Long Mom'' (''I'm off to drop the bomb'') and ''We Will
All Go Together When We Go'' (Universal bereavement, An inspiring achievement).

Mr. Lehrer has always been modest about his achievements. As a graduate student
at Harvard - he received his B.A. when he was 18 - the mathematician regaled his
colleagues with songs like his Gilbert and Sullivanian rendition of ''The
Elements.'' There were others, which have sunk into oblivion, like ''Don't Major
in Physics'' and the ''Slide Rule Song.''

Million and a Half Albums Sold

In 1953, he recorded his repertory as ''Songs of Tom Lehrer'' and pressed 400
copies. ''I thought I could break even at 300, and I'd have a hundred to keep in
the basement to give away in my old age,'' he explained. ''But lo and behold -
like herpes - it spread.'' Now, his three basic recordings are issued on the
Reprise label, including a rerecorded version of that first album, and have sold
more than a million and half copies.

He wrote his most explicitly political songs for the 1964 television show ''That
Was the Week That Was,'' and they were later recorded as ''That Was the Year
That Was.'' Most assuredly not on television was ''The Vatican Rag,'' which was
condemned by some school administrators and members of the clergy.

Why has Mr. Lehrer been mostly silent for 14 years, having composed only a few
innocent children's songs for television's ''The Electric Company,'' content to
channel his social concerns into teaching mathematical applications in the
social sciences at the University of California in Santa Cruz?

''I think problems have gotten more serious,'' he explains. ''The Vietnam War is
what changed it. Everybody got earnest. My purpose was to make people laugh and
not applaud. If the audience applauds they're just showing they agree with me.
They're not being amused by it. I'm sure in 1968, I could have gotten up and
said something like 'Cops are pigs,' and they'd applaud. But that's not humor.
So I dropped out just in time.''

No Ayatollah Jokes

''Tomfoolery,'' then, is a retrospective. ''We all agreed on no updates,'' said
Mr. Leherer. ''No Ayatollah jokes or Alexander Haig jokes.'' But Mr. Lehrer, in
the middle age of his adolescence, also exhibits some solemnity. ''I couldn't
write about Alexander Haig because he makes me angry. I don't laugh. Eisenhower
you could laugh at, and Kennedy. I could relax when things were going on. I used
to pick up the newspaper and laugh. I'd say, isn't that ridiculous or silly. But
now I pick up the paper and I have to wait till breakfast is over because it's
just going to ruin it. The space shuttle - that just makes me so furious. I
don't know why I've become more serious.  I wish I could tell you. Is it hot in
here, or is it just me?''

''I would describe myself as a liberal,'' he says. ''One of the last. I think
that the old liberal consensus has broken up, and that was one of the things
that made my audience possible. There were a whole group of people who agreed on
everything, like 'lynching is bad.' Issues that have come along since are a lot
more complicated.  So I just am not sure about where I stand about some things
any more. Life was simpler then.''

All lyrics copyright c 1952, 1953, 1954, 1958, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1968 and 1981
by Tom Lehrer. Reprinted by permission.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Tom Lehrer

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 27, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words


By John Leonard
DAMBALLAH. By John Edgar Wideman.  205 pages. Avon/Bard. $2.95.
HIDING PLACE. By John Edgar Wideman.  158 pages. Avon/Bard. $2.95.

HERE are two new books - a collection of related short stories and a novel about
a few of the characters we meet in those short stories - by John Edgar Wideman.
They are original paperbacks, and Avon is to be congratulated, and I wish Mr.
Wideman the most massive of markets because he is a fine writer.

But his earlier books had hard-cover publishers, back when being a black writer
was fashionable. Can it really be that whole chunks of people, black or female
or Jewish or Italian or Sap@phic, go in and out of style according to a phase of
the cultural moon? The black exceptions - a brilliant Toni Morrison, a strong
angry Toni Cade Bambara, an Alice Walker and a Paule Marshall, an Ishmael Reed
who writes wherever he wants to - are obvious. This, however, is a handful from
a multitude. Are we going to spend the next 30 years, as we've spent the last 30
years, waiting for Ralph Ellison to be less invisible? Is each aggrieved sector
of our society permitted a single stiff spokesman? Is there in the 1980's a new
''esthetic'' of bad faith?

Mr. Wideman pertains because, like so many gifted moderns, he is ambivalent. He
grew up in black Pittsburgh and got out via a Rhodes scholarship. He has been
teaching ever since. He says out loud that he is ''too self-conscious'' to like
watermelon; he would prefer James Joyce. And yet he has been drawn, in novels
like ''Hurry Home,'' back to the ghetto, as if to testify. He has become a black
Boccaccio in search of ''a history we could taste and chew.'' He is much more
than an adjective. That his two new books will fall apart after a second reading
is a scandal.

Of Spoons and History

Consider this meditation in ''Damballah'' on history: ''On a spoon you see the
shape of a face in an egg. Or two eggs because you can change the shape from
long oval to moons pinched together at the middle seam or any shape egg if you
tilt and push the spoon closer or farther away. Nothing to think about. You go
with the Mistress to the chest in the root cellar. She guides you with a candle
and you make a pouch of soft cloth and carefully lay in each spoon and careful
it don't jangle as up and out of the darkness following her rustling dresses and
petticoats up the earthen steps each one topped by a plank which squirms as you
mount it. You are following the taper she holds and the strange smell she trails
and leaves in rooms. Then shut up in a room all day with nothing to think about.
With rags and pieces of silver. Slowly you rub away the tarnished spots; it is
finding something which surprises you though you knew all the time it was there.
Spoons lying on the strip of indigo: perfect, gleaming fish you have coaxed from
the black water.''

Perhaps the black water is soft-cover, rather than hard-core history. A boy in
''Damballah'' back in plantation times sees a man fishing. Both are black: ''In
his village across the sea were men who hunted and fished with their voices. Men
could talk the fish up from their shadowy dwellings and into the woven baskets
slung over the fishermen's shoulders. Orion knew the fish in this cold river had
forgotten him, that they were darting in and out of his legs. If the whites had
not stolen him, he would have learned the fishing magic.  The proper words, the
proper tones to please the fish. But here in this blood-soaked land everything
was different. Though he felt their slick bodies and saw the sudden dimples in
the water where they were feeding, he understood that he would never speak the
language of these fish. No more than he would ever speak again the words of the
white people who had decided to kill him.''

Orion will die. Mr. Wideman is still looking for the language of the fish.
Orion's severed head will be cast upon black water. Mr.  Wideman will follow its
flow north to Homewood, a black ghetto founded by a runaway slave on the south
side of Pittsburgh. The head will speak and sing - of dead children in garbage
cans, of icemen, of caterpillars consumed like canapes, of a young girl pushed
to paralysis down the steps of a stairwell, of chopped-off arms and the
slaughterhouse and blindness and rape, of drugs and prison and Vietnam, of
bridges and gardens, of wings and the church, of gospels and basketball, of lost
gods and dead fathers.

A Voodoo Title

Talk about your ambivalence, or your blues. The hero of ''Damballah'' - the
title refers to a voodoo god, ''the good serpent of the sky,'' who specializes
in a kind of speechless but benevolent fatherhood - is John French. One sour
apple on his family tree, Tommy, takes over in ''Hiding Place.'' Tommy is
running away from a murder conviction and from history. He is not one of those
angels for whom ''not hurting nothing is their nature''; maybe we need some
hurting. He is taken in by Mama Bess. She is family, and what family does is to
try to put together the ''scars'' and the ''stories''; family, which forgives,
is the opposite of history, which is haunted and denies itself.

Mama Bess warns us: Tommy ''ain't scared no more and they better listen and they
better make sure it don't happen so easy ever again.'' Tommy is also aware: ''He
will suffer for whatever he knows. Maybe that's why he forgets so much.''
Whereas Mr. Wideman, in his epic poem of black faces on severed heads, of gospel
speech, of signifying, refuses to forget anything. Who knows what silent fish,
what pinched moons, he met in England during his Rhodes scholarship or while he
taught at the universities of Pennsylvania and Wyoming? He goes home in these
two books, stolen and seamed.

Isn't this what hard-cover books used to be about - the mind that is stolen and
reclaimed, the home we have to go back to, a writer who belongs in our permanent
library?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 28, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

New Bacteria May Be Used To Make Toxic Herbicide Safe

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 94 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 27


Scientists have developed bacteria that they say can clean up land contaminated
by Agent Orange, the powerful weed killer used in the Vietnam War, and other
herbicides.

Researchers at the University of Illinois Medical Center in Chicago said
Thursday that they had bred a strain of bacteria that feeds on the major
component of Agent Orange.

In using up the carbon in this component, a herbicide called
2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid, or 2,4,5-T, the microbes change the
chemical's composition, rendering it harmless, they said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 28, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Sports of The Times;
A Biship's View of Football

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19, Column 5; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 951 words


WHEN 14-year-old Terrence Robinson died of head injuries from football last
September, Bishop Walter F. Sullivan was stunned to learn the boy had been
playing for a parish team.

''I thought we had eliminated that two years ago,'' Bishop Sullivan said
recently.  Now Bishop Sullivan has told the entire Roman Catholic Diocese of
Richmond, Va., that he does not consider football to have any ''redeeming
value'' for young people, including high school students. Bishop Sullivan, who
says he played football as a child and who enjoys competing in tennis, contends
that football ''teaches violence toward opponents.''

''It sponsors hatred between schools, between parishes,'' he says.  ''It does
not represent any Christian values that I can see.'' He has, of course, stirred
up rabid opposition, particularly at the northern fringe of the Sunbelt, where
football often seems to be a religion in and of itself. Bishop Sullivan has
received a friendly call from Gerry Faust, the Notre Dame coach, who gently
defended football, but he has been harshly criticized by many parents within his
diocese.

Bishop Sullivan is aware of the hold of football around the country. He found a
reminder in the National Catholic Reporter, one of the best religious journals
in the country, which discovered that Servite High in California's Orange County
links Faith, Family and Football as a desirable trinity for its students.

But Bishop Sullivan says he is committed to trying to limit football within his
diocese, which covers the state of Virginia. Two years ago Bishop Sullivan
ordered all parish schools to end sponsorship of football teams, in compliance
with a state law that forbids organized football in grade school.

''I did it for legal reasons, but I also was concerned about the amount of
injuries in football,'' Bishop Sullivan says. ''I have seen statistics showing
about 50,000 injuries per year in football. I've talked to doctors who say the
elementary-school years are vital for growth, and that football can hinder
growth.

''I was also concerned about the violence in football, the idea of mowing down
the opposition. I'm not saying coaches were teaching children to deliberately
injure other players, but the terrible need to win has made football no longer a
sport. People say football helps boys get rid of their aggressions, but that's
not good enough for me.''

Following the Bishop's decree two years ago, the schools technically dropped
football. But parents and parish groups promptly resumed the rivalries. An
active cleric who was an early opponent of the Vietnam War, a critic of
strip-mining that has ravaged western Virginia, and a sympathetic figure to
female activists in the church, Bishop Sullivan did not learn about the
circumvention of his orders until last September. He had baptized Terrence
Robinson, had followed his progress through grade school and was dismayed by his
death.

In the Oct. 5 issue of his diocesan newspaper, The Catholic Virginian, Bishop
Sullivan wrote a pastoral letter entitled ''Respect Life and Limb.'' Toward the
end of the letter, he wrote:

''I regret not having taken a stronger stand in outlawing football under
Catholic auspices for grade-school youngsters.  ''I ask the full cooperation of
our pastors, school principals, and parents in supporting my position that
football on a grade school level, either through the school, the parish or an
athletic association, must be outlawed. I ask the Catholic high schools to
consider seriously the same concern and take action to eliminate football from
their athletic program. ... May this year's Respect Life commitment be a lasting
tribute to Terrence Robinson.''

The Bishop ordered the parish teams to shut down after this season, and he asked
diocesan high schools to review their policy on football. One parish tried to
keep its children from meeting with the Bishop, but the boys informed their
parents they were old enough to listen to their pastoral leader, even if they
disagreed with his position.

The board of one diocesan high school, Norfolk Catholic, voted, 20-1, to keep
the football program. Sister Theresa Kreibick, the principal and a board member,
said she was glad football would continue but also said she was glad Bishop
Sullivan had ''challenged us.''

John O'Hara, the coach of the Norfolk Catholic team, said: ''In any sport, you
try to work over the weaker spots in your opponent. We don't teach anybody to
hurt anybody else. We teach proper techniques, but we also teach
sportsmanship.''

O'Hara said that he did not believe there was a ''hatred'' engendered by
football. ''The only thing I object to is when I see a coach grabbing the face
mask of a player, yelling and cursing at them, getting right up in a young man's
face,'' O'Hara said. ''That's no way to teach anything.''

Several weeks after his pastoral letter, Bishop Sullivan says: ''It's as if we
can't exist without football. It's a sacred cow in American society. In
basketball, in soccer, in a lot of sports, you have physical contact, but the
main objective is not to hurt the other guy.

''I hear people saying, 'Football's not so bad.' But that's not a good enough
argument for me. People say, 'Why don't you get on automobiles? More people die
from automobiles than football.' But that's no answer, to me.

''I just don't think football fits We talk at great length about being against
abortion, but there are other day-by-day attitudes that need investigation, too.
I don't think football is a sport, is fun, is something you enjoy. I feel the
hostility between schools, between people who don't even know each other. Is
that what we're teaching our young people? That doesn't fit into my values.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY REBUTS ITS CRITICS ON PROBLEMS WITH ARMS

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2113 words


Managing the development, production and testing of billions of dollars worth of
new weapons and equipment and the use and maintenance of highly sophisticated
arms systems are serious concerns in the military, officials say.

But while critics outside the services have expressed skepticism, senior
officers and civilian officials in the Pentagon and others in the field and at
sea said in interviews that they were optimistic that the services could handle
the problems.

Difficulties are expected in excess costs, such as in the M-1 tank procurement
program, and in maintenance, but the officers said they believed the military
had learned from its mistakes.

At Odds With Pentagon's Critics

These views run counter to those of outside critics. For instance, James
Fallows, in his book, ''National Defense,'' said, ''There is a growing concern
within the military itself that airplanes, tanks, ships and missiles have grown
too complex, expensive and delicate to be useful in warfare or credible for
deterrent purposes.''

Representative Robin L. Beard, Republican of Tennessee, a member of the Armed
Services Committee, described the new M-1 tank in a recent article as more
difficult to operate and maintain than the P-51 fighter aircraft used in World
War II because of the tank's laser and computer technology.

''Yet these tanks,'' he said, ''will be manned not by college graduates but by
soldiers who in many cases will not even be high school graduates or able to
read'' above seventh-grade level.

In more than a dozen interviews, by contrast, no military officer or official
expressed doubt that soldiers, sailors and airmen could use the new weapons.

Both military and civilian officials emphasized that increased sophistication in
weapons offered the best chance of establishing a military balance with the
Soviet Union.

The United States, it was emphasized, cannot hope to match the Soviet Union in
numbers of men or weapons. But it has the technology to build weapons that are
more accurate and lethal and weapons platforms that are more durable and stable.


Major Problems Identified

Military leaders discussing the armed services of the future identify three
major problems: the quality of personnel in the allvolunteer forces, the ability
of industry to produce what is needed, and service performance in maintaining
sophisticated equipment.

In the next five years, billions will flow to meet the services' major weapons
requirements: $114.4 billion for the Navy, $52.1 billion for the Army and $51.5
billion for the Air Force.

The problems are likely to be most serious for the Army, which, after a decade
of coping with weapons of the Vietnam era, is modernizing, just as the Navy and
the Air Force did in the 1970's.

In the 1982-1987 fiscal years, Army aircraft purchases will rise 55 percent over
deliveries in the fiscal year 1981 and earlier years.  Similarly, purchases of
missiles will increase 54 percent; of artillery pieces, tanks and armored
personnel carriers, 96 percent; ammunition, 40 percent, and in other fields, 20
percent, according to The Armed Forces Journal.

Officials estimate that in 13 selected programs the Army will spend $73.9
billion in the next five years, an increase of 188 percent over the previous
four years.

The five basic Army priorities cover the M-1 tank, M-2 and M-3 armored fighting
vehicles, Patriot surface-to-air missile, and the UH-60 and AH-64 helicopters.
In 1981 dollars, these will cost about $52.1 billion.

The top Navy programs will cost $114.4 billion, for the F-18 fighter-attack
aircraft, Trident submarine and missile, DDG-47 destroyer, SSN-688 attack
submarine and F-14 fighter.

The bill for the leading Air Force weapons systems is to be $51.5 billion, for
the F-16 and F-15 fighters, air-launched cruise missile, A-10 close support
aircraft and E-3A warning aircraft, or Awacs.

Cost Estimates Vary

The Department of Defense has been sharply criticized for what some in Congress
have called misrepresentation on the cost of the B-1B bomber. The Pentagon's
estimate for 100 of the aircraft was $28 billion, allowing for inflation. But
the Congressional Budget Office arrived at a cost of $39.8 billion, covering the
bombers and equipment. The difference arose in the Defense Department's failure
to include the cost of systems required to make the B-1B an effective combat
aircraft.

As for the quality of personnel in the volunteer force, there have been recent
signs of improvement. According to Pentagon figures, more men and women joined
or re-enlisted in the fiscal year 1981 than in any year since the draft ended in
1973.

In the Army, which has difficulty getting educated recruits, 80 percent of new
personnel are high school graduates.  But the Navy has found, according to Rear
Adm. Thomas Hughes, Deputy Chief of Staff for manpower, personnel and training,
that only 9 percent of high school graduates have had a year of physics, less
than 10 percent have had more than one mathematics course, and only 3 percent
have had a year of algebra.

Loss of NCO's a Problem

The Army, in particular, has been losing middle-grade noncommissioned officers.
Maj. Gen. Richard W. Anson, chief of the Army force modernization, said he hoped
the quality of recruits would enable the service to ''grow its own'' noncoms to
replace those who, after receiving technical education, have left for civilian
jobs.

Maj. Gen. T.R. Morgan of the Marine Corps, noting that about 80 percent of its
recruits were high school graduates, said he did not believe the introduction of
sophisticated weapons to a service trained basically for uncomplicated combat
would prove a major problem so long as the corps kept experienced
noncommissioned officers.

Over all, the services' retention rate has risen because of pay increases of
14.3 percent for officers and 10 to 17 percent for enlisted personnel.

The Navy, possibly the service hardest hit by losses of technicians, has begun
to offer selective re-enlistment bonuses.  Through these, a chief petty officer
in the nuclear service, who reenlists for six years, receives a $20,000 bonus.
Other petty officers get up to $16,000.

If the services continue to lose trained personnel, some officers advocate
contracting with weapons manufacturers for civilian assistance at bases.

Training Might Be Lengthened

Another suggestion is a longer training period for introducing technical skills.
The Air Force has lengthened instruction time on its weapons systems.

Dr. Lawrence Korb, Assistant Secretary of Defense for manpower, reserve afffairs
and logistics, was optimistic.  ''If we do as well in recruiting and retention
in the future as we have this year,'' he said, ''the people will be there to
handle the new weapons systems and to maintain them.''

Civilian officials are also concerned about the ability of industry to handle
orders for sophisticated weapons and equipment. Dr. Fred C. Ikle, Assistant
Secretary of Defense, reported that it took ''much too long to produce weapons
and equipment.''

Gen. Lew Allen Jr, the Air Force Chief of Staff, believes that his service will
be able to manage its acquisitions, within cost and time deadlines, through cost
controls introduced at the development stage, fixed-price contracts and
restraint on engineering changes.

After some unhappy experiences, the services are wary of ''goldplating.'' This
is the addition of minor but important improvements while weapons are in
production. Though the cost of an individual improvement may seem small,
changes, multiplied by thousands of weapons, can cause spending to soar.

Weapons Testing to Change

Vice Adm. Robert Monroe, director of Navy research, development, testing and
evaluation, believes that new methods of weapons testing will prevent adopting
arms that are overly difficult to operate and maintain. For example, the Navy
has introduced testing and evaluation procedures that are independent of a
weapon's planners, developers and manufacturers.

Instead, tests are carried out by the crews, whether aboard ship or in aircraft,
who are to use the weapons. The tests, without rehearsals, are conducted under
bad-weather conditions, with ''enemy'' ships or aircraft encouraged to maneuver
at high speeds and to use electronic deception.

Gen. Kelly Burke, Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff for research, development and
acquisition, emphasized that the services had learned from their errors and were
incorporating reasonable safeguards against failure.

''When the aircraft reaches the pilot, it works,'' he said. ''The Air Force has
followed it from the blueprints. It's dangerous to think that the sophistication
of modern aircraft is the enemy of reliability and maintenance in use.''

Gen. David C. Jones, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, mentioned one
problem in monitoring weapons development, production and testing. Such
programs, he said, can take five to 10 years to run their course from research
to operations. It will be difficult to keep officers involved in such programs
over that long a time, he said, because of the services' emphasis on rotation.

Some Arms Simple to Operate

General Anson of the Army said that although new weapons were ''far more
complex,'' some are so simple to operate that ''you could train chimpanzees to
use them.''

There has been a conscious effort by designers and manufacturers to make the new
weapons easier to use, General Anson added. In adapting from the Redeye antitank
missile to the Stinger, personnel had to learn to use just one additional button
on firing panels.

Admiral Monroe said weapons had been designed to be easy to operate to make
sophisticated systems usable by people of limited education.  Dr. Ikle, too,
predicted ''no serious problems with the users.''

The general agreement that the services will be able to use such new weapons as
the MX and Stinger missiles is balanced by recognition of the problems posed by
maintenance of these sophisticated weapons.

On this score, the Air Force is cautiously optimistic. General Allen said that
radios failed less frequently than five years ago and that the F-15 fighter
required fewer maintenance man-hours for each hour of flying than the F-4 it
replaced.

Black Boxes Hard to Repair

The Air Force Chief of Staff and others conceded that breakdowns in the ''black
boxes'' housing advanced electronics might be a problem.  A defective black box
may be replaced on an airfield. But repairs require sophisticated equipment,
which, at a forward airbase, could be vulnerable to attack.

Adm. Stansfield Turner, former Director of Central Intelligence and NATO
commander in the Mediterranean, believes problems can arise in the management of
arms and equipment. But he said, in a telephone interview, that as long as ''the
level of competence'' among officers in control remained high, the services
''will be able to manage procurement.''

He said that all the services would have difficulty using new weapons because of
''low skill levels.'' But he pointed out that in the long period for
introduction of weapons, the services had an opportunity to train program
managers and eventual users.

Robert W. Komer, Under Secretary of Defense in the Carter Administration,
believes that problems that arose in absorbing one weapons system, the M-1 tank,
could be met by assigning senior sergeants as tank commanders.

He said the charges that the services could not handle new weapons were
''overdrawn.'' He added that professionals, not ''recruits,'' would handle
advanced Air Force and Navy weapons.

Predictions that tomorrow's soldier, sailor or airman will be unable to maintain
computerized weapons may overlook an emerging trend, several sources said. This
is the widespread popularity of computers and computerized games.

''You've got high school boys doing computer programming,'' said General Anson,
''and you've got kids jamming amusement arcades to play complicated computerized
games. It's not going to be so difficult for them to handle the new machines as
many think.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: table of projected growth in army purchases table of
weapons cost

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

F.B.I.'S MAN ON BRINK'S CASE: AN ELEMENT OF VINDICATION

BYLINE: By LESLIE MAITLAND

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1040 words


Classical music plays softly in the background, coffee is served in gold-rimmed
china and an antique brass lamp casts a warm glow across Kenneth P. Walton's
desk. The calm surroundings, though, belie the fact that Mr. Walton, an
assistant deputy director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the No. 2
man in the New York office, heads what is arguably one of the agency's most
sensitive cases in years - the investigation into last month's Brink's robbery
in Rockland County and the radicals from the Weather Underground and the Black
Liberation Army who are suspects in it.

As a 16-year F.B.I. veteran, Mr. Walton is acutely aware of the potential
problems such a case can pose. It wasn't long ago that J.  Wallace LaPrade, the
former head of the Bureau's New York office, lost that job in a dispute with the
Justice Department over surveillance tactics used to investigate Vietnam war
demonstrators.  One of them, Judith A. Clark, still has a law suit pending
against the Bureau and Government officials.

Now Miss Clark and two other members of the Weather Underground, Katherine
Boudin and David J.  Gilbert, along with Samuel Brown and Nathaniel Burns, are
in custody, charged with the Rockland robbery in which two Nyack policemen and a
Brink's guard were killed. Last week, Mr. Gilbert and Mr. Brown pleaded not
guilty; a judge entered similar pleas for Miss Clark and Miss Boudin when they
refused to participate in court proceedings.

There is an element of vindication in all this for Mr. Walton and other agents,
who remember a time when, as the F.B.I. looked into the increasingly violent
activities of some radical groups, it didn't always have the public's support.
''I was never satisfied with the resolution of the Weather Underground and the
entire militant left movement,'' Mr. Walton said. ''When some members surfaced,
they were treated like folk heroes and let off with a slap on the wrist. This
business in Nyack has not only seriously diminished their ranks, but probably
has diminished a good deal of the intellectual support they had in the 1970's.
They were not viewed as a threat, and now they are.''

That threat was clearly on Mr. Walton's mind shortly after the robbery, when he
led a group of agents in a raid on a Mississippi farmhouse in which Cynthia
Boston was arrested as a suspect in the case. She was later freed, after
presenting evidence that she was not in New York at the time of the robbery. The
Bureau, meanwhile, was criticized by some for over-zealousness and for the
massive show of force - including armored trucks and SWAT teams - it mounted
during the operation. But, Mr. Walton said, ''if I had the same set of
circumstances, I'd do it again in the exact same way.''

Miss Boston, also known as Fulani Sunni Ali, is a member of the The Republic of
New Africa, a black militant organization. She had been identified as one of
those involved in the Brink's conspiracy, according to Mr. Walton. In tracing
her to a small town near Jackson, investigators said they had also come to
believe that other suspects, perhaps including Joanne Chesimard, the fugitive
leader of the Black Liberation Army, would be found there, too.

''In 1971 in Mississipi, this group had an underground residence where a police
officer was killed and an F.B.I. agent was shot just trying to serve a
subpoena,'' Mr. Walton said. The F.B.I.'s ''substantial show of strength'' in
the recent arrests was aimed at discouraging a similar shoot-out, he said.

Mr. Walton said agents found two loaded guns in a car near the house and seven
more, along with enough ammunition for a ''gun shop,'' inside it. ''In
retrospect,'' he added, ''the fact that not a shot was fired, not a person hurt,
speaks for the planning of the operation.''

The investigation Mr. Walton heads is staffed not just by the F.B.I. but also by
the New York and New Jersey State Police, the New York City Police and several
police departments in Rockland County.  Though such efforts are sometimes
paralyzed by rivalries, this one apparently has not been thus far. Furthermore,
though leads in many investigations dry up a week after the crime, Mr. Walton
said there are still many avenues to pursue in the nationwide search for missing
suspects.

The F.B.I. is also attempting to determine whether there is an association
between the Black Liberation Army, the Republic of New Africa, the Weather
Underground and a group called the May 19 Committee and, if there is, whether a
prosecution can be mounted under Federal racketeering statutes - a novel
approach successful against Croatian terrorists.

''The guidelines are clear, and we will not investigate groups without an overt
criminal act or information that one will be committed,'' Mr. Walton is quick to
add. ''After 1979, we had no grounds to continue any domestic surveillance of
radical groups.''

The 42-year-old son of a Chippewa Falls, Wis., bus driver, Mr.  Walton is
partial to three piece suits and starched shirts, wears a gold watch chain
across his chest and combs his long hair neatly back from his face - all
trademarks that earn him constant ribbing from his colleagues. In his years with
the agency, he said, he has watched the F.B.I. change from a ''reactive agency''
of the Hoover days to one he now feels stresses investigative quality rather
than quantity.

This perspective, though, has been attained at some personal cost.  His transfer
to New York two years ago was the ninth reassignment in a career that has been
marked by periodic shifts around the country.  His wife and three children have
grown accustomed to seeing him infrequently, since the 14-hour days he has
worked during the Brink's investigation have always been something of a pattern
for him.

''I've worked for people who have said, 'Keep me advised,' '' he said. ''I don't
have to be kept advised, because very frequently I'm there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of F.B.I. SWAT team in simulated rescue of
hostages photo of Kenneth P. Walton

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

YELLOW RAIN OVER SOUTHEAST ASIA: 'THE EVIDENCE IS COMPELLING'

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 743 words


To the Editor:

In a Nov. 17 editorial (''Too Quick on Yellow Rain'') you allege that the U.S.
Government has rushed to judgment in concluding that lethal toxins are being
used against innocent people by Communist forces in Southeast Asia. Nothing
could be further from the truth.

he most meticulous scientific analysis of samples from areas of witnessed
attacks has convinced independent and Government experts alike that
trichothecene toxins have in fact been used. The testimony of victims and
refugees made available in detail to the United Nations substantiates this
conclusion.

I realize there are some who will not be persuaded. But it would be an act of
moral dereliction by this Administration if it did not voice its concerns in an
effort to focus international attention and bring a halt to the killing of
innocent and defenseless people by this particularly horrible and indiscriminate
weapon.

The editorial is factually incorrect on several accounts.  First, none of the
samples from the region we have analyzed have been provided by the Khmer Rouge,
as your editorial suggests.  Second, none of these lethal trichothecene toxins
are known to occur naturally at the levels and in the combination found in
Southeast Asia. In point of fact, they are not known to occur naturally anywhere
in the world at these levels and in these combinations. Indeed, one of the
mycotoxins found, T-2, is not known to occur naturally in Southeast Asia at all.

As an additional means of verifying that these mycotoxins do not occur
naturally, special efforts were made to obtain soil and vegetation samples of
the same species from areas immediately adjacent to the attack site in Kampuchea
from which two of the poisoned samples came. None of these control samples
contained trichothecene mycotoxins.

Third, the numerous victims of these attacks range from young children to mature
adults. Contrary to your editorial's implications, they have been interviewed
systematically by qualified medical personnel. These reports, in turn, have been
scrutinized and verified by other scientists, A consistent pattern emerges,
pointing to the same toxin symptomatology that we have now identified as the
result of mycotoxin poisoning.

We have made the details of our findings available to the Congress, to the
United Nations and to other governments. There is no question but that the
possession and use of these toxins is a violation of the 1925 Geneva Protocol,
the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention and the rules of customary international
law, which apply to all states.

As I stated in my testimony of Nov. 10 to the Arms Control Subcommittee of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the Soviet Union is providing comprehensive
military support to the Vietnamese, Laotian and Kampuchean Communist forces
fighting in Southeast Asia.  Further, the Soviets are advising and controlling
chemical warfare activities there. We know of no facility in Southeast Asia
capable of producing these toxins in the quantities being employed, and we have
identified such facilities in the Soviet Union, which are under military control
and heavy guard.

Finally, as I noted, the Soviets have consistently opposed all international
inquiry into reports of the use of chemical weapons in this region.

We have called upon the Soviet Union to take such steps as are necessary to halt
the use of these weapons and to cooperate with the U.N. experts investigating
this situation.

The evidence we have presented is extensive and compelling. Delay in making this
evidence available to the international community would exact an unacceptable
price in human lives.

The objective of the United States Government is to get this activity stopped.
The United States will continue to take such steps as are necessary to keep this
issue high on the international agenda until that objective is achieved.
RICHARD BURT Director of the Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs Department of
State Washington, Nov. 19, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AT 39, ALI HAS MORE POINTS TO PROVE

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 5; Page 1, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 2408 words


NASSAU, the Bahamas H IS religion prohibits magic. Muhammad Ali mentions this as
he performs some sleight of hand in his hotel room while waiting for a fight
some people say he shouldn't attempt, and others suspect may never come off.

While waiting it out, Muhammad Ali takes three unequal ropes and makes them the
same length without being detected. He stuffs a handkerchief into his huge fist
and makes it disappear. He turns a half dollar into a nickel with a flick of his
hand.

But after that trick, he deliberately exposes the device that allows him to
switch the coins. He says in the hoarse voice that worries his friends:
''Muslims don't believe in magic. That's why I've got to explain what I do. I
believe in God, and I believe in knowledge, in education. No magic, no voodoo.''

He is wearing a chocolate brown suit with a clean shirt and tie at 8 in the
morning. He is all dressed up with nowhere to go, because he is mostly killing
time until he gets into the ring with Trevor Berbick on the night of Dec. 11.

If he gets into the ring. Three times in an hour, Ali uses the phrase ''if the
fight comes off.'' Network television in the States wouldn't touch a fight by
the most recognized athlete - perhaps the most recognized human being - in the
world. He has gone to another country, where the local promoters finally got
around to making tickets available, in a supermarket, last week. Ali's somber
behavior reflects the shaky financial status, as well as his own poor physical
shape. He promises no magic in the ring on Dec. 11 - just a tired man, nearly 40
years of age, trying to defy the fears of his admirers.

His friends say he has taken too many punches since he began boxing as a skinny
12-year-old in Louisville, nearly 28 years ago. He admits his mother and his
wife don't want him to box again. He dismissed Dr. Ferdie Pacheco for saying
brain damage was evident in his speech. Ali admits ''I couldn't win a round'' in
his clumsy battle with Larry Holmes in October 1980. And he has heard that
George Foreman, whom he beat seven years ago, has said: ''All the people who
cheered him will be embarrassed for him now.''

But Muhammad Ali is beyond embarrassment. As he shifts from his repertoire of
sleight of hand into his repertoire of rhetoric, he says, ''I see the overall
picture,'' He looks a visitor in the eye and he says: ''Write this down. The
price of certainty of being the greatest is a constant assault on my own
personality and ability. ''

Why is he fighting again? He leans back on a couch in his chocolate brown suit,
seemingly exhausted from running two miles that morning, and whispers: ''Not
because I'm broke. Not because I miss the limelight. Not because anybody makes
me. It's just the idea. Four times a champ. I remember when Floyd Patterson
regained his championship.''

Here Ali imitates the oohs and ahs of millions of astonished boxing fans, as
heard over the static of a radio in a 1960 bout against Ingemar Johansson. Ali
is his own sound-effects man.

''Everybody said it was amazing that a man won the heavyweight title back,''
says Ali.  Floyd Patterson won the title two times, ''but I'm going to do it
four times,'' Ali says. ''Nobody will ever do it five times because you know as
well as I do that people get old too fast. I used to run six miles a day but now
I got to make an effort for three. I can still do everything I want but I got to
make appointments. Can't do things on the spur of the moment like when you're
20. Not even Muhammad Ali could win the title five times. ''

Ali has not fought since Holmes reverently peppered him 14 months ago. Because
he could not get backing in the United States, he has allowed some associates to
arrange a so-called ''Drama in Bahama.'' For the past eight weeks he has been a
bigger attraction than the captured dolphins and barracudas in the lagoon behind
the hotel. He is big enough to drag people out of the casino just to gape at
him, which may not be exactly what management had in mind when it made Ali a
guest at the hotel.

''Everybody knows me,'' Ali says. ''Not just in the West, but in China, in
Russia, in Morocco, in Libya. They know me all over the world. I set up a goal
for myself, to demonstrate to other people what can be done. I do it for them.
People tell me not to fight, but they are at the foot of the wall of knowledge
and I am at the top. My horizon is greater than theirs.

''Why do people go to the moon? Why did Martin Luther King say he had a dream?
People need challenges.'' A visitor relays a greeting from George Foreman, who
quit boxing abruptly four years ago and is now serving a tiny Christian
congregation in the pine woods outside Houston. Foreman has said Ali should not
fight any more but should serve his own Islamic faith outside the ring.

''Foreman's a good man,'' Ali says softly. ''Don't want to say anything against
him. But you say he's got 21 people in his church on a good night. I've got the
whole world. If I make my comeback, I can see Yankee Stadium packed with people.
There's Billy Graham on my left, preaching Christianity. There's a noted rabbi
on my right.  There's Reverend Ike. There's Wallace Muhammad. All of us
preaching our Gods, like ponds and streams and rivers and lakes all going down
to the ocean. That's why I keep fighting. I'm spreading my faith.''

Foreman's point had been that Ali did not need to box any more, that he had such
great visibility that he could preach his point of view far from a boxing ring.
Nearly 40, Ali has clearly not found any way of life more appealing than hanging
around a boxing environment, training and talking - and putting his own brain
cells on the line again. This is not to say Ali does not represent his faith.
Sitting around the hotel room, Ali has a respectful debate with a visitor from a
Christian television network. When Abdel Kader, Ali's Moroccan aide, brings out
Ali's Bible and his Koran, both are wellthumbed. And when Ali wants to find the
passage in Exodus 20:4, his thick fingers flick to the pages in a few seconds.
The born-again television man is impressed.

A few minutes later, Ali lets Jeremiah Shabazz, a Muslim minister, carry the
debate about whether the Bible forbids visual images of God. Ali sits back and
listens, and turns to a journalist and whispers: ''I like this -sitting around,
talking about serious things. This is good.''

A few minutes later, Ali winks at the journalist and whispers: ''You listen to
me talk. Do I sound like I've got brain damage to you?''

Many friends and associates say Ali's voice worries them, that it is thick and
slow, like coffee with too many grounds in it. One doctor in England claims that
samples of Ali's voice over the past 15 years indicate increased slurring, a
sign of loss of irreplacable brain cells.

''I'm tired,'' Ali admits. ''This is hard work for somebody my age. Naturally, I
talk slower when I'm tired. But I still make sense, don't I? I'm not one of them
punch-drunk fighters. My face is still pretty, no marks on it. Besides, I went
to some white doctors, so white people would believe me. Went to the Mayo
Clinic. Went to Columbia, S.C. Went to New York. Went to U.C.L.A. You can't get
better than that, can you?''

In a rare move for any boxing match, the promoters of the Ali-Berbick fight
released a medical report issued Dec. 1, 1980, by Dr. Dennis W. Cope, Division
of Endocrinology, U.C.L.A. Medical Center. Ali had gone to the center after
claiming he had become dehydrated from taking too many thyroid pills for the
Holmes fight.  Some people had suggested Ali had been taking pills to cut down
on his weight.

Dr. Cope's report said Ali had come to the center first on Oct. 6 ''complaining
of lethargy, weakness and shortness of breath.'' The report, which covered four
visits to the center, said: ''The patient tended to talk softly and to almost
mumble his speech at times; but when questioned about this, he was able to speak
appropriately without any evidence of a speech disorder. He was evaluated by
both a neuro-surgeon and neurologist who felt that his speech pattern was not
pathologic.''

The examination also placed Ali in the normal range for thyroid, heart, brain,
lungs and kidneys, and concluded: ''The patient's current health status is
excellent and there is no evidence from a health standpoint that he should be
limited whatsoever in his activities.''

Ali explains his dismal showing against Holmes this way: ''I took too many
thyroid pills. Always used to double up on my vitamins. Bad idea with thyroid
pills. Started training at 253, went down to 217 for the fight. Too much. People
saying, 'Oooh, isn't he pretty?' But I was too weak, didn't feel like dancing. I
was dazed. I was in a dream.

''The day before the fight, I couldn't run half a mile. Had to quit. The day
after the fight, I ate some pie, some ice cream, some cheeseburgers, got some
salt and sugar back into me, two days later, I ran nine miles. Nine miles. Most
I ever ran in my life.''

Certainly more than he is running these days. Ali says he weighs 232, but a lot
of it has settled around his waist. He says he runs three miles six times a
week, but the other morning at 5 o'clock, with the roosters crowing and the sun
not yet dawned over the Caribbean, Ali chugged a mile and a half, walked half a
mile throwing punches at the darkness with two light weights in his fists. He
was delighted to stop and spar with a young man out for a dawn run, and did not
seem overly offended when the young man asked: 'What you doing here? You
fighting again?'' After two miles at the most, Ali climbed back into Murphy's
limousine and returned to the hotel.

His sparring session the day before had been equally bleak.  Performing for
about 300 tourists, who had paid $3 apiece to enter the hotel theater, Ali had
pushed and shoved a lighter opponent for nine rounds, then went into a plodding
two-step that was a parody of the young Ali. Afterward, he satisfied the
customers by gabbing from the edge of the stage. He said: ''Today you saw me
sharpening my defense, developing my visual scope, dodging punches. Every day I
work on something different. When I fight Berbick, I will be dancing all night.
Do you have any questions? You say I'm still pretty. Tell me something new,
man.''

Later he lay on a bed behind the stage, wrapped in a white robe like a king
being prepared for burial in a pyramid, and admitted this was tough work for a
39-year-old man.

''Everybody over 40 going to be rooting for me,'' he predicted, adding yet
another constituency to his legions. ''I'm gonna beat Berbick badder than Holmes
did.''

Trevor Berbick is a big, strong Jamaican, 27 years old, who now lives in Nova
Scotia. In his most recent fight, last April, Berbick lost a decision to Holmes
in Las Vegas, Nev., without ever showing fear of the champion. He also hit John
Tate so hard in Montreal in 1980 that Tate quivered in the ring for many long
seconds before finally reviving.

Ali has always had a genius for finding a deus ex machina - good luck, whatever
you want to call it - in his moments of need. When he refused to serve in the
military, the public mood eventually turned against the Vietnam War, allowing
him to return to boxing. When he won his championships, he had the great vision
to encounter the mysterious Sonny Liston in Miami Beach, Fla., the awed Foreman
in the middle of the night in Zaire, and a totally inept Leon Spinks in New
Orleans.

This time Ali could be saved from a beating by the fiscal shorts.  Franklin
Wilson, a vice president of Sports International, a Bahamiam company formed to
promote this fight, said last week, ''There were sufficient elements of truth''
to rumors of financial problems but he added: ''That is old news now.'' Mr.
Wilson said arrangement between United States television interests and Sports
International had ''passed the deadline point. The fight is going on.''

Mr. Wilson admitted that only 2,000 tickets had been sold through last week, but
claimed nearly half the 17,000 tickets were now reserved through travel agents
in the United States.

Ali said: ''We got some money up front. We got $250,000 for expenses, and more
to come later. If the fight comes off or not, that's up to my lawyers. They
handle that stuff and I do the fighting. I'm not worried.

''A lot of people want to see me win the fourth title, but a lot of people are
against me. Rap Brown, Stokely Carmichael, you don't hear from them. Martin
Luther King, he's gone. I'm the last of the heroes of the sixties. I'm fighting
the odds. A lot of the white society doesn't want black heroes. It's like the
old days, all over again.  Wonder Woman is white. Tarzan is the king of the
jungle. Batman is white. Evel Knievel jumps the Grand Canyon, nobody stops him.

''There was an old lady, 80 years old, finished the marathon in New York. That's
26 miles. I never ran 26 miles in my life, but an 80-year-old woman did it, and
nobody made her stop.

''There was this man in Canada, Terry Fox. He had an artificial leg from cancer,
he ran almost all the way across Canada on one leg before he died and he was a
hero. They didn't try to stop him.

''Why are so many people worried about me fighting Berbick? I'll whip Holmes and
everybody will say, 'Whooo, four times, Muhammad Ali win it four times.' I'll
defend my title a few times, then I'll retire, go preach all over the world.
What's wrong with me trying it? You ever see so many people worried about one
black guy in your life?''

Then Muhammad Ali winks at the visitor and asks again: ''Do I sound like I got
brain damage to you?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Ali exercising and doing impromtu sparring
photo of Ali training with Angelo Dundee

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KEEPING AN EYE ON RUSSIA

SECTION: Section 6; Page 31, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6980 words


Leslie H. Gelb is The Times's national security correspondent, based in the
Washington bureau.
By Leslie H. Gelb

Dozens of times each year, the American satellite passed overhead, its amazing,
high-resolution lenses capturing great swaths of the Ural Mountains on film.
Dozens of times over the years, the American intelligence experts who studied
these films focused their attention on the city of Sverdlovsk and, in
particular, on a closely guarded building within Military Compound 19 on the
city's southern rim. The physical details of the structure, including the
presence of special venting outlets and of animal pens, led the experts to
suspect that it was a factory for the production of biological weapons - a
violation of the biological-weapons convention signed by the Soviet Union, the
United States and more than 100 other nations in 1972.

On or about April 2, 1979, an epidemic of deadly anthrax struck Sverdlovsk.
Rumors about the event began appearing in the foreign press, connecting the
epidemic to an accident at the building in Compound 19. But it was almost a year
before the United States realized that something politically significant had
happened in Sverdlovsk and mobilized its vast intelligence and scientific
apparatus for a full study. Information was smuggled out and emigres were
questioned; some of the nation's leading scientific authorities were consulted.
American and Soviet officials engaged in bitter recriminations, public and
private. Yet even today, in spite of the uproar and the all-out investigative
efforts, the facts remain unclear. Estimates of fatalities during the six-week
course of the epidemic range from 20 to 1,000. Respected scientists differ
sharply as to the meaning of the medical evidence.

It is just this way with so many arms-control agreements: a suspicious event,
accusations, Soviet stonewalling, uncertainty - charges of treaty violation that
can be neither proved nor disproved. They hang like a poison cloud over United
States-Soviet relations and over any prospects for arms control.

The events at Sverdlovsk and their aftermath, as pieced together from dozens of
interviews with present and former Government officials, have all the elements
of an international spy novel, including secret intelligence operations,
bureaucratic fumbling, a crushing piece of evidence along the lines of the dog
who didn't bark (a la Sherlock Holmes) and a surprise witness (or nonwitness) -
an American in Sverdlovsk. However, the story has an unhappy, even threatening,
ending.

Arms-control agreements depend essentially upon the use of technical means
outside a country's own territory - spy satellites, radar sensors and listening
posts, for example - to ferret out evidence of cheating by that country. Most
governments want no foreigners snooping about in search of treaty violations,
real or imagined. And for some kinds of agreements, such as limits on strategic
arms, that remote kind of checkup is generally regarded as sufficient. In
others, though, technical means are not enough; the necessary confidence may
require much more demanding means of verification, such as on-site inspection.
The issue has been raised most dramatically in recent charges by the Reagan
Administration that chemical weapons produced by the Soviet Union have been used
in fighting in Afghanistan and Indochina.

An important series of arms-control negotiations is now under way.  They include
those just beginning in Geneva on limiting medium-range nuclear missiles in
Europe and others that look to the destruction of chemical-weapons stockpiles
and the banning of nuclear explosions.  But the events at Sverdlovsk and other
possible instances of Soviet noncompliance raise tough questions for those who
seek peace through arms control. Do the technical means of verification enable
the United States and other nations to monitor weapons treaties effectively? If
not, what other means of verification can be reasonably sought -particularly for
nonconventional weapons, such as biological and chemical agents and nuclear
devices? How will the Soviet Union respond to the very demanding stance the
Reagan Administration has said it would take on the verification issue?

Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin and former head of the House
Subcommittee on Intelligence Oversight, is a longtime supporter of weapons
agreements with Moscow. He warns: ''The future of arms control hangs in the
balance until we get a full, accurate account of what happened in Sverdlovsk.''

Sverdlovsk, with a population of 1.2 million people, is the principal city of
the Urals industrial region. The city fills a valley some 850 miles east of
Moscow.

The building in the military compound in Sverdlovsk had attracted the attention
of the United States intelligence community because of certain characteristics
that showed up on satellite photographs: the venting system and animal pens, the
smokestacks, the refrigeration facilities and the nearby revetments that might
hold artillery shells. The security arrangements were very tight, with sentries
guarding the few paths leading through double barbed-wire fences. It had all the
earmarks of a germ-warfare factory. In fact, it looked just like Fort Detrick,
Md., a former development center for biological weapons. And there were about a
dozen similar buildings sprinkled throughout Soviet territory that had attracted
similar American suspicions.

Yet, some American observers had their doubts. Would the Russians actually put a
biological-warfare facility in so highly populated an area? And would they still
be bothering with germ warfare? The United States gave up its biological-weapons
program unilaterally in the early 1970's. Most experts today see the weapons as
militarily useless.

Germs have virtually never been used on a battlefield because, once released,
they fly anywhere the wind blows them, toward friend or enemy. If one of the
hardy varieties used in weapons-testing boomerangs, it can be a disaster,
because these germs maintain their lethal qualities over great distances and
lengths of time. Sections of an island in Scotland where the British did some
biologicalwarfare testing in World War II are unlivable to this day.

The 1972 biological-weapons treaty forbade the development, production and
stockpiling of toxic weapons. But even if the building in Sverdlovsk was
producing germs, that would not necessarily be a violation of the treaty, which
banned only germ production ''of types and in quantities that have no
justification for prophylactic, protective or other peaceful purposes.'' For
example, germs could be produced for vaccines to be used in the event of a
germ-warfare attack.

As far as can be determined, the April 1979 outbreak of anthrax in Sverdlovsk
attracted no particular attention in the United States intelligence community.
But in July of that year, when rumors about an anthrax episode - variously said
to be located in Sverdlovsk or in Novosibirsk, Siberia - began to circulate, one
Administration official started collecting information and newspaper clippings.
He is said to have mentioned his suspicions to some colleagues, but nothing came
of it.

Anthrax is primarily a disease of animals, caused by a bacillus that under
certain conditions forms tough, virulent spores. It has taken its toll of human
life, particularly during the 18th and 19th centuries, when it spread across
southern Europe. In modern times, the Soviet Union has had more experience with
anthrax than any other industrialized nation.

The disease, in man, takes three basic forms. In 95 percent of known cases, the
anthrax bacilli enter the body through the skin, because of contact with
infected animals. This form, which shows up usually as a carbuncle, is seldom
lethal. The eating of infected meat can produce the intestinal form of the
disease, which is sometimes - though not usually - fatal. By far the deadliest,
and the rarest, is pulmonary anthrax, caused by the inhalation of dust from
animal skins. When the bacilli enter the respiratory tract, death is rapid.

In the short history of biological weaponry, anthrax has been the germ of
choice, in the United States and elsewhere - largely because of its deadliness
and durability.

On Oct. 26, a sensationalist, London-based magazine called NOW carried this
headline: ''The Great Russian Germ War Disaster.'' The accompanying article,
written by the ''magazine's resident expert on Communist affairs,'' was said to
be based on the report of ''a traveler who was in the city at the time.''

The essence of the article: An accident at a bacteriologicalweapons factory had
left thousands hospitalized, hundreds dead. Bodies were being returned to
families in sealed coffins, presumably so that the relatives could not see the
effects of the disease on the dead person. Travel to the city was banned. The
accident was set in June, however, not April, and the site was identified as the
southern outskirts of Novosibirsk.

Similar accounts appeared in Possev, a Russian-language paper run by Russian
emigres in Frankfurt, and in Bild Zeitung, the Hamburg tabloid owned by the
publishing tycoon Axel Springer. Articles came out later in The Daily Telegraph
of London and The Foreign Report of The Economist. These journals are often
examined to see what rumors are emanating from the Russian emigre community and
what information is being leaked by ''Western intelligence sources,'' as they
are called in the articles. Much of what appears in these columns is gossip -
but not all of it.

With its January edition, Possev corrected its earlier articles as to the time
and locale of the incident. The accident was now described as an explosion.
Other details: The first fatalities were said to have reached hospitals in
Sverdlovsk on April 4. All patients died within three hours of arrival; their
temperatures were said to exceed 42 degrees centigrade, the equivalent of 107.6
degrees Fahrenheit. According to the article, a special hospital was set up, and
military personnel replaced civilian workers. Empty coffins were buried. Public
meetings were called to calm the population. People in the area of the explosion
were vaccinated twice. The village of Kashino, southeast of the city line, had
been particularly hard-hit, and in May, the top layer of soil was paved over to
cover the infected area. No cases were noted among animals. Between 30 and 40
people died each day, the article said, with the death total estimated at 1,000.

Early in February 1980, the C.I.A. heard detailed testimony from a secondhand
witness whom the C.I.A. characterizes as eminently credible; his identity is not
revealed here in order to protect his safety. This man, who is also believed by
intelligence officials to have been Possev's source, now added a clinical
detail: The victims in Sverdlovsk were said to have had trouble breathing, an
indication that they had been struck by pulmonary anthrax.

This report finally galvanized the Administration. One of its first steps was to
ask the Russians for an explanation. The usual procedure in such cases is to
inform the Russians privately of the Administration's concern. The prevailing
judgment of the Government's Soviet-affairs specialists has been that the only
chance of gaining Soviet cooperation in such situations is to avoid a public
confrontation. But the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan had taken place, and the
White House and some intelligence officials favored a different approach to the
Sverdlovsk issue as part of the Administration's calculated response to the
invasion. Thus, a private message was passed to the Russians in mid-March, but
before Moscow could possibly answer, certain Administration officials took it
upon themselves to leak these suspicions to the public. An article about the
epidemic in Bild Zeitung was read on a West German radio station and then
reprinted in a C.I.A. publication dedicated to picking up foreign radio
broadcasts and read by many American journalists.

On March 18, the State Department officially confirmed that there had been
''disturbing indications'' that ''a lethal biological agent'' might have struck
Sverdlovsk a year before and that this had raised questions ''about whether such
material was present in quantities consistent with the ban.''

Moscow issued angry denials, privately and publicly. The Soviet leadership
insisted that the epidemic at Sverdlosk had been caused by consumption of
tainted meat, that the deaths had been the result of intestinal anthrax. Under
the biological-weapons convention, the parties are expected ''to consult one
another and to cooperate in solving any problems of compliance.'' Moscow used
the fact that Washington had made the accusations public before the private
Soviet response had been given as an excuse not to cooperate in an
investigation.

It was almost a year after the incident at Sverdlosk before the United States
finally set about a serious investigation. A group was established with
representation from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the National Security Council,
the State Department and other agencies.  Several outside experts were also
called in, including Dr. Philip Brachman of the Center for Disease Control in
Atlanta, the leading American expert on anthrax; Joshua Lederberg, president of
Rockefeller University and winner of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine,
and Paul Doty, a professor of biochemistry at Harvard University. Dr. Matthew
Meselson, another Harvard biochemist, served as an independent consultant.

The group's first move was to find out what had been discovered by spy
satellites and other means back in the spring of 1979, when the incident
occurred. They found a significant amount of information, the importance of
which had been overlooked at the time. For all the expertise assembled, it soon
became clear that it would not be easy to determine the truth.

The working group's first hypothesis was that there had been a problem at a
facility producing anthrax vaccine. The Russians do give between one million and
two million anthrax innoculations each year; more than one factory might be
needed to provide that quantity of vaccine. But the working group also had
substantial evidence that the Russians used only an avirulent strain for their
vaccinations - a strain that could not have caused the epidemic that occurred.

The group's second hypothesis was that the outbreak had been produced by a
single explosion involving virulent, airborne anthrax spores. Critical to any
such scenario was the testimony of the key secondhand witness, which has been
backed up just this fall by new testimony from other secondhand witnesses highly
regarded by the C.I.A. In an interview, Dr. Brachman said that the clinical
evidence provided by the secondhand witness was ''probably consistent only with
inhalation anthrax'' - very high fever, suddenness of the onset of the disease,
trouble breathing, the large number of cases and, in particular, the high
mortality rate. The symptoms of intestinal anthrax, he said, were quite
different, and that version of the disease is usually not lethal. He did cite
one form of it in which lymph nodes are infected and there is trouble with
breathing, further complicating the problem of distinguishing between pulmonary
and intestinal anthrax.

Placing all responsibility for the outbreak on pulmonary anthrax, however, was
no answer. A single, deadly cloud, the group concluded, could have wreaked havoc
in the first day or so, but it would thereafter have dispersed; a thin layer of
spores would have settled over a wide area. That could not result in the
concentration of spores in any one place that would be necessary to produce a
continuing flow of pulmonary anthrax cases over a six-week period.

What could the continuous source of lethal anthrax be? The possibility that
anthrax spores were leaking over a six-week period from the military facility
was explored but discarded, on the assumption that such a leak would have soon
been discovered. The Russians were claiming that all of the anthrax deaths had
been caused by contaminated meat being sold on the black market; that
possibility was considered by the members of the group but discarded. They could
find no historical precedent for an outbreak of intestinal anthrax causing so
many deaths over a period of several weeks.

As time went by, the members of the group became somewhat uncertain about
diagnostic distinctions between intestinal and pulmonary anthrax. Thus the group
came to concentrate more and more on one fact: the unprecedented numbers of
people who had been struck down in that brief time.

The judgment of the working group -the explanation the C.I.A. still sticks with
- has two chapters. Initially, it holds, there was an explosion at the factory
in Sverdlovsk, causing a sudden huge release of virulent spores being used for
the development of biological weapons. The quantity released was large enough to
cause a number of deaths from pulmonary anthrax. After the explosion and the
initial wave of pulmonary anthrax cases, the C.I.A. believes, the long-lived
spores settled to the ground, where they were eaten by cattle, and the meat from
these infected animals was sold on the black market.  Then, theoretically, there
was a second wave of anthrax - of the intestinal variety - filling out the six
weeks.

There is one important fact that this theory has never been able to resolve:
None of the witnesses reported even a single case of intestinal anthrax.

Other, nonmedical factors contributed to the working group's conclusion. One was
the arrival in Sverdlovsk, shortly after the anthrax outbreak, of Soviet Defense
Minister Dmitri Ustinov. The trip was not on his usual itinerary.

Another factor was Moscow's private denial that it had imposed a quarantine in
the Sverdlovsk area. Material obtained by the C.I.A.  offers convincing evidence
that there had actually been some form of quarantine.

For some members of the group, the clincher was a satellite photograph of a
building in Military Compound 19 one year after the anthrax epidemic. The
structure had been virtually abandoned. There were no animals in the pens. The
snow had not been shoveled. As in the Sherlock Holmes tale, the indirect piece
of evidence, the absence of the expected, was damning: The dog had not barked.

The most complete discussion of the Russian version of the incident in
Sverdlovsk - that the outbreak had been caused entirely by tainted meat -
appeared last May in a Soviet magazine, The Journal of Microbiology, Immunology
and Epidemiology. To read it is to gain a new understanding of the difficulties
of sorting out the evidence available in such suspected arms-treaty violations.

The article argued, for example, that there was nothing extraordinary about an
epidemic of anthrax in the Sverdlovsk area; the disease had long been endemic
there, probably because of the soil characteristics. The article also claimed
that there was a large quantity of black-market meat to be found in Sverdlovsk
at the time of the epidemic, and information available to the C.I.A. tended to
confirm this.

The Soviet journal dealt with several points that are central to the main
arguments offered by the C.I.A.  Diagnosis. American experts say that the
symptoms of pulmonary and intestinal anthrax are quite distinct, with little
overlapping. The journal article stated that laboratory testing is the only
conclusive method of diagnosing the difference, and that position receives
support from a British authority, A.B. Christie, in his standard text,
''Infectious Diseases: Epidemiology and Clinical Practice.'' On the intestinal
form, he writes: ''There may be no gastrointestinal symptoms, but only a state
of severe shock.'' Temperatures are extremely high in both varieties. And to the
extent that there are reliable case studies on anthrax, the article claimed,
they do show that the symptoms are about the same for both.

Numbers. The C.I.A. received estimates of anthrax-caused fatalities in
Sverdlovsk that ranged from 20 to 1,000. While the working group had no hard
evidence, some members thought that between 40 and 100 had died, while others
put the toll in the hundreds. The Russian journal article spoke only of ''a
number of victims.'' The article cited an incident in 1927 in which 27 people
had been infected and all had died. This case is also cited in Soviet journals
that predate the Sverdlovsk incident. But for the first time in any Soviet
publication, a case was cited in which as many as 40 people had died.

The discrepancy between the Soviet and American numbers seems impossible to
reconcile, yet it should be recalled that when the socalled Legionnaires'
disease struck in the United States, several years ago, the dozen or so deaths
were spoken of as being of epidemic proportions. A few people stricken by plague
go a long way.

Lethality. The American working group essentially accepted Dr.  Brachman's view
that only pulmonary anthrax could have killed nearly every person who contracted
it. Dr. Christie's book supports that view with an example of a 1972 outbreak of
intestinal anthrax in Spain in which there were only three deaths among 33
patients. Yet Soviet scientific writings that predate the Sverdlovsk incident
almost universally state that the two kinds of anthrax can be equally lethal.

Other factors turned up that tended to support the Soviet version of the
outbreak - and to contradict some of the emigre reports on which the C.I.A.
relied. Satellite photos showed no significant evidence that streets had been
newly paved to cover over spores in the village of Kashino or anywhere else. And
though a ceramic factory across the street from the suspected germ-warfare
facility in Compound 19 closed down temporarily after the incident, the meat
factory next door continued to function.

One of the most surprising developments in the case occurred in February of this
year, when another piece of negative evidence, another nonbarking dog, cropped
up that seemed to favor the Soviet view. On a plane ride from Washington to
Boston in February 1981, a Soviet official chatted with Harvard's Mathew
Meselson, a consultant to the working group. As Mr. Meselson recalled it, the
Russian said to him at one point: ''You know, of course, that there were an
American and his family living in Sverdlovsk at the time of the incident.'' In
fact, neither Mr. Meselson nor the C.I.A. nor any arm of the United States
Government was apparently aware that the Americans had stayed in the city, which
had been effectively closed to foreigners for some years. The last known
American visitor had been the U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers, who spent a few
days there in 1960 on his way to trial in Moscow.

It turned out that Donald E. Ellis, a professor of physics and chemistry at
Northwestern University, and his wife and their two small children had gone to
Sverdlovsk on an exchange program. He worked daily with Russian scientists, and
the family shopped in the stores and lived among the people, spending the months
of April and June there, with a month between at Novosibirsk.

Mr. Ellis said in an interview that he had noticed nothing untoward during his
stay. ''I don't exclude the possibility that something may have occurred,'' he
said. ''But I think either I or my wife would have sensed some effort to protect
us from it. We moved freely and were not aware of any restrictions on us.'' In
fact, he added, ''we passed very close to the place, the facility,'' where the
incident supposedly occurred, ''in July on the way to a children's camp.''

Mr. Meselson sees the Ellis testimony as critically important.  ''One of the few
important certainties in this murky business,'' the biochemist said, ''is that
the Soviet authorities permitted Professor Ellis and his family to enter and,
most remarkably, to re-enter the city. Although not conclusive, this does not
readily fit in with the picture of an attempted Soviet cover-up of a
biological-warfare accident.''

It is clear that, wherever the actual truth may lie, neither the working group's
hypothesis nor the Soviet version of what happened at Sverdlovsk stands up to
all the known facts; both theories have gaping holes.

One of the unsolved mysteries of Sverdlovsk was the failure of the Soviet Union
to take advantage of a chance to defuse the uproar. At any point, they could
have conceded that the epidemic had begun with an explosion of anthrax spores -
and maintained that it was part of a peaceful and defensive research program of
the sort allowed by the Biological Weapons Convention.

Exactly why the Russians failed to do so is unclear, though it is safe to assume
that part of their reason was a standard unwillingness to concede anything and
thereby open the door to further questioning of their behavior. The treaty is
filled with loopholes that invite evasion: No limits are given on the quantities
of spores that may be used for research; no standards are set for distinguishing
between defensive and offensive research; no forms of consultation are
specified.

To hear those involved at the time talk about the way in which the treaty was
negotiated, these details did not seem to matter much. It was the heyday of the
detente sought by President Nixon and Henry A.  Kissinger. In 1969, Mr. Nixon
made a unilateral decision to destroy biological-weapons stockpiles and research
facilities on the assumption that the weapons had no rational use on the
battlefield.  And when Administration witnesses testified before the Senate on
behalf of the new treaty, they effectively acknowledged that its provisions
could not be verified. The attitude seemed to be that this was not important, in
part because the Administration assumed that the Soviet Union would not be so
unrealistic as to violate the treaty.

It is ironic that, in the case of the Sverdlovsk incident, the unverifiable was
detected. But detection is one thing and verification - knowing with confidence
that the violation has occurred -is quite another.

Verification procedures for most arms-control treaties come in two varieties.
There are the so-called ''national technical means'' outside the nation being
monitored; they include satellite photography (said to be accurate enough to
capture an automobile license plate on film), radar sensors and radio and
electronic listening posts and seismic monitors to detect and measure nuclear
explosions. Then there are so-called human intelligence means, including spies,
emigres and the analysis of published materials.

The basic test of a verification technique is whether it can catch militarily
significant treaty violations in time to put together a comparable weapon or to
take defensive action. But as Paul H. Nitze, a leading defense expert and an
arms negotiator for the Reagan Administration, has testified, verifiability is
not ''an absolute requirement; it is a means toward the end of a good agreement.
If those provisions of an agreement which are strategically significant to us
are adequately verifiable, the agreement might be a good agreement, even if its
less important provisions are not confidently verifiable.'' He concludes: ''The
difficulty, however, rests in determining which provisions are 'strategically
significant' to us and what is meant by the word 'adequate.' ''

Verification by means of remote sensing devices can provide a high level of
confidence in many cases - for example, the monitoring of basic nuclear-arms
limitations provisions, such as the number of warheads tested on particular
missiles. When the Russians send up an SS-19 missile, American radar and other
devices can determine whether the number of warheads released exceeds the treaty
quota for that missile.

But often, verification is uncertain at best. Washington and Moscow have signed
- but not ratified - a Threshold Test Ban Treaty, which limits underground
nuclear explosions to no more than 150 kilotons.  The United States uses seismic
stations outside Soviet territory to monitor Russian tests, but scientists
generally agree that the readings given by the seismic gauges could be off by a
factor of 50 percent in either direction. Washington could lower this margin of
error by ratifying the treaty, which would oblige Moscow to provide certain
additional information. But the Carter Administration did not propose
ratification, in part because it would get in the way of Congressional support
for other diplomatic agreements, and President Reagan has yet to act upon it.
Moscow has said it is willing.

Meanwhile, every underground nuclear test conducted by the Russians since the
treaty was signed has led some American experts to charge that the Russians had
exceeded the 150-kiloton limit. Some say we can't tell. Given present means of
verification, no one can be sure.

Sometimes, the uncertainties about verification are astonishingly large, as is
true of the recent controversy over possible Soviet use of chemical weapons in
Afghanistan and Southeast Asia. The Geneva Protocol of 1925 bans the production
and use of such weapons, and verification of violations would seem easy, given
the obvious and unusual effects of, say, poison gas. Yet, no hard evidence has
been found in Afghanistan and the information from Indochina has been sparse.
There has been testimony from alleged firsthand witnesses and a larger number of
secondhand witnesses who spoke of something they described as ''yellow rain.'' A
leaf containing chemicals known as trichothecene mycotoxins - a chemical-warfare
agent - has been found on the border between Thailand and Cambodia. And about
two months ago, several new samples of the agent were discovered on leaves,
rocks and water.

So far as is known, this mycotoxin is not found in nature in Southeast Asia; the
assumption is that it must have been manufactured. The manufacture of such an
agent is not banned by the 1925 protocol, but the use of it is.

American intelligence experts believe that the Government of Vietnam does not
have facilities to produce the mycotoxin and that Moscow must have made it. But
no one is sure. Nor is anyone sure whether the chemical agent was used by the
Vietnamese or the Soviets themselves. Again, there are grounds for suspicion of
a treaty violation and a lot of unanswered questions. Without further samples
and on-site research, and without clinical evidence, there can be no firm
conclusions.

Verification requirements are going to become harder, not easier, given the
kinds of future arms-control agreements now being debated.  We may say we want
agreements to destroy existing stockpiles of weapons and to monitor weapons
production facilities, but such moves cannot be verified by national technical
means; some form of on-site inspection seems inescapable. The Soviet-American
negotiations over the development, production and stockpiling of chemical
weapons have languished, largely because of the failure of both sides to work
out concrete approaches to on-site verification.

We may say we want treaties to reduce our military manpower and our stockpile of
conventional arms, and national technical means could help to verify such
reductions. But the movement of troops can be hard to check; some on-the-spot
presence would be vital. For example, in the current talks in Vienna between
NATO and the Warsaw Pact about reducing troops and arms in Central Europe, an
agreement whereby each side manned main exit and entry points along the borders
to monitor the flow of troops would build confidence in verification enormously.

Washington and Moscow may say they want to limit and control the small and
mobile weapons systems of the future. But if there are to be ceilings on the
numbers of small, truck-borne cruise missiles soon to be deployed in Europe,
both sides will have to cooperate in finding ways to aid mutual verification.
One approach might be to restrict the missiles to certain areas, making them
easier to keep tabs on.

In every one of these cases, some form of direct monitoring - onsite inspection
by people or instruments, confidence-building measures, cooperative measures -
would be helpful and sometimes decisive in insuring verification. Direct
verification need not mean peering inside each other's weapons systems or a
hunting license to walk into buildings and interrogate people.

The United States and the Soviet Union have on several occasions agreed to forms
of on-site inspection and other direct verification measures. The Peaceful
Nuclear Explosives Treaty of 1976, for example, included provisions for placing
verification equipment and personnel on Soviet and American territory in certain
carefully delineated situations.

But the biggest breakthrough came in 1978, in the Soviet-American negotiations
on a comprehensive test ban. ''You have just repealed 400 years of Russian
history,'' Paul C. Warnke, director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
at the time, told his Soviet counterpart when the deal was sealed in principle.
The deal has never, however, been sealed in fact: The negotiations are dormant,
both because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and because of disagreements
on the issue within the United States Government.

Among other things, the two sides had agreed to place tamper-proof seismic
equipment on each other's territory that could distinguish between earthquakes
and illegal nuclear explosions. Each side could also demand rigorous on-site
inspections, and if these were denied without good cause, the other side could
withdraw from the treaty.

In the second strategic arms limitation treaty, which we have yet to ratify, the
Russians undertook to notify Washington in advance of their missile tests. That
would alert American monitoring stations so that they would be ready for their
task.

Most arms-control experts, with some important exceptions, would say that the
Soviet record on compliance with weapons treaties is good. Moscow exploits the
gray areas of an agreement, but generally stays to the letter of limitations
requirements. In most cases, those who charge the Russians with cheating are
really saying that Moscow disagrees with American interpretations of the
agreements.

The record also seems to indicate that Soviet leaders will allow relatively
intrusive forms of inspection and cooperation when they are convinced that the
verification requests are legitimate and not simply ruses to pry into and bring
about change in the Soviet society. The Russian leaders apparently must also
believe that the United States will not sign a particular treaty unless those
verification requests are met.

''What is lacking now,'' said Representative Aspin, ''are new, creative and
practical ideas from our scientists and technicians on how to use on-the-scene
inspection and cooperative measures to really help verification without turning
off the Soviets.''

A move toward direct verification will require changes in Western attitudes, as
well. The very words ''on-site inspection'' set off a history of alarm bells in
American politics and among arms-control experts. Over the years, liberals have
usually viewed it as a conservative trick to provoke Soviet intransigence by
demanding too much. Conservatives have seen it as a symbol of American toughness
in negotiations and a test of Soviet sincerity. Americans and their political
leaders will have to develop a more sophisticated, realistic approach to this
issue.

Change will also be in order for the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies.
Traditionally, there has been a reluctance to specify to the Russians what we
can and cannot verify for fear of compromising our sources and methods of
intelligence collection. The fear is that the more we tell of our capabilities,
the easier it is for the Russians to work around us. The intelligence community
would have to figure out both how to protect its tools and still to be
forthcoming enough in exchanging data to achieve better verification.

It is far from clear how some of America's allies would react to an increase in
on-site verification. France has historically been secretive. The West German
Government has resisted certain suggestions from the United States that Bonn and
the Warsaw Pact countries might put inspection stations at key points on each
other's territories to monitor troop reductions.

The Sverdlovsk incident comes up repeatedly in conversations among Western
specialists on the Soviet Union and arms-control experts.  Perhaps there is an
embarrassing but acceptable explanation of the event. It is conceivable that the
Soviet story about tainted meat is true, but many things have to be explained
away for it to be credible. This is where most of the Government experts on the
working group ended up - uncertain but believing the Russians probably violated
the treaty. And there the working group also thought it was clear that, by
refusing to cooperate in an exchange of information with Washington, Moscow had
failed to dispose of its treaty obligations.

Yet even if the Russians were suddenly to change their stand, it is unlikely
that we could ever get beyond our present uncertainty. The doubts and
ambiguities are bound to persist. If autopsies could be performed on victims,
who could be sure the corpses had not been tampered with? If inspectors were
permitted to visit the suspected germ factory, could not all incriminating
evidence have been removed in the meantime?

The Soviet mania for secrecy means that they are never likely to be positive
about intrusive forms of verification. Yet if the Russians are really interested
in arms control, it is in their interest to avoid situations like the one of
doubt and mistrust attending the Sverdlovsk incident. Otherwise, there will
continue to be ambiguities, uncertainties and the inevitable charges of
violations by those on both sides who would seek to prevent improving mutual
relations. Soviet leaders could come to see that accepting direct verification -
as distinguished from hunting licenses - and giving us greater confidence that
we really can verify the agreements is a sensible way both to reach agreements
and to improve relations with the United States.

Publicly, all postwar American Administrations have stated that they will be
tough with Moscow over verification. In private, now, senior Reagan
Administration officials say that previous Administrations have not been tough
enough. Now, with practically no trust between the Soviet Union and the United
States, the Administration view is that it will insist that future arms
limitation agreements commit Moscow to further ''cooperative measures,''
including on-site inspection when necessary.

''The present cat-and-mouse game must end,'' says Eugene V. Rostow, the Reagan
Administration's director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Soviet
willingness to improve verifiability, he added, ''may be a litmus test of their
commitment to serious limitations.''

But Paul Warnke adds a note of caution about new tough talk on verification:
''Where we need more verification, we must get more. In assessing proposals for
on-site inspection, in particular, one must determine whether their objective is
to increase confidence in compliance or to increase confidence that agreements
will not be reached.''

The prospects for arms control are increasingly bleak. There is too little trust
left between Moscow and Washington, due in good part to events like Sverdlovsk.
On top of this, the kinds of arms treaties now being discussed - such as
destroying weapons stockpiles and banning nuclear tests - are going to be even
harder to verify than past agreements. There is a substantial feeling in
Washington that if arms control is to have much of a future, a new chapter will
have to be written on verification.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a technical school in Sverdlovsk photo of
anthrax culture photo of Soviet missile photo of Russian soldiers in
chemical-war training map of Soviet Union showing location of Sverdlovsk

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REMEMBERING PEARL HARBOR

BYLINE: By GADDIS SMITH; Gaddis Smith teaches American diplomatic and maritime
history at Yale.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2452 words


AT DAWN WE SLEPT The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor.  By Gordon W. Prange.  In
Collaboration With Donald M. Goldstein and Katherine V. Dillon.  Illustrated.
873 pp. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co. $22.95.

THE PACIFIC WAR By John Costello.Illustrated. 742 pp. New York: Rawson, Wade.
$24.

THE JAPANESE attack on Pearl Harbor, Dec. 7, 1941, has served for 40 years as a
test of what Americans think about their nation and its leadership, about Japan
in particular and enemies in general, and about the requirements of national
security. Gordon W. Prange's ''At Dawn We Slept,'' the result of half a lifetime
of research, is a brilliant re-creation of the thoughts and personalities of the
officers on both sides who fought that day, and it takes frank delight in the
intellectual elegance of successful military planning.

The initial American reaction was a combination of patriotism, vengeful
indignation and racism. The attack confirmed American courage in adversity. The
Japanese were portrayed as a race inherently deceitful and cruel, fanatical
creatures devoid of redeeming human qualities. A banner inscribed ''Remember
Pearl Harbor'' would stream figuratively behind the atomic bombs falling on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945.

A second reaction, suppressed during the early part of the war but open and
bitter after 1944, was to see criminal negligence and even treacherous
conspiracy within the American Government. Strange bedfellows, united
principally by hatred for President Franklin D.  Roosevelt, advanced the
proposition that the President had used American ships and lives as bait to
tempt the Japanese into a war he wished to wage for a variety of nefarious
reasons. Roosevelt allegedly knew the Japanese would attack Pearl Harbor and
when, and withheld this information from the local commanders in Hawaii in order
to insure Japanese success. The conspiracy theorists included naval officers
seeking to protect the reputation of their service and of their colleague Adm.
Husband E. Kimmel, Commander of the United States Pacific Fleet; isolationists
who believed the United States had no business fighting in Asia or Europe;
haters of the British Empire, which was supposed to have benefited from
Roosevelt's plot; and radical anti-Communists who saw Roosevelt bent on
advancing the cause of world Communism. (How else explain his antipathy to such
a staunch anti-Communist nation as Japan?)

A counterwave of historians in the early 1950's attacked the conspiracy theory
as nonsense. Roosevelt, they said, did make mistakes, but he and his advisers
were grappling in good faith with forces beyond American control. The defense of
Roosevelt was implicitly an argument that, in a permanently dangerous world, the
nation's security required that the President be trusted by a sophisticated
public on guard against simplistic theories, especially those which claimed that
our problems were caused by traitors within.

As political passions that once flared around the name Roosevelt cooled after
1960, commentators on Pearl Harbor looked to the future. Roberta Wohlstetter's
classic ''Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision'' (1962) explained how the American
intelligence community, even though it was reading Japan's secret diplomatic
radio traffic, was overwhelmed by too much data and lacked the manpower to
separate real signals about Japan's intentions from irrelevant ''noise.'' Her
purpose was to improve strategic intelligence.

During the Vietnam War distrust of Presidential foreign policy reappeared and
with it a small new wave of Pearl Harbor revisionism with an emphasis more
antiwar than anti-Communist. Roosevelt was now portrayed as leading the country
into an unnecessary war that did not serve national security. Japan and the
United States should have compromised their differences and abandoned
unrealistic objectives founded on rigid ideology.

''At Dawn We Slept'' falls into none of those categories and takes strong issue
with several of these groups of historians. What Prange sees above all else in
the attack on Pearl Harbor is the professional skill, daring, imagination and
dedication of the Japanese officers who conceived and carried through the most
difficult and immediately successful naval operation in history. His original
intention was to write only about the Japanese side and to present the
participants as distinctive human beings, not faceless stereotypes. He began
thinking of the project while serving as an officer in the American Naval
Reserve during World War II, and he commenced intensive work in Japan, where
from 1946 to 1951 he was a historian with Gen. Douglas MacArthur's headquarters.
He interviewed virtually all the important surviving Japanese naval participants
and in the process became intellectually and psychologically at one with them.
This accounts for the power of the book and for its unusual perspective.

In 1953, back in the United States at the University of Maryland as a professor
of history, Prange signed the contract for this book. The years went by. He
decided to deal with the American as well as the Japanese side; he interviewed
hundreds more people, read millions of pages of documents, and his manuscript
grew to 12,000 typescript pages. His explanations to his publisher of how much
he had done and why the book was not yet ready are themselves almost long enough
to make a book. On the publisher's side there must have been a temptation to
abandon the project in frustration. In May 1980 Prange died. Two former students
agreed to reduce the manuscript and fashion the present volume, and it is a
Herculean editorial achievement.

Mr. Prange demolishes the conspiracy theory as others have done before him.
Roosevelt and his advisers knew by November 1941 that war with Japan was likely.
They wanted to buy as much time as possible, but were unwilling to abandon
support for China, Japan's victim in the war raging since 1937, or to give Japan
the petroleum and other resources for waging war. But, as Prange shows, they did
not have substantial evidence of an attack on Pearl Harbor. The fragments of
intelligence data pointing in that direction were misinterpreted and mishandled
through human error. But even if these fragments had been properly understood
and acted upon, the Japanese attack would still have taken place. The Japanese
would have encountered the resistance and suffered the losses they had
anticipated, instead of escaping almost unscathed in the short run.  One might
compare the Pearl Harbor situation to a hypothetical major California earthquake
at some point in the future. The early warnings will be detected, but the exact
location and date will be unknowable. The quake will do terrible damage. People
will be caught asleep.  Afterward there will be recriminations. The authorities
knew there would be a quake. Why did they not warn the people? Perhaps they were
involved in a conspiracy of concealment.

The author also finds the conspiracy theory repugnant because he believes it
demeans the Japanese, who were far too headstrong and shrewd to be anyone's
pawns. He reveals how the Pearl Harbor concept originated in the mind of Adm.
Isoroku Yamamoto, Commander in Chief of the Japanese combined fleet, in the
spring of 1940; how it was perfected by a group of the admiral's disciples, most
notably the aviation expert Comdr. Minoru Genda; how it was tested in war-gaming
rooms; how it was accepted by the Naval General Staff only after Yamamoto
threatened to resign; and how weapons, men and ships were prepared in secret and
with arduous training. The author refutes the American view of Yamamoto as a
bloodthirsty monster, and shows him to be a thoughtful man who doubted Japan's
ability to defeat the United States. But the admiral believed that, since war
had become inevitable through the actions of the two Governments, the Pearl
Harbor attack offered the Japanese their only chance of success.

The strategy was designed to cripple the American fleet and thus protect the
Japanese forces during their drive through the Philippines, Malaya and the
Netherlands East Indies. Nothing short of complete and unthinkable capitulation
by the United States to Japan's expansionist demands would have stopped the
attack. Here Mr.  Prange makes clear his disagreement with those who think war
could have been prevented by lesser American concessions. He does note that the
plan, however brilliant, was fatally flawed by the assumption, held more through
hope than conviction, that the blow to Pearl Harbor would destroy American
morale as well as ships and lead the United States to sue for an early peace.

But Prange's awareness of this flaw does not dim his enthusiasm for the Japanese
military achievement. Suspense builds chapter by chapter as the fleet avoids
detection and approaches Pearl Harbor. The planes are launched. Surprise is
complete. So thorough is Prange's immersion in the Japanese point of view that
he even conveys a feeling of disappointment that Adm. Chuichi Nagumo, the
officer commanding the force on the scene, was too cautious to launch a second
attack, which could have destroyed vital American fuel reserves and shore
facilities.

Prange's exhaustive interviews of people on both sides enable him to tell the
story in such personal terms that the reader is bound to feel its power. His
descriptions of the Japanese officers are vivid and memorable, but so are those
of many of the Americans. At the very beginning of the book he sets up the
coming attack almost in the way of an epic poet, comparing Admiral Yamamoto and
Admiral Kimmel: ''Both were small-town boys. Each had graduated from his
country's naval academy in 1904... Each gathered to himself a staff of
exceptional capability, taking these men into his complete confidence and
treating them like a family. Each encouraged individual initiative in his
officers, disliked yes-men, and was always ready to hear both sides of a
question. Each gave his staff intense loyalty and in return gained a devotion
which withstood every pressure and bridged the years with a span of steel. Above
all, each was a patriot and a sailor's sailor down to the last drop of his
blood. And each admiral had a summer-lightning temper.''

But Prange has also a definite gift for reporting a story. During the air attack
on Pearl Harbor, he writes, Lieut. Fusato Iida ''drilled the station armory and
swooped down just as an aviation ordnanceman named Sands stepped out the side
door and got off a burst with a BAR (Browning Automatic Rifle). A sailor of the
old school, he called to his mates in the armory, 'Hand me another BAR!' ... As
Iida moved in for the kill, the defiant sailor 'emptied another clip' and
escaped Iida's bullets which 'pockmarked the wall of the building.' Iida
appeared to break off the unequal duel ... but as he did so, a spray of gasoline
began to flow from his plane, and he 'headed directly back to the armory.' ... A
sailor saw him returning and, evidently considering Iida Sands's particular
pigeon, shouted, 'Hey, Sands! That sonofabitch is coming back!' Sands grabbed a
rifle; Iida roared straight at him. Ignoring the bullets splattering around him,
Sands 'emptied the rifle at the roaring Zero.' ... The Zero crashed into a road
winding up a round, flat-topped hill and struck the pavement about five feet
below one of the married officers' quarters, 'skidded across and piled up the
embankment at the opposite side.' The impact ripped out the engine, turned the
plane upside down, and shattered Iida's body to pieces.'' It is impossible to
forget such an account; there are many like it in this book, told in the words
of those who were there.

''At Dawn We Slept'' adds some details to what was previously known about the
American side and includes a useful if anticlimactic appraisal of the many
American investigations into what happened, but here the main outlines of a
familiar story remain unchanged. Failures of imagination, excessive adherence to
routine, bad coordination and communication between Washington and Pearl Harbor
and between Army and Navy, and bad luck contributed to the debacle. Almost
everyone involved must share some of the blame, though almost all were
hardworking men doing their best within their own limitations and the
limitations of the system.

Prange is sympathetic in his criticism, but his conclusion is clear, if not
comforting. In a summary chapter called ''The Verdict of History,'' Prange
analyzes carefully what the American military commanders knew at the time of the
attack and how they misunderstood what they knew. These failures to realize ''at
all levels'' what their intelligence information really might have meant ''have
a common denominator - the gap between knowledge of possible danger and belief
in its existence,'' he writes, ''... yet it would be a mistake of the first
magnitude to credit the success of the Pearl Harbor operation solely to American
errors. We have seen how meticulously the Japanese perfected their planning; how
diligently they trained their pilots and bombadiers; how they modified weapons
to achieve maximum damage; how persistently they dredged up and utilized
information about the U.S. Pacific Fleet. They balked at no hazard, ready to
risk a wild leap to achieve their immediate ends.'' In other words, when
Americans argue about placing blame for Pearl Harbor they should recognize that
the enemy was real, and, in Prange's view, first class.

The second book under review - John Costello's ''The Pacific War'' - is a
military-naval history of the entire war from the American and British point of
view. Mr. Costello has a vivid sense of color and sound. The battle scenes are
well done. But he is careless with names and numbers (for example, the Hiroshima
bomb was equivalent to 20,000, not 20 million tons of TNT). Publisher's claim to
the contrary, this is not ''the newly revealed history of the origins and
conduct of World War II in the Pacific based on hitherto secret archives.'' It
is a readable synthesis based primarily on published histories. Mr. Costello did
riffle through some recently declassified material on intercepted and coded
Japanese messages, and he has tacked onto the end of the book a couple of
chapters on this. He believes he has found new evidence suggesting that the
decision for war lay with Roosevelt more than with the Japanese. This is a
variation on the conspiracy theory, and it is still nonsense. Mr.  Costello also
reflects a touch of wartime Anglo-American emphasis on Japanese brutality while
at the same time describing without emotion or judgment the American fire-bomb
raid on Tokyo that took perhaps 100,000 lives in March 1945.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of airplane and Japan's Imperial flag

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SEEKING NAMES FOR PEACE

BYLINE: By HOWARD MANSFIELD

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 46, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1816 words


COMMUTERS wait for a glimpse of the 7:38 from Westfield to Newark, standing out
on the railroad tracks themselves as if daring it to come. They stand with their
backs to the slanting sunlight, heads bent over their newspapers.

Jack Cluff - 24 years old, hair in a ponytail and wearing a tweed jacket,
dungarees and sneakers - approaches a few of the businessmen, whose minds are
groping toward wakefulness along a familiar route: coffee, newspaper, change in
Newark to PATH or the train to Pennsylvania Station in New York.

In one mouthful, Jack says, ''Would you like to sign a petition for a mutually
agreed arms freeze?'' ''No,'' says one man, though he adds, as he looks at Jack
from head to toe while cutting a wide arc around him, ''I'm for it.'' ''Sure,
sure, see if it helps,'' says a woman, who signs with the attitude of pitching
pennies into a wishing well.  ''We believe that every soul counts,'' Jack
replies.  ''Arms race? Race to what?'' asks another woman, signing. ''Race to
the end?'' Others nearby bury their heads in their newspapers, stealing some
time for themselves before the onslaught of the day.  ''I don't approach the
ones who are reading the paper,'' says Jack, who is petitioning for SANE, an
organization trying to stop the arms race. (Surprisingly, SANE is not an
acronym.)

SANE groups across the country are planning to submit to Congress during this
Thanksgiving recess petitions bearing thousands of signatures from each
Congressional district. They call for both the United States and the Soviet
Union to freeze all arms testing, production and deployment.

By mid-November, the Union County chapter had more than 4,000 signatures.  Down
the platform, Sam Tucker stood next to a bridge table that had a petition, some
pamphlets and a sign on it. Sam used to take the train every morning. He
remembers when it used to terminate in Jersey City and you had to take a ferry
across to Manhattan.

Sam, who has been active in SANE since its founding in 1957, retired last August
from his job as a life insurance actuary and is now publicity chairman of the
organization's Union County chapter.

Back in '57, the catchwords were ''Ban the Bomb.'' Today, they are longer:
''Nuclear Proliferation,'' ''On-site Inspection,'' ''SALT'' and ''Four Minutes
to Midnight.''

SANE is part of a movement old enough to generate nostalgia. In the movie ''The
Way We Were,'' the camera pulls away as Barbra Streisand stands on a street
corner hawking petitions to ''Ban the Bomb.'' A nice period touch.

A young man stops at the table. ''Let me sign,'' he says.  Another man glowers
as he walks past the table and, as he buys a newspaper, looks over his shoulder
to throw another dirty look.  On the table, a sign reads: ''Petition for a
mutual US/Soviet arms halt to the Nuclear Arms Race.'' There is a rainbow under
it, with a dove on one side and a star on the other. Under the rainbow, it
reads:

''Insure the future for your children, a non-nuclear future.'' In the train
station itself, a woman tells Jack: ''I think we should stop crime and drugs
before we start on the Government.'' Jack explains that the petition is not
against the Government, but for an end to the arms race.  ''Well, I expect the
Government to take care of that,'' she says.  Outside, a man replies ''No!''
without breaking stride. ''I don't believe in it,'' says another commuter,
disappearing into the station.

In half an hour, eight people have signed and six have refused.  There is a
fatalism in those who sign.  ''If it doesn't stop soon, there isn't going to be
any place to live,'' one woman remarks. Others, Sam says, despair over the issue
and doubt that any organization ''as insignificant as SANE'' could do anything.

It is beyond petitioning. They have learned to live with The Bomb.  A national
poll released recently found that most Americans saw nuclear war as inevitable.
''I think there are a lot of people who are putting this in the back of their
minds,'' Sam says. ''However, subconsciously there's a tremendous amount of
fear. It has to be faced. This thing is getting out of hand, as you well know.''

It is a force out of our control, like a train rushing into the night - an
analogy that one scientist has used to describe our predicament.

Last year, scientists met to discuss moving forward the clock depicted on ''The
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists.'' The clock, which tells us how near we are
to doomsday, had been set at seven minutes to midnight.

The scientists moved it forward to four minutes to midnight.  Arguing that this
recognized indication of our doom should be moved forward even more, one
scientist said:

''Our society is like a runaway train. There is no one in the engine, and yet we
race on faster and faster and the mass of society are in the caboose, looking
back.''

But Sam Tucker is a believer, a missionary in the jungle, who believes in
petitioning, democracy and, as he says, ''lighting a candle.''

''I am pessimistic, yet I am here,'' he said. ''The probability for war is
entirely too high. I have children and grandchildren, and the race is getting
out of control.''

Commuters board still another train after the 7:38. As it rolls out of the
station, a man in a white raincoat runs alongside and then, thinking better of
it, walks back to the station.

Jack approaches a man in a herringbone coat.  ''It doesn't matter,'' the man
says. ''Armageddon is upon us. Where were you 10 years ago?'' Calling at him
from the table, Sam tells him that SANE has been at it since 1957.  ''It's too
late,'' the man says, moving closer to the table. He notes that ''it's something
like three minutes to midnight.'' ''I have children and grandchildren, and here
I am,'' Sam says.  ''They didn't ask for this world.'' ''That's been true
throughout history,'' the man replies. ''I'm sure they said it in the time of
Alexander the Great.'' ''But only now do we have the unmatched power to destroy
civilization,'' Sam says.  ''That's true,'' the man answers.  It's not Russia
that he's worried about, but other nations - like Libya, Brazil and Mexico -
getting the bomb.  ''It's too late,'' he says.  ''Too late, yet here we stand,''
Sam says.  ''The entire world is an armed camp,'' the man continues. ''The only
thing that will save us is more sophisticated technology. There is no end to
technology.

''If Aristotle were alive today, he'd understand everything about our society.
But he wouldn't understand our technology. Technology moves ahead, people don't.
We have the same emotions as when we were dressed in animal skins.

''Look through military history. Nothing has ever stopped a warto-be.'' Today,
the world spends more than $1 billion a day on arms - $500 billion in 1980
alone. According to the United Nations, there are three tons of TNT for every
man, woman and child on the earth, and the National Security Council estimates
that 140 million Americans would be killed in a nuclear war, overwhelming the
one million Americans who died in the Civil War, both World Wars, Korea and
Vietnam. And that was anguish enough.

''It's madness,'' says the man.  ''We didn't have the U.N. then,'' says Jack,
joining in.  ''It's just talk,'' the man replies. ''Countries do what they want
to.'' ''I'm pessimistic, but I'm compelled,'' Sam says. Then, pointing to Jack,
he adds, ''He's not pessimistic.  ''I'd love to be that way, but the U.S. wants
war,'' the man declares.  During the Iranian crisis, he recalled, he was
visiting a college in Ohio, and ''young jocks slugging down beer said: 'Give us
a rifle, we'll go get them.' ''

They discuss to what extent the country is a democracy.  ''The country is a
military-industrial complex,'' the man says.  ''It started with George
Washington, the first general.  Talk turns to Dwight D. Eisenhower's famous
farewell speech warning of the military-industrial complex.  ''That is looking
backward,'' Sam says. ''We have to do something about the future.'' He implores
the man to sign the petition. After all, it couldn't hurt.  ''Maybe war is a
natural state of humanity,'' the man says.  ''Bertrand Russell said to never
think of nuclear war as inevitable,'' Jack says.  ''I think the prospect is for
the balance of terror to hold people back,'' the man says. ''I have faith in the
technology, not in the people.''

''There we disagree,'' Sam says. He notes that last November we were seven
minutes into the launch sequence because of a faulty tape in our computers.

And then in one last try, he says to the man: ''I am a pessimist, and yet here I
am today.'' The man goes down the platform and waits for his train. It pulls
out. It is 9 A.M., the end of the rush hour.  Jack departs. The station is
almost deserted. Sam Tucker stands by his bridge table for a few minutes before
folding it up.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Howard Mansfield, who lives in the Somerset County community of Warren, is the
author of ''An American Castle,'' to be published next year by the American Life
Foundation, and ''A Syracuse Sketchbook,'' to be published by North Country
Books.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

OFFICIAL DENIES C.I.A. EMPLOYED MAN ACCUSED OF SHOOTING LIBYAN

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 480 words

DATELINE: FORT COLLINS, Colo., Nov. 30


A Government official testified today that Eugene A. Tafoya was never employed
by the Central Intelligence Agency, although he has maintained he was acting on
agency orders when he shot a Libyan dissident.

The testimony by the rebuttal witness for the prosecution came after the
defendant, Mr. Tafoya, concluded nearly three days of testimony on his own
behalf.

Mr. Tafoya, who is charged with attempted murder and conspiracy, has said he
believed he was carrying a message for the intelligence agency when he shot the
dissident, Faisal Zagallai, at the Libyan's apartment on Oct. 14, 1980. Mr.
Tafoya said he fired only after Mr.  Zagallai attacked him.

Mr. Zagallai, a graduate student at Colorado State University, recovered from
two bullet wounds to the head, but he lost the sight in one eye.

No Record of Employment

George Marling, chief of the operations group of the intelligence agency,
testified that there was no record that Mr. Tafoya had ever either worked for
the agency or applied for a job there.

Mr. Marling said, however, that the agency did not keep applications longer than
two years. Mr. Tafoya had testified that he applied for a job in 1977.

The prosecution contends that Mr. Tafoya was hired by Edwin P.  Wilson, a former
intelligence agent, to kill Mr.  Zagallai. Mr.  Wilson is now a fugitive from a
Federal indictment charging him with shipping explosives to Libya.

Mr. Marling said that if Mr. Tafoya had been hired by a C.I.A.  agent on a
contract basis, there would have been a record. He said there would also have
been a record if an agent had asked Mr. Tafoya to carry a message for the
agency.

Case Ready for Jury

Mr. Tafoya said the message he was carrying warned Mr. Zagallai to halt his
dissident activities.  The defense rested after Mr. Tafoya's testimony, and it
appeared that the case could go to the jury Tuesday.  In other testimony, Mr.
Tafoya disclosed the circumstances surrounding his court-martial while he was
serving as a Green Beret in Vietnam in 1965.

Mr. Tafoya, 47 years old, said that his company was attacked while on a mission
and that he believed many casualties could have been avoided if there had been
air cover. He said he criticized the company commander and was court-martialed
for being disrespectful to an officer.

He was demoted from sergeant to private because of the incident.  The
prosecution has tried to show that Mr. Tafoya might have been hired to kill Mr.
Zagallai because of the victim's outspoken criticism of the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi.

Mr. Tafoya has been painted by the defense as a patriot who acted in
self-defense.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 2, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DISCONTENT SPREADING IN LIBYA AS OIL BOOM FADES

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1225 words

DATELINE: TRIPOLI, Libya


Libya's oil boom, long the source of well-being and a high standard of living,
has been eroded by the glut on world markets. Foreign analysts say that the
resultant economic plight coincides with other indications of discontent
springing from Col.  Muammar el-Qaddafi's authoritarian rule.

This year, one authoritative source said, oil revenues could be down by half of
the $25 billion that Libya's economic planners had been expecting.

Such is the pervasive nervousness and fear generated by internal security
agencies that informants declined to be interviewed except on the understanding
that articles based on the discussions contain no clue as to their identity.

The income from oil will be enough to cover the development budget this year,
the source said, but not other expenditures such as the financing of arms
purchases from the Soviet Union. As a result, development projects will be
deferred and the flow of consumer goods, with which Colonel Qaddafi has sought
to keep the 2.5 million Libyans happy, will be restricted, the source said.

Libya's light crude oil is highly prized and is equally highly priced. Because
of the glut, oil industry sources said, production has fallen from 1.8 million
barrels a day to 600,000 barrels a day, and Colonel Qaddafi has signaled that,
after the boom years, a period of austerity is imminent.

Chad Is Compared to Vietnam

There are other focuses of unhappiness. Libya's military intervention in Chad is
thought to have cost about 1,000 dead and wounded and is compared by some
foreign analysts to America's involvement in Vietnam - a distant war that was
unpopular at home.

At the same time, Colonel Qaddafi, dreaming of a socialist revolution, has
alienated Libya's residual merchant and middle classes by virtually outlawing
private enterprise, closing down private stores and, a well-informed source
said, embarking on fiscal measures that prompted well-to-do Libyans to burn
money rather than hand it over to the state banks.

Tripoli residents also say that some food items are becoming scarce for
civilians, while the army of 60,000 to 80,000 soldiers is well fed, and that the
activities of the secret police are becoming oppressive. ''A lot of people are
frightened,'' a foreign resident said. ''Whatever is said about people's
democracy, this is a rough, tough dictatorship.''

King Idris Ousted in 1969

Colonel Qaddafi rose to power in 1969 as the leading figure among 12 military
men who ousted King Idris and ended what many Westerners now say was a corrupt,
Western-supported regime.

In the welter of reports about Colonel Qaddafi, and the links with international
terrorism that the Reagan Administration sees as his main attribute, the Libyan
leader's domestic achievements are sometimes forgotten.

In the 12 years of his reign, the gap between rich and poor has narrowed, per
capita income has risen to $10,000 and Libyans have been treated to a bonanza of
consumer goods. ''The average Libyan family,'' one foreign resident said, ''will
have two cars, two or three television sets, five or six radios.''

In the large, state-owned supermarkets, a Libyan can buy TV sets, cameras,
radios and Italian suits. Among the shoppers, usually, are clutches of East
Europeans and Russians, in Libya as military and civilian advisers, gazing
longingly at a display of goods rarely seen in their own countries.

The injection of consumer items, an authoritative analyst said, is part of
Colonel Qaddafi's campaign to match the forcefulness of his rule with
enticements to Libyans to follow him. Despite large military expenditures
-estimated at $12 billion over the last five years - he has also spread oil
wealth around, building apartment houses, schools, clinics and other social
facilities.

Women, the analyst said, have been partly liberated. ''Twelve years ago, you
never saw women without the veil,'' the analyst said.  ''These days, they are
out driving cars, wearing Western clothes to a far greater extent than ever
before.''

A $500 Monthly Minimum Wage

The minimum wage is 1150 dinars ($500) a month. ''When you consider that
housing, health care and schooling is free, and the kind of food Libyans eat is
cheap, that's a lot of spending money to be spent on subsidized imports,'' a
Western resident said.

There are other aspects, however, of the social and political revolution that
Colonel Qaddafi is seeking to bring about by creating a society based on his
''third universal theory'' - ostensibly a blueprint for egalitarian rule and
people's power that is contained in the first volume of ''The Green Book,'' his
own literary creation.

The book asserts that the colonel's political theory, based on a series of
so-called people's committees and people's congresses and envisioning popular
democracy, represents ''the final solution to the problem of the instrument of
governing.''

More cynical analysts, however, point to the book's final paragraph, which,
almost as an afterthought, notes: ''Theoretically, this is the genuine
democracy. But realistically, the strong always rule; i.e., the stronger part in
the society is the one that rules.''

Colonel Qaddafi clearly feels, a foreign analyst said, that he is the ''stronger
part'' of Libyan society and his dominance is pervasive.

''There is an ever-tightening corset of controls,'' a Western source said. Apart
from the secret police, the informant said, Colonel Qaddafi has instituted
equally secret, so-called revolutionary committees - handpicked, nonelected
groups whose job it is to monitor the people's committees and to curb any
disloyalty to the colonel.

''He is a realist and realizes that radical change can only be brought about by
force and fear,'' an authoritative source said. ''He is very impatient to create
a new generation of Libyans and is rather disappointed with the results. Thus
there are ever-tighter controls - revolutionary committees, military education
in an ever-growing age range.''

'There Is No Government'

Theoretically, there is no Government in Libya, as illustrated by a recent
exchange between a foreign visitor and a Libyan official.  ''I was invited here
by the Government,'' the visitor said.  ''Impossible,'' the Libyan replied.
''There is no Government.''

The theoretical replacement of the Government with a so-called state of the
masses means that Colonel Qaddafi has no official position, beyond being
''leader of the revolution.'' Yet, authoritative sources say, he dominates the
instruments of power and his policy decisions are not always popular.

The Chad campaign, the sources say, upset many Libyans who lost relatives in the
fighting, but were never given details of how, or why, they died. ''Even
today,'' a reliable source said, ''there are persistent reports of hundreds of
Libyan soldiers in hospitals in the south suffering from mutilations received in
Chad. The Chadians cut off their ears, noses, genitals. They are an
embarrassment to the authorities.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of soviet missiles

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 2, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AT ARMORY, WRAM BED FOR A NIGHT

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1247 words


Another bone-chilling night has fallen in the city, and a mass of men, smells,
tattered coats, frayed parcels and confusion fills the dim reception room of the
Men's Shelter on East Third Street, just off the Bowery.

''Register and get a ticket,'' shouts a supervisor over the din of a hundred
voices and romantic music piped in over loudspeakers as more ''clients'' come in
from the cold.

And the homeless, old and young, ragged and neat, crippled and whole, will wait,
sometimes for hours, for a shower, clean underwear and socks, and a bus ride to
bed - in Brooklyn and Queens and on Wards Island.

A Controversial Shelter

On the shelter's fifth floor, 40 men sit on plastic chairs in a corridor,
waiting to scrub themselves with yellow soap in one of three showers.
Eventually, they will crowd into a bus bound for the city's newest and most
controversial shelter - a cavernous room of a National Guard armory in Flushing,
Queens.

A lawyer representing the homeless, Robert M. Hayes, has charged that the Queens
shelter, open only at night, does not provide enough bathrooms, showers, first
aid and recreation and dining facilities, violating several provisions of a
consent order agreed to by the city and the state.

But to the homeless, the shelter provides a warm, quiet, clean, well-protected
bed, and, for many, a chance to get out early the next morning and look for a
job.

Yesterday, at a hearing in State Supreme Court, the city presented its tentative
plans to use more armories to shelter the homeless, but Mr. Hayes challenged the
plan and the city's entire program. Justice Richard W. Wallach recessed the
hearing until Monday without issuing any orders.

''Maybe the Queens shelter doesn't have every facility, but it's great for
sleeping,'' said Arthur Perez, a 29-year-old factory worker from Rhode Island
who came to New York three months ago with $100 in his pocket and quickly became
destitute.

Jack Morey, 31, who has been living in shelters on and off for three years, said
it compared favorably with a Bowery hotel known as the Palace and similar hotels
in that section.

''At the Palace, you walk in and think you're in a junkyard,'' he said.
''Compared to that, Queens is the Waldorf. The first time I put my hand in a bed
at a hotel, I got bitten by lice.''

Most of those seated along the corridor at the Queens shelter were young, and
some were well-dressed. Several asked a visitor if he could help them get a job.
One talked aloud to no one in particular.  Among the old-timers were one with a
bandaged foot and another, George Loughlin, who complained about the ''tube in
his stomach.''

Mr. Loughlin recalled how guards at a Brooklyn shelter had saved his sneakers as
they were being stolen while he slept. He said that he was 71 years old and that
he had never collected Social Security despite years of work as a dishwasher in
the Catskills and at the Waldorf-Astoria.

One of the men, Stanley A. Forys, described himself as an electrical engineer
with experience in digital computers who had had a breakdown five years ago
after years of ''all work and no play.'' He said the Queens shelter ''just felt
comfortable.''

''Rather than being cramped and pinched, you have a lot of elbow room,'' he
said.  Mr. Forys, who is 41, said he would like to find a job ''doing anything''
but did not have the fare to get from the Bowery to midtown.

Seated near him was a man who gave his name only as Smitty because, he said, he
did not want to embarrass his relatives.  Smitty said that he was a Vietnam
veteran who gets disability payments for a shoulder injury and ''nerves'' and
that he drove a gypsy cab occasionally. He said he had signed up at the shelter
because he had run out of money before his next Government check arrived and
because ''sometimes I just want to be in solitude.''

He called the new shelter peaceful and the guards efficient. ''They watch over
you pretty good - they don't haunt you,'' he said.  Many of the men praised the
shelter staff for waking them early enough to look for a job. About 80 percent
of all men admitted to the shelter leave after a few days and do not return,
according to shelter officials.

'Like a Bus Terminal'

The journey to Queens the other night began after the men finished their dinners
of macaroni and cheese, collard greens and canned pears at the Men's Shelter in
Manhattan.

Along with hundreds of others, they stood in jagged lines in the reception room
and were sorted into groups for transportation to the satellite shelters.

''It's like a bus terminal,'' said William Greher, an assistant supervisor.
''But I don't think any bus terminal has to serve so many clients like this.''

As he spoke, an elderly man in a shabby coat waved a meal ticket in his hand and
said over and over again: ''They've changed my name. How can they change my
name?''

Every resident of the Queens shelter is required to take a shower each night and
to ride the bus back to the Bowery early each morning to avoid arousing
opposition to the shelter in the neighborhood, supervisors say.

'Kind of Mandatory'

''We don't want them walking around in Queens,'' Mr. Greher said.  ''It's kind
of mandatory that they come back on the bus.'' Outside on the street, the
merchants are watching their new neighbors with alarm. At a meeting yesterday at
Queens Borough Hall, one merchant complained to shelter officials that several
homeless men wandered into his diner across the street on Saturday night. He
said they were turned away.

Harold McNeill, the shelter's director, said he had no record of anyone leaving
the shelter that night.  The Queens Borough President, Donald R. Manes, said
that he ''strongly objected'' to the secrecy that surrounded the shelter's
opening and that he was worried about its effect on an ambitious plan for the
development of a shopping center nearby.

But he did not ask that the shelter be closed, and Robert Trobe, a deputy
administrator of the city's Human Resources Administration, interpreted this as
a small victory.

''I'm not saying that the Queens community thinks this is the greatest thing
since white bread,'' he said. ''But they and the Borough President understand
our problem.''

Because of a shortage of showers and hot water in the Flushing shelter - a
turreted red-brick armory set back behind a chain-link fence rimmed with barbed
wire at 137-58 Northern Boulevard - half the residents shower at the Manhattan
shelter before boarding buses, while the others shower at the armory.

As each bus arrives at the Queens shelter, a section of overhead lights is
switched off, and most of the men go quickly to sleep.  Those who want to smoke
must go downstairs to a corridor outside the men's room.

Six uniformed Human Resources Administration police officers are on guard at
night, but no incidents have been reported since the shelter opened last week,
one supervisor said.

At 6 A.M. each morning, the men are awakened and brought to the Manhattan
shelter for breakfast. And then they go out on their own once more.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of an armory in Flushing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 3, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUA ARMS CALLED PERIL TO AREA

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1219 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 2


The Reagan Administration is portraying Nicaragua as a serious threat to Central
America because of a military buildup directed by Cuba and the Soviet Union.

A senior official, quoting intelligence reports, told reporters today that
Nicaragua was ''on the verge of becoming a superpower in Central American
terms.'' The official also said that Nicaragua was fostering left-wing
insurgencies in Honduras and Guatemala as well as El Salvador. Like other
Administration officials and military analysts interviewed on the subject, the
official spoke on condition that he not be identified.

Other Administration officials said that President Reagan was considering the
question of whether to order United States military forces to combat the threat
or to rely on a variety of other means ranging from diplomacy to covert action.

Administration Is Divided

The Administration, officials acknowledged, is divided along lines that reflect
an unusual reversal of roles. Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.,
supported by the White House counsellor, Edwin Meese 3d, has become the leading
advocate of using force, the officials said.

But Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, with strong support from the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, has argued against using military force because it might
lead to a protracted involvement like that in Vietnam. The military leaders fear
that the American public would not support military action and might turn
against the Administration's plans to modernize the armed forces.

According to an assessment widely shared by military and intelligence analysts,
Nicaragua has expanded its military manpower and received a steady flow of
military equipment from the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies through
Cuba.

Long-Term Threat Is Seen

The objective, the analysts said, is to make Nicaragua, led by the left-wing
Sandinist Government, the dominant power in Central America. Some analysts said
that the military buildup might constitute a long-term threat to Mexican
oilfields to the north and to the Panama Canal to the south.

The buildup, the analysts said, has been made possible by the greatest shipment
of weapons and equipment from the Soviet Union to Cuba since the missile crisis
of 1962. They said that about 56,000 tons of military supplies had arrived in
Cuba since the first of the year, including shipments from Eastern Europe.

Much of the most modern Soviet equipment, they said, has remained in Cuba. But
these new supplies, they said, have permitted Prime Minister Fidel Castro's
Government to ship large quantities of older weapons and equipment to Nicaragua.

The Reagan Administration is most concerned, the senior official said, by the
prospect of Nicaragua acquiring MIG-17 and MIG-21 Soviet jet fighters from Cuba.
He said that Cuba had recently received 17 later models of the MIG-21, thus
making the older planes available to Nicaragua.

Other officials said they expected Nicaraguan pilots now in training in Bulgaria
or other Eastern European nations to return to Cuba, pick up the fighter planes
and fly them to Nicaragua. The senior official said that was expected next
spring.

The officials said they had aerial pictures of at least three airfield runways
being lengthened to accommodate high-performance jet aircraft. In addition, they
said, the Nicaraguans have received antiaircraft guns and small surface-to-air
missiles from the Soviet Union to protect the airfields.

In addition, military analysts said, Nicaragua has a military assistance
agreement with Vietnam under which Hanoi has evidently promised to send to
Nicaragua 1,000 United States helicopters, transports and light fighter planes
seized after the Vietnam War.

Doubts on Ability Expressed

But some analysts expressed serious doubts about whether Nicaragua would be able
to strike deep into neighboring countries, largely because it does not have the
trained men to fly or to maintain the aircraft, weapons and sophisticated radar
and communications equipment.

Some officials were also dubious about the ability of the Vietnamese to furnish
the 1,000 aircraft they pledged to Nicaragua and about the condition of those
planes. They questioned whether they would be able to fly and whether Nicaragua
could absorb all or even a large part of them.

On the other hand, other Central American nations are so lightly armed that a
few MIG's might be a formidable force. The senior official meeting with
reporters said that those MIG's would tip the balance against Honduras, for
instance.

In addition to weapons, the Soviet Union and its allies have provided large
numbers of military advisers to Nicaragua. The senior official said that the
capital, Managua, ''has become an international center with East Germans there,
Bulgarians there, North Koreans there, Soviets there, Cubans there, and even the
P.L.O.,'' or Palestine Liberation Organization.

Other officials said that 4,000 to 6,000 Cubans were in Nicaragua, 500 to 600
having arrived in the last few weeks. They were said to be training the
Nicaraguan Army while East Germans were supervising the training of internal
security forces.

The Nicaraguan Army, the officials said, has grown from about 7,000 men when the
new government came to power two and a half years ago to about 80,000 today, a
mixture of regular forces and militia. They said the objective seemed to be a
regular force of 50,000 and a militia of 200,000.

Military Headquarters Spotted

The analysts said that seven military headquarters had been spotted around the
country. Some were patterned closely after Soviet military posts, with barracks,
workshops, supply depots and athletic fields laid out in the Soviet fashion.

The Nicaraguan Army has about 25 older Soviet tanks, the officials said, shipped
from Cuba and replaced there by newer Soviet models.  They said the tanks
appeared to be intended to maintain control over a restless population since
they would not be effective in the Central American jungle.

Nicaragua has also received antitank weapons, howitzers, medium and heavy
mortars, automatic rifles and trucks. The analysts said they expected Nicaragua
to receive armored reconnaissance vehicles, armored personnel carriers, more
artillery and more trucks in the future.

Most of the shipments from Cuba, they said, have been unloaded at the ports of
Puerto Cabezas, on the northeast coast of Nicaragua, and Bluefields, on the
southeast coast. Small shipments have also gone in by air, they said.

Some of the small arms coming from Cuba have been passed on to guerrilla forces
in El Salvador, the officials said. They have identified at least five overland
routes to El Salvador, they said, plus sea and air routes.

A new tactic for shipping arms into El Salvador, they said, was for helicopters
to take off during daylight in Nicaragua and to time their arrivals in El
Salvador for dusk. They would then be unloaded and take off under cover of
darkness to return to Nicaragua.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of South Vietnamese soldiers

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 3, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

JURY IN SHOOTING OF LIBYAN BEGINS ITS DELIBERATION

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 964 words

DATELINE: FORT COLLINS, Colo., Dec. 2


After nearly three weeks of testimony from 32 witnesses, the case against Eugene
A. Tafoya, the former Green Beret accused of shooting of a Libyan student here
last year, was presented to the Larimer County jury late this afternoon.

The panel must now decide whether to believe the prosecution's contention that
Mr. Tafoya is a cold-blooded, if bumbling, hired killer or that he is what
Walter Gerash, the defense attorney, calls a ''forgotten patriot'' who thought
he was on a secret assignment for the Central Intelligence Agency when, posing
as a job recruiter, he visited the apartment of Faisal Zagallai in October 1980.

From the beginning, the case against Mr. Tafoya, 48 years old, has been set
against a background of international espionage. There are suspicions that the
decorated Vietnam war veteran was in fact acting on behalf of the Government of
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the ruler of Libya, and was acting under orders from Edwin
P. Wilson, a former American intelligence agent who is now a fugitive in that
militant Arab nation in North Africa.

Libyan Wounded in the Head

Mr. Zagallai, who was wounded in the head by two shots from a .22-caliber pistol
belonging to Mr. Tafoya, has been described as an outspoken critic of the
Qaddafi government who had been marked for assassination. Mr. Zagallai, 36, who
at the time was a student at Colorado State University here, survived the
shooting but was blinded in his right eye.

Mr. Tafoya testified that he fired in self defense while struggling with Mr.
Zagallai, who Mr. Tafoya said pulled a pistol on him first.  Mr. Tafoya said he
had not intended to shoot Mr. Zagallai, rather that he had been asked by an
intelligence agent identified only as John to warn the student to stop making
''broadcasts'' opposed to Egyptian-Israeli detente.

'Justice to Be Done'

''There is justice to be done for this soldier left out in the cold, this
forgotten patroit who has been here since April waiting your decision,'' Mr.
Gerash told the jury in closing arguments today.

At another point, Mr. Gerash's voice cracked and he wiped tears from his eyes as
he read a citation Mr. Tafoya had received in Vietnam, where he was awarded a
bronze star for valor.

Prosecutors called Mr. Tafoya's account of the shooting a fabrication, and
asserted that he had in fact sought work as an assassin. Among the evidence
introduced by the prosecution was a tape recording containing a statement
attributed to Mr. Tafoya when he was looking for a job with either the
intelligence agency or a foreign government. ''Do you know anybody who needs to
quit breathing?'' he was heard on the tape asking an associate.

In the trial, the prosecution offered evidence from the intelligence agency
denying that Mr. Tafoya had ever worked for the agency.

George Marling, the chief of records for the intelligence agency, testified that
the agency had no record of employment of Mr. Tafoya.  However, Mr. Marling
acknowledged that it was his agency's policy to deny any classified operation.

As a result, there has been much interest here in what was not said in testimony
as well as in what was said.  For example, despite the fact that Mr. Tafoya has
been charged by the police with conspiracy to commit first-degree murder, the
prosecutor has offered no specific testimony suggesting who might have actually
ordered Mr. Tafoya to kill the Libyan student.

Articles on Ties to Wilson

Articles published before the trial and remarks by prosecutors in private
sessions in the judge's chambers suggested that the authorities believed Mr.
Tafoya was closely linked to Mr. Wilson. Mr. Wilson, who has been indicted by a
Federal grand jury on charges of illegally shipping explosives to Libya, is
living in Libya, apparently working for Mr. Qaddafi.

Among other things, it has been reported that neighbors of a country estate in
England owned by Mr. Wilson identified Mr. Tafoya as having stayed there some
weeks after the shooting.

There have been only passing references to Mr. Wilson in the trial. Stuart Van
Meveren, the tall, square-jawed county prosecutor, said his office had decided
to limit the evidence in the trial to the circumstances surrounding the actual
shooting.

''Mr. Wilson is not on trial here,'' Mr. Van Meveren said.  ''Besides, a lot of
the material we have is only so much conjecture.''

Judge Gives Instructions to Jury

At today's proceedings, Judge J. Robert Miller instructed the nine women and
three men of the jury that, based on the evidence, they could return verdicts of
guilty or not guilty on any of four separate charges: attempted first-degree
murder, conspiracy to commit first-degree murder, attempted second-degree murder
or third-degree assault.

The visitors' gallery has been packed each day in the courtroom on the second
floor of the Larimer County Courthouse in downtown Fort Collins, a city of
66,000 people.

There have been some unusual security measures for the trial.  People entering
the courtroom must pass through a metal detector, and a squad of sheriff's
deputies armed with shotguns, automatic weapons and gas masks has been kept on
standby inside the courthouse.

The police have also borrowed two dogs from nearby Warren Air Force Base,
outside Cheyenne, Wyo., to sniff out explosives. The police started out with
one, but the first, a German shepherd named Charley, slipped on ice while
patrolling the courthouse roof Monday and fell two stories, breaking its leg and
several teeth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Farida and Faisal Zagallai

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 3, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STOP SELLING MOROCCO U.S. ARMS

BYLINE: By Marlene Sokol

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 873 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The six-year-old conflict between Morocco and the Polisario Front for control of
the Western Sahara - the Front calls its nation the Sahara Arab Democratic
Republic -is far from finished, despite the generous packages of American arms
aid sent to to Morocco.

When on Oct. 13 the Moroccan Army suffered a brutal defeat by Polisario at the
Western Saharan outpost of Guelta Zemmur, the State Department should have
realized what it often learns too late - that we are championing another lost
cause in the third world.

Washington considers King Hassan II of Morocco among the last pillars of
strength in the Middle East. Attempting to play the moderate, Hassan has offered
a referendum on continued Moroccan rule to the 75,000 people still living in
Western Sahara but refuses to acknowledge the existence of almost 750,000
Western Saharan refugees scattered throughout Northern Africa. He also refuses
to recognize or negotiate with Polisario, the Saharans' political and military
organization.

A week in a Polisario camp in Algeria - I was there in August - reinforces
doubts about America's part in the conflict. After all, historically Hassan has
been the aggressor, driving hundreds of thousands of Saharans from their
villages and attempting to annex their land. Today, the United States is the
only major power still selling arms to the King, while the Saharan state gains
worldwide recognition and Hassan is condemned throughout the third world and in
Europe.

America's loyalty to Morocco is based on the globalist theory that by supporting
Hassan we are protecting his strategically situated country from Libya and
Algeria, and therefore from the Soviet Union.  In support of this argument,
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. recently cited the Polisario's use of
Soviet-made tanks and SAM-6 missiles, supplied presumably by Libya, and
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger is to arrive in Morocco today,
reportedly to discuss increasing and upgrading the weapons that we supply to the
King.

Such logic is lost on the Saharans, who want nothing more than to return to
their land (a colony that Spain gave up in 1976). Khanduf Brahim, a guerrilla,
told me: ''We have been called Communists, Socialists, radicals, and political
fanatics, and we are none of these. We are neither pro-East nor pro-West. Once
we return to the Sahara, we wish to establish friendly, beneficial relations
with all nations, based of course on mutual respect.''

After centuries of isolation, these former nomads have been thrust into a war
involving tanks, missiles, and aircraft. This sudden brush with modern
technology has deeply affected their culture; though once pastoral, they now
experiment with farming and artisanship and talk of exploiting the phosphate
mines of Bukra when they return to Western Sahara.

Though the Saharans are religious people with a constitution rooted in Islamic
law, they vehemently reject any comparison between their revolution and the more
reactionary, anti-West struggles of Iran and Algeria. In their view, Islamic
ideology does not prohibit modernization or good relations with the West.

Whether or not the Saharans return to their homeland will depend on how long
they continue to fight King Hassan's army despite their numerical disadvantage.
It seems highly unlikely that they will give up. Virtually all Saharan songs and
poetry are colored by nationalist ideology, and Saharan schoolchildren study
Polisario texts along with the Koran. The walls of hospitals and schools are
covered with posters bearing slogans such as: ''The war continues from
generation to generation.''

In Moroccan streets, one finds little such enthusiasm for the costly, exhausting
war, often called in whispers ''Hassan's Vietnam.'' Indeed, what little popular
support Hassan enjoys is based on his promises to reunite Western Sahara and
Morocco, and a defeat could be politically devastating.

What role, if any, should the United States play in the conflict?  Humanitarian
concerns suggest that the Reagan Administration consider that the Saharans have
been persecuted under Hassan, and that they now live in exile on mere handouts
from Algeria and Libya.

Pragmatically, America must weigh the limited benefits of Hassan's friendship -
shipping rights in Moroccan ports and a lukewarm endorsement of Camp David -
against the dangers of supporting yet another unpopular dictator in an
unwinnable war.

As long as America supplies Morocco with sophisticated weapons, Polisario
fighters will be forced to defend themselves with Sovietmade arms from Libya and
Algeria, increasing its dependence on those benefactors. Therefore, rather than
prolong the war and further erode America's image in the third world, the
Administration would be wise to end its sale of offensive weapons to Morocco.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Marlene Sokol is taking a master's degree in international affairs at George
Washington University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LIBYA CASE: 'PRETTY BIG' FOR FT. COLLINS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: FORT COLLINS, Colo. Dec. 3


At 7:32 P.M. on Oct. 14, 1980, the dispatcher at the Fort Collins Police
Department received a call reporting a family disturbance at an apartment on
South Shields Street, not far from the campus of Colorado State University.

Such calls are not unusual in this northern Colorado community of 66,000 people,
a college town and one of the fastest growing cities in the state. But when
officers arrived at the scene it was quickly apparent that things were not as
first reported.

''As soon as I got there I realized this was no family fight,'' said Sgt. Ray
Martinez, 29 years old, a Fort Collins police detective. ''A foreign student had
been shot, and right away alarm bells went off in my head. I had a feeling this
was something pretty big.''

It was indeed. The victim in the shooting was a 35-year-old Libyan national
named Faisal Zagallai, and subsequent investigation was eventually to lead
Sergeant Martinez and the 80-man Fort Collins Police Department deep into the
shadowy world of international espionage and assassination.

Along the way, they encountered the Central Intelligence Agency, former spies
and gun runners and grizzled former Green Beret mercenaries, all of them somehow
entangled into suspicions of a complex plot of international murder for hire
that led directly back to the shooting last year in Fort Collins.

'Two Murders a Year'

''We get maybe two murders a year in Fort Collins,'' said Sergeant Martinez.
''And believe me, this is our first international case.'' Over a period of
months, and with the off-and-on cooperation of the Federal authorities, the
police eventually arrested Eugene Aloys Tafoya, 48, a decorated Vietnam War hero
who the authorities say was hired by Libyan officials to assassinate Mr.
Zagallai. Federal officials say Mr. Zagallai was marked for elimination as a
persistent critic of the regime of the Libyan leader, Muammar el-Qaddafi.

After a three-week trial, Mr. Tafoya's fate was placed Wednesday in the hands of
a Larimer County jury, which must decide whether he was a professional hit man
who, as prosecutors charge, bungled an attempt to kill Mr. Zagallai last year.
Wounded twice in the head by a .22-caliber pistol wielded by Mr. Tafoya, the
former Colorado State student survived the attack, but lost the vision in his
right eye.

Mr. Tafoya testified that not only did he shoot Mr. Zagallai in self-defense in
a struggle, but that he also believed at the time he was on a secret assignment
from the C.I.A. His orders were not to kill the student, Mr. Tafoya testified,
but rather to ''rough up'' Mr. Zagallai.

Eventually, the Larimer County prosecutor, Stu Van Meveren, a rock-jawed man
more comfortable with burglary cases than international murder-for-hire plots,
decided to limit the focus of the case against Mr. Tafoya, restricting the
evidence presented to the jury to the circumstances of the Fort Collins shooting
itself.

But in chasing leads in the case, many of which led the authorities to a former
C.I.A. agent named Edwin P. Wilson who prosecutors believe hired Mr. Tafoya to
carry out the hit on behalf of the Libyan Government, Sergeant Martinez traveled
to London and counseled with intelligence agency officials in Washington.

He studied international telephone records, examined a so-called ''hit list'' of
other victims targeted for assassination and discovered among Mr. Tafoya's
belongings, and pored over more than 1,500 pages of reports prepared by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation detailing Mr. Wilson's contacts and associates.

Though Mr. Tafoya has been charged with conspiracy to attempt murder, no
co-conspirator was named in the case, and no effort was made in the trial to
directly link Mr. Tafoya to Mr. Wilson.

Meanwhile, the intelligence agency itself has closely followed the trial here.
Two C.I.A. officials were among the 32 witnesses who testified, and both
suggested that, contrary to Mr. Tafoya's testimony, he was never in the employ
of the agency. Or least not that they can talk about.

Sergeant Martinez concedes that the investigation led him into water over his
head, and some of the authorities here in Larimer County, which sits on the high
plain of Eastern Colorado, against the foothills of the Rocky Mountains, have
suggested that along the way, Federal officials in both the C.I.A. and the
F.B.I. have provided little guidance.

Amid this never-never land of spies and international murder plots a gun
belonging to Mr. Zagallai, found in the apartment the night of the shooting, was
returned to the victim rather than held as evidence for trial. Defense attorneys
have stressed the mistake over the gun, which they say Mr. Zagallai confronted
Mr. Tafoya with the night on the shooting, leading to the struggle in which Mr.
Zagallai was eventually shot.

The defense attorney, Walter Gerash, said that as a result certain scientific
tests were never run on the gun, which might have proved Mr. Tafoya's contention
that he grappled with Mr. Zagallai over the weapon.

Moreover, Sergeant Martinez conceded that, in at least two jailhouse interviews
with the suspect, he failed to advise Mr. Tafoya of his rights.

Nevertheless, it was the Fort Collins police who eventually broke the case, when
two youngsters discovered a gun in an irrigation ditch near town. The police
traced the gun to Mr. Tafoya.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LATIN POLICY: A NEW PLAN;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1345 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 5


After months of often contradictory signals, Reagan Administration officials say
they have settled on a four-part approach to dealing with what they see as the
problems of Cuban and Soviet intervention in Nicaragua and elsewhere in Central
America.

They say they hope this tentative plan, which they say they will refine in
coming weeks, will involve other Latin nations and reduce the necessity of a
single-handed American military role.

The general outline of the approach was made public Friday in Castries, St.
Lucia, to the Organization of American States by Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig Jr. It was amplified in private talks with diplomats and journalists.

Warning Called 'a Solid Plus'

On Mr. Haig's airplane returning to Washington Friday night, reporters were told
that the Secretary believed his forceful warning about Nicaragua's becoming a
potential Communist bastion in Central America had been ''a solid plus.'' The
other Latin delegates were almost unanimous, the reporters were told, in wanting
to do something to prevent what Mr. Haig called in his speech the transformation
of Nicaragua into a ''platform of terror and war in the region.''

In a conversation today, a senior State Department official, who asked not to be
named, said the next several weeks would be crucial.  The Administration hopes
in that period to hold consultations with other Latin countries, with members of
Congress and within the often divided executive branch so that a firm policy
declaration can be made by President Reagan, perhaps by the time of his State of
the Union address next month. The aim is to put an end to the seeming indecision
that has marked the Administration's policy for most of the year.

The four-point approach that is being worked on is described in this manner by
Mr. Haig and others: The Administration hopes to keep open lines of
communication with Nicaragua in the hope that the country's Sandinist leadership
can be persuaded that its support for the guerrillas in El Salvador should stop
and that its interests do not lie in throwing itself completely into the Cuban
and Soviet camps.

There is not much optimism within the State Department that the Sandinists, who
see themselves as liberators in the area, will be turned from their course.
Nevertheless, in deference to Mexico and other countries that still see some
hope in Nicaragua, Washington will keep the door open.

Mr. Haig is also in regular contact with Moscow. As to contacts with Cuba, the
State Department would not comment on a report in a Madrid newspaper that Mr.
Haig, while in Mexico 10 days ago, met with a high-ranking Cuban official.

Collective Approach Sought

Meanwhile, taking advantage of widespread concern in the hemisphere about what
are seen as renewed Cuban subversive tactics, particularly in the militarization
of Nicaragua, the Administration hopes to formulate some kind of collective
approach to deal with the situation.

There is no expectation of an initiative by the Organization of American States
as such, but rather the bringing together of those nations most willing to act
in unison to formulate common positions.  Mr. Haig talked about preventing the
importing of heavy offensive weapons, such as Soviet-built fighter aircraft,
into Nicaragua and the limiting of foreign military advisers.

One possibility would be military cooperation between El Salvador, Honduras,
Costa Rica and Guatemala, the countries perceived to be most threatened by
Nicaragua, with aid and advice provided by the United States, Argentina and
other major powers.

More Aid Would Be Available

While ruling out American combat involvement, the United States would make clear
that it would be ready to supply increased military and economic assistance. The
amounts of aid involved are small, relative to the large-scale American
assistance for such areas as the Middle East. But the Administration has already
doubled its military aid to Honduras, for instance, to $10 million for this
fiscal year.

Any significant increases in aid will require the full support of Congress,
however, and this is questionable. So far, for example, Congress has seemed
reluctant about, if not critical of, American support for El Salvador, because
of that Government's seeming inability to keep its police in check. There is
also strong criticism of Guatemala because of repressive policies there.

Mr. Haig intends to make a major effort this week, before going on a trip to
Europe, to persuade the House of Representatives to approve the new aid bill to
make increased support in Latin America possible.

Caribbean Basin Plan Evolving

Finally, to demonstrate that it is concerned with more than just security
matters, the United States would make public a concrete plan for the Caribbean
basin that has been worked on for most of the year, but which until Friday
appeared to be devoid of much substance.

Mr. Haig said President Reagan was preparing a three-part economic plan:
legislation to allow Caribbean and Central American countries one-way free trade
preferences into the American market; special incentives and other measures to
spur private investment in private ventures in the region, and an increase in
American financial aid to deal with acute liquidity crises in such countries as
Costa Rica. It is not known whether Congress, in the current tight budget
atmosphere, will be generous to the Caribbean countries.

Much of the confusion surrounding American policy in the Caribbean has been
caused by the seemingly erratic nature of Administration statements.

At the start of the Administration, Mr. Haig opened a major campaign around the
world to draw attention to what he said was Cuban, Vietnamese and Soviet support
for the insurgents in El Salvador, who he charged were being supplied by way of
Nicaragua.

U.S. Involvement Opposed

There was considerable speculation in this country that the campaign was a
precursor for involvement of the Vietnam war type.  Since El Salvador's
Government was regarded as having been responsible for, or at least having
countenanced, the murder of four American Roman Catholic workers, as well as
other assassinations, there was almost no public support for a deeper American
involvement there.

The White House, concerned earlier this year with gaining approval of the
President's economic package, did not welcome a Salvador distraction and told
Mr. Haig to put an end to his public campaign.  This irritated Mr. Haig, who
felt that he was being muzzled; subsequently he said privately that his campaign
had led Nicaragua to stop supplying arms to the Salvadoran rebels but that the
flow had resumed after the United States stopped talking about the issue.

Now he has been given permission again to make his concerns known, and he has
seemed to pick up an ally in Edwin A. Meese 3d, the White House counselor, who
has recently echoed Mr. Haig's words of concern. Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger, however, has been wary of the campaign and has said very little
about the situation.

Military Moves Hinted

As part of this increased public campaign, Mr. Haig and Mr. Meese refused in
recent weeks to rule out such American military moves as a naval blockade of
Nicaragua or the mining of Nicaraguan harbors.

But the presentation by Mr. Haig in St. Lucia was meant, in part, to assure the
Latins that the United States wanted to avoid playing a unilateral military
role.

''I think if we 'heavy-hand' our position there, it is wrong,'' reporters on Mr.
Haig's plane were told. ''It's wrong in the sense of American policy and it is
wrong also from the standpoint of hemispheric unity and collective action.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Haig giving address (page 20) map of Central
America

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUDDENLY THE ACCENT IS SOUTHERN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1344 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Dan Hulbert is theater critic for The Dallas Times Herald.

By DAN HULBERT
DALLAS The Meadows School of the Arts at Southern Methodist University here has
discovered an interesting formula for developing young playwrights - offer them
degrees in every area of theater except playwriting, then send them out into the
world as journeymen actors and directors.

After a few years, says Jack Heifner, author of ''Vanities,'' ''situations that
seem like nothing more than a slice of life in the Southwest take on real
dramatic possibilities when you get a new perspective, in New York or Los
Angeles. Suddenly, you find yourself beginning to jot them down.''

And jottings become plays. Beth Henley, who won this year's Pulitzer Prize in
drama for ''Crimes of the Heart,'' is the latest in a string of recent S.M.U.
alumni who struggled as actors or directors, only to make a breakthrough at the
typewriter.

The list also includes James McClure, author of ''Lone Star,'' which has won
critical praise and is currently being filmed in Texas for 20th Century-Fox;
Lanny Flaherty, whose ''Showdown at the Adobe Motel'' was staged, with Henry
Fonda in the lead, at the Hartman Theater in Stanford, Conn., last year; Rick
Bailey, whose Vietnam War drama, ''The Bridgehead,'' was the first winner of the
Actors' Theater New Play Festival in Louisville in 1977 (the first of several
plays by S.M.U. graduates to be presented there); and of course Mr.  Heifner,
whose study of small-town Texas cheerleaders ran Off Broadway for several years.
These young playwrights are coming to be known as the Texas Mafia, although only
Mr. Bailey and Mr. Heifner were actually born in that state.

Almost from the day of its inception in 1965, S.M.U.'s theater division has been
a growing tributary to the New York and Los Angeles theatrical communities,
turning out designers, technicians, directors and actors such as Powers Boothe,
who played the lead in ''Lone Star'' and later won an Emmy for his portrayal of
Jim Jones in the TV drama ''Guyana Tragedy.''

Only recently has this group included playwrights. They have come mainly from
small towns throughout the South and Southwest, and after studying at S.M.U. and
perhaps taking on an acting role or two in regional theater, they began arriving
in New York or Los Angeles during the 1970's.

The only ''old boy'' network awaiting them in New York centered around the Lion
Theater on West 42d Street, under the artistic direction of another S.M.U.
alumnus, Garland Wright, who has since gone on to become associate artistic
director of the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis. Mr. McLure recalls that his
first official task as a professional actor was cleaning the Lion's restroom.
Mr. Heifner remembers his early days as an actor at the Lion as ''too many
months of living in seedy West Side hotels, keeping my milk cold on the
windowsill.''

A little intimidated at first by what they call the ''affected'' diction of the
Yale and Juilliard actors, and feeling, as Mr. McLure puts it, ''like complete
dodos,'' the S.M.U. alumni soon began to revel in the way they spoke. Not merely
their accents, but the patterns of speech and colorful turns of phrase they had
brought with them from Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi -and learned to exploit
dramatically at S.M.U. - were what distinguished them from the graduates of the
better-known Northeastern conservatories, and gave them a special facility for
naturalistic drama.

Acting, they now say, is what gave them the impulse to write, because they had
learned first-hand what kinds of writing would and would not work on the stage.
Mr. Flaherty, who like Miss Henley is originally from Mississippi, says he wrote
''Adobe'' as a kind of therapy from the ''bing-bang garbage pail manner of
speaking'' that he says literally hurt his ears as a young actor in New York.

Mr. McLure observes: ''Lanny Flaherty's work is really just pure storytelling,
and it demonstrates what we all have going for us. It's that oral tradition,
that gift for telling a tale, that really has no equivalent up North except in
Jewish culture.''

''The folks back home speak absolute poetry,'' Mr.Flaherty agrees.  ''Sometimes
I'm a-tremble to hear it. Like the last time I was home, I asked our old
mechanic why he'd had all his teeth pulled out and he said, 'They were dealing
me a world of trouble.' Right away I reached for my notebook.''

Mr. Heifner, whose hometown is Corsicana, Tex., says, ''I don't know if people
realize that all these ''eccentric'' characters we write about really exist back
home. I actually knew someone who took every dollar bill he earned and poked
them into those tiny toothpick wrappers and hid them all over the house. The
closets are full of skeletons back home.''

Mr. Bailey says he must periodically ''return to the well'' in his native Dallas
for inspiration, and Miss Henley, who got her start as a professional actress
with Theater Three in Dallas before seeking her fortune in Los Angeles, says
simply, ''I learned to listen back home.''

Southern Methodist University, which is not terribly different today from the
clubby football school Mr. Heifner portrayed in ''Vanities,'' is an unlikely
breeding ground for innovative playwrights. Nestled in the conservative,
well-groomed Dallas suburb of University Park, it is best known as a feeder for
the network of businessmen and professionals who hold sway in the Southwest.

And professional theater in Dallas does not provide many good models for S.M.U.
students. There are half a dozen permanent repertory companies in Dallas, none
very distinguished. Even the 22-year-old Dallas Theater Center, the best endowed
and most heavily subscribed in the city, did not open its auditions to Equity
actors until last October.

Observers of the arts in Dallas speak dismayingly of a ''brain drain'' of S.M.U
playwriting talent. Paul Baker, managing director of the Theater Center,
solicits new plays from around the country, but none of the better known S.M.U.
playwrights has felt compelled to send him one.

Instead they have turned their eyes to the Actors' Theater of Louisville, where
nearly all their first plays - including ''The Gin Game,'' ''Lone Star,'' ''The
Bridgehead'' and ''Crimes of the Heart'' - were given their first or second
productions. ''Louisville audiences are just as conservative as Dallas
audiences,'' said Mr.  McLure. ''It's just that an artistic director like Jon
Jory can make it work in Louisville. There's no limit to what Dallas theater
could be with a leader like him.''

But Dallas has a tradition of fine theater, dating back to the seminal work of
Margo Jones in the late 40's and 50's, and that tradition has been kept alive at
S.M.U. It was Miss Jones who introduced much of the work of Tennessee Williams
and now, in the Margo Jones Theater, S.M.U. recently presented a highly praised
revival of ''Summer and Smoke,'' 34 years after the play was first produced here
by Miss Jones.

Since S.M.U. does not offer a degree or a major in playwriting, it would appear
that it is nature rather than nurture that is most responsible for the recent
crop of young dramatists. But all the writers point to a balanced program in
acting, directing and design - one that Mr. Flaherty calls ''nearly suicidal in
intensity'' - as the training that made their writing possible. Miss Henley
attributes her success partly to her acting classes under S.M.U.'s Jack Clay.
And Mr. McLure, when comparing notes with students from other schools, concludes
that ''we worked harder, and learned more.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Stephen Schnetzer and Giulia Pagano

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEET THE 'GOLDEN BOYS' WHO MAKE ITALY'S NEW FILM COMEDIES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 7, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1835 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Melton S. Davis frequently reports on the arts in Italy.

By MELTON S. DAVIS
ROME Five men, taking a quick test for jobs as draftmen, must draw a tree. Four
produce simple black and white sketches of shriveled little trees. The fifth
turns in a small masterpiece of color and form: a luxuriant, flourishing tree.
The first four are hired, the fifth is turned down.

This is the beginning of ''Ratataplan,'' a picture made by Maurizio Nichetti, an
example of the new kind of comedy emerging in Italy to increasing popularity.
Among the creators of these works are four filmmakers who write, direct and
appear in their own comedies.  They're called the ''Golden Boys'' of the Italian
cinema, and each has his distinctive style. Nanni Moretti is the caustic
generational humorist. With a mop of black hair, his brown eyes gleaming wildly,
he looks like the product of Europe's rebellious 1968 he limns.  Thirty-three
year old Maurizio Nichetti is a former architect from Milan. Short and skinny,
with hair jutting in all directions, his thick mustache and thicker glasses give
him an owlish appearance perfectly in tune with the madcap humor that is his
specialty.  Thirty-five year old Carlo Verdone, stocky and cherub-faced, is
mainly a humorist with words - cabaret moved outdoors. The most successful of
all, Massimo Troisi, 27, tall, thin, clean-cut, brings Neapolitan farce up to
date.

This flock of new moviemakers has given Italy hope of a second team to masters
like Fellini, Antonioni, Rosi and Bertolucci. Almost a quarter of all pictures
produced in the country this year were by directors who have made no more than
three. And, in a reversal of the past, some of these new works have been
outgrossing American movies, longtime favorites in Italy.

The new comic trend was kicked off in 1976 by Nanni Moretti, whose first
picture, made in Super-8, cost $3,000. It was with his second, two years later,
made with friends, that recognition came. Mr.  Moretti uses the language of his
post-'68 generation, while kidding the concepts. He was the first to laugh at
the Left, espoused by many of his contemporaries. In his latest film, ''Golden
Dreams,'' which won a Golden Lion at the 1981 Venice Film Festival, he shows
grimly marching demonstrators brandishing banners that say, ''Vietnam will
win.'' They advance menacingly to an obsessive military drumbeat, then suddenly
burst into song and become a jiving chorus line. Mr.  Moretti, playing the role
of a young director, Michele, who is making a film called ''Freud's Mama,''
carries on a rivalry with another young director while coping with personal and
work problems. It is sort of a young man's ''8 1/2,'' inventive and
autobiographical.  ''Mine is a personal cinema,'' he says, ''My characters'
defects are mine, they're neurotic, hysterical and violent.'' According to the
Italian critic Guglielmo Biraghi, the movie editor of Rome's ''Il Messaggero,''
''Moretti is representative of the upper middle class, coming across as
arrogant, although this may be a cover for shyness.''

Adds the young critic Claudio Quarantotto: ''Moretti gets his laughs through
timing, the cliche phrases he uses become uproarious and his pauses are superb.
He's a master at the ridiculousness of everyday situations.'' The Italian
director Gianluigi Polidoro, now making pictures in the United States, agrees,
''Moretti is complex, biting; he judges Italian reality as absurd.''

The trend was confirmed when Maurizio Nichetti's ''Ratataplan'' - completely
mimed - was shown at the Venice Festival in 1979.  Spectators carried the
actor-author out of the Palazzo del Cinema in triumph. ''I shot it,'' he says,
''in 16 millimeter with $100,000.  After a lot of trouble, I found a distributor
willing to take the risk. If you can call it a risk, seeing he made over $4
million.'' His second picture, ''Splash,'' is an almost silent satire on
advertising that is halfway between surrealism and the grotesque. It tells of
young people trying to find their place in a modern society. ''The public,'' he
says, ''no longer goes for the commedia all'italiana, the Italian-style comedies
of 20 years ago; it wants the tics and neuroses of the 80's.''

The film critic Guglielmo Biraghi thinks that Mr. Nichetti's pictures stem from
the silent movies of Mack Sennett, only that the characters are involved in the
upper mobility typical of today's Milan.

The next success was of a Roman stage-TV comic, Carlo Verdone, whose low-budget
''Life is Beautiful,'' backed by the father of spaghetti westerns, Sergio Leone,
made almost $3 million. Mr. Verdone plays various characters who seem grown up
children, sad and clumsy, muddleheaded and innocent. ''The public wants to
laugh,'' he says, ''but comedies must show the reality of today's youth and not
repeat the themes of the 80's.'' In his calm, placid manner, he admits he
directed his first film because no one else would, ''Earlier, I was assistant
director in three pictures and made documentaries.'' This shows in Mr. Verdone's
skilful handling of sketches. In his second picture, ''Black, White and
Verdone,'' he's first a mute Italian worker in Germany who returns to Italy and
is fleeced of everything he owns by his countrymen. Then he's a bedeviled young
man who takes his cantankerous grandmother to vote, and finally an overly
pedantic husband whose wife eventually leaves him. The story lines, the grimaces
and the comicality of other characters make for hilarious viewing.

For the critic Claudio Quarantotto, Mr. Verdone's comicality, like that of his
confreres, has its roots in the past. ''His changing faces and personalities are
like Italy's hallowed comedian Fregoli, his situations stem from the third
century B.C. playwright Plautus.''

The newest of the ''Gang of Four'' is Massimo Troisi, whose first effort has
broken national boxoffice records. Intelligent and shy, he looks, in fact, like
an average young Neapolitan. But, he says, ''My protagonist is different from
the superficial characterizations usually found in films about Neapolitans.''

Part of a comedy trio, he was asked to act in other people's stories, or with
well-known directors. ''But since I felt I had something to express, I directed
myself. I knew even the best director would try to change my script, direct me
towards what is held to be public taste.''

Mr. Troisi's picture, ''I'm Starting From Three,'' a simple sentimental comedy
which cost $450,000, is becoming the second highest grossing Italian film of all
time. It concerns a young Neapolitan who goes north. Asked if he's startings
from zero, he answers, ''No, I've already done a couple of things, so I'm
starting from three.'' In Florence, he's caught up in the clash of two cultures.
When he's identified as coming from Naples, people say, ''Oh, you're an
immigrant.'' Mr. Troisi's face contorts into a grimace of distaste which then
dissolves into pride as he says, ''Me? I'm a tourist.'' He then meets a
''liberated'' Florentine who invites him to move in with her.

Mr. Quarantotto says that Mr. Troisi's is behavioral comedy in the Neapolitan
tradition. ''He goes back to commedia dell'arte as a modern Pulcinella no longer
concerned with eating spaghetti but with the larger aspects of life. For
instance, in the picture, he must decide whether or not to marry the girl he
thinks is expecting someone else's child.''

Most critics agree that the success of all four is due to the particular period
in which they have emerged. Youth identifies with them, as they're less
sophisticated than their predecessors and they criticize society. Mr. Biraghi
believes the reason the four have won their following is their use of live
language. ''They're closer to the people and they themselves are alive; besides
which they're new.  Today, people go to movies to forget, to laugh. Someone
else's troubles are always consoling, and all four of these directors portray
losers. And if you live with the Red Brigades you don't want to see them on the
screen.''

Besides, a new climate of encouragement in Italy has made their popularity
possible. Awards such as the Rizzoli Prize are given annually to new directors.
At this year's Venice Film Festival, four out of the five Italian entries in
competition were by new directors, and the 1981 Taormina Film Festival for the
first time was reserved exclusively for new works. Of course, France has had its
Young Cinema Festival at Hyeres, not far from Cannes, for 17 years. But St.
Vincent, in Italy's French-speaking border region, has announced an
international film comedy festival in 1982, which will hopefully give other
directors a chance to immortalize the new Italian comedy.

Some of the older moviemakers are perplexed. ''Earlier comedies,'' says
Francesco Rosi, ''gave a portrait of Italy; those of today seem to come from an
unknown planet.'' Another director, Carlo Lizzani, explains this by saying,
''We're undergoing a transformation of society. The new image is that of an
industrialized country, and the younger directors seem better equipped to depict
this.''

Obviously, life is very different for the average Italian than for Americans.
Many lead lives of noisy desperation, so that beneath the surface of a
free-spending people (''Who knows what will happen tomorrow?'') insecurity is a
constant companion, with anxiety hanging heavily in the air. Galloping
inflation, arrant terrorism, largescale corruption, indiscriminate crime,
crippling strikes, unemployment - particularly among the young - all violently
erode stability.

These difficulties complicate the grim task of survival.  Fortunately, as they
have for centuries when times get worse, Italians turn to individualism. They
may believe in little, but the single person is paramount - and these new movies
are about individuals, average ones. The topical satire of the 60's has been
replaced by a less political but possibly more profound view of the individual's
relation to society.

The new comedy directors delight in making fun of the contemporary Italian
scene, but they do it in a more intimate way than their predecessors. There are
no hidden meanings, no intellectualizing, a minimum of slapstick and few
gadgets. If there's any one thing common to their pictures, it's innocence, and
even when they spear foibles, they remain filled with human warmth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE JOBS THAT WON'T COME BACK

BYLINE: By WINSTON WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2043 words

DATELINE: JOLIET, Ill.


LIKE hypersensitive economic bellwethers, the old smokestack towns of the East
and the Middle West have for many years foreshadowed what economists call
America's ''slow economic rot.'' This sulfur-filled town 40 miles southwest of
Chicago is no different. It emerges weaker from each recession than it did from
the last, and it is likely to do the same this time around, too.

The gradual degeneration of Joliet became apparent when the Vietnam War ended. A
local munitions factory closed, stripping 7,000 jobs from this community of
78,000 jobs. A few years ago the United States Steel Corporation shut an old
mill, and Texaco Inc. mothballed an obsolete refinery here, idling hundreds more
workers.

New little businesses had come along to take up some of the slack when the
automobile and housing industries entered their prolonged slumps more than two
years ago. Unemployment, which reached 11.3 percent locally last month, is
rising again as Caterpillar Tractor, GAF, Dow Chemical, Mobil and Olin Mathieson
and others trim production and lay off additonal workers because of the current
recession.

In recent weeks throughout the industrial belt and in much of the country,
hundreds of communities are confronting events similar to Joilet's.
Manufacturing plants are shutting down in Louisville, Ky.  Ore miners are being
laid off in Minnesota. Aircraft production is winding down in Seattle and
Wichita, Kan., and textile output is falling in New England.

Unemployment in the nation jumped to 8.4 percent last month, higher than had
been expected, and public officials are concerned that many of these jobs may
disappear forever, leaving unemployment at high levels for some time to come.
And a number of social activists, noting that many public programs such as
unemployment compensation, CETA and trade readjustment assistance have been
trimmed in the Federal budget cutbacks, are predicting unusually harsh times
even for a recession.

''The implications of a renewed recession are particulary serious for Illinois
and the neighboring Great Lake states'' where much of the nation's manufacturing
is concentrated, said Roland Burris, controller for the State of Illinois.
''They have yet to fully recover from the recession of the second quarter of
1980.'' In September of this year, he said, the number of jobs in Illinois was
five-tenths of 1 percent below the level of March 1980, just before the 1980
recession began.

Growing unemployment will leave its mark on the rest of the nation, too, experts
say. Rising unemployment will undoubtedly aggravate the Federal deficit, now
officially projected to be in the $40 billion to $60 billion range for the
current fiscal year. According to the Congressional Budget Office, a 1 percent
jump in the unemployment rate increases the Federal deficit by $27 billion as
the falling level of economic activity cuts tax revenues for the Government and
soaring unemployment increases unemployment compensation benefits and other
transfer payments that the Government has to pay out.

And the probability of unemployment going as high as 9 percent and remaining in
the 7.5 to 8.5 percent range for most of next year, as many economist predict,
will also bring mounting pressure on the Administration to alter its economic
program.

In recent months, the recession has spread beyond the automobile industry,
affecting office workers and government employees. General Motors indicated in
Detroit last week that it would lay off 13,000 white-collar workers. In Chicago,
the city announced layoffs of hundreds of health workers and bus drivers.

''These interest rates have to come down,'' said Michael Biernat, an unemployed
carpenter, who chatted with a friend about the housing industry as they waited
in a long line at an unemployment claims office in Joliet. ''The Government
could ease up a little on money,'' he added.

A partner with his brother and father in a small construction company, Mr.
Biernat said he had become disenchanted with Reaganomics. ''The election was
supposed to bring the rates down, but they went up,'' he said. ''It looks like
they've lost confidence in everything they were trying to do.''

But conservative economists in Washington, who see a labor bargaining calendar
for 1982 that encompasses contracts covering 40 percent of organized labor, say
a sustained period of unemployment is necessary to dampen wage demands and to
cool inflation.

''The most constructive thing that should be done is nothing,'' said Marvin
Koster, a specialist in labor economics at the American Enterprise Institute.
''Anything done now would have adverse consequences later and no immediate
beneficial effects.''

In Washington, officials expect the unemployment situation to correct itself.
The Administration hopes that the interest rates will fall enough next year to
stimulate a recovery.

T HE next round of tax cuts set for June 1982, will put money in the pockets of
consumers and business, insuring a recovery, according to Adminstration
economists. In the meantime, they say, short-term deficits from the recession
should not cause alarm.

Needless to say, that outlook has not gone unchallenged. Many economists say
that even after a recovery, businesses add workers slowly and cautiously and
many managers use slow periods to permanently reduce their work forces.

Laurita Parish, a secretary who was laid off last month from the GAF building
materials plant in Joliet, said she has seen examples of this at GAF since she
started working there a few years ago.

''Every year they lay off people, saying it's temporary,'' she said. ''Only two
people have come back. They worked a few months and were laid off again.'' She
said the office staff dwindled to 17 from 45 during her tenure, while the
production force, at 300 now, is about a third of what it had been.

Others say the large budget deficits will prevent an economic self-correction.
''You're going to have these tremendous deficits from the recession,'' said
Marion Anderson, executive director of Employment Research Associates, a
Lansing, Mich., consulting firm.  ''The Government will be going to the debt
market next year for more than a billion dollars a week. That's going to send
interest rates back up and choke off the recovery.''

Barbara R. Bergman, an economist at the University of Maryland, has questioned
the stimulative effects of the tax cuts, saying they may not lead to high
employment and output because they mostly benefit the rich and will not greatly
stimulate demand for durable goods such as autos and appliances.

At the same time, such developments as U.S. Steel's $6.3 billion bid for
Marathon oil have raised questions about the commitment of big business to such
distressed industries as steel, rubber, textiles and automobiles. During the
last decade tens of thousands of jobs have been lost in these industries to
more-efficient foreign plants and cheaper overseas labor; the tax reductions
were supposed to help win them back.

But even if the tax plan were working according to plan, industrial jobs would
still be disappearing, experts say. Robots have been eliminating jobs in the
auto industry since General Motors started using them at its Lordstown, Ohio,
plant several years ago. And their use has been spreading rapidly to other
industries since then.

The bleak propects for employment are producing louder pleas for help from the
unemployed. ''I'm a conservative myself,'' said Gary Stiller of Waseca, Minn.
''I know we have to save money, but the Government ought to be able to do
something.'' Despite his political leanings, he says he favors some some sort of
public works employment program, recalling that it helped his parents duing the
Depression.

Mr. Stiller, a 42-year-old truck driver who had worked for the same company for
more than 23 years, was thrown out of work last April when his employer,
Herter's, a sporting goods chain, went bankrupt, tying up more than $17,000 he
had in the company's profit-sharing account. With a daughter in college and a
son in high school, the family is surving on the wife's part-time job.

Having drawn his final $86-a-week unemployment check, he is getting despondent.
''It's getting out of hand,'' he said of the recession. ''It looks like the
bottom could drop out.''

Some social activists insist that the bottom could fall out for people if
unemployment remains unusually high for a long period.  Extended benefits, which
sustained some of the unemployed for more than a year during the 1974-75
recession, have been severely curtailed under the Reagan program, making it much
harder to receive benefits past 26 weeks.

Other transfer payments, which are sometimes called ''automatic stabilizers
because they prevent a recession from spiraling downward into a depression, have
been cut also. In addition to welfare and food stamp cuts, there have have been
changes in trade readjustment assistance and the Comprehensive Employment and
Training Act.

And many of the supplemental funds of the auto, rubber and steel companies,
which add to the income of furloughed workers, are close to depletion beacuse of
the prolonged slump in those industries.

The unemployed defend these programs vigorously. ''If it weren't for
unemployment compensation, I would have missed a few mortgage payments,'' said
Mr. Biernat, the Joilet carpenter, who is single. He insists that he would much
rather work than collect the payments.  But, he says, his company has not built
a house in three years, and they have had to settle for small, occasional
remodeling jobs, which are now becoming even more scarce.

T HE cutting back on transfer payments and the scaling back of subsidies to the
unemployed by the Federal Government has another purpose besides saving Federal
dollars. ''The theory is that the stabilizers have taken away people's incentive
to work at certain wages and for companies to lower prices,'' said George
Schwartz, the associate director of research for the United Automobile Workers.

Next year, labor contracts covering the auto, trucking, rubber, construction,
electrical equipment, oil refining and food processing and production industries
will be negotiated. The Administration is counting on the swelling ranks of the
unemployed and the reduction in Government benefits, including the denial of
food stamps to strikers, to moderate wage demands.

The economy's poor performance has already caused unions of railroad, airline
and automobile workers to offer concessions to troubled companies. And
individual workers seem willing to experiment with lower pay within limits.

Mrs. Parish, the furloughed secretary at GAF, said she would accept a job paying
as low as $5.50 an hour, down $3 an hour from her old rate. Mr. Biernat has
considered moving to Miami or Houston to find work as a carpenter, but the $6 to
$8 an hour that he could make in the Sun Belt is less than half the local scale
of $13 to $17 an hour.

Liberal political groups in the area are saying they hope to mount enough
pressure before next year's Congressional election to prevent the unemployed
from making such dire sacrifices. National People's Action, a Chicago-based
activist group that has taken the Federal Reserve to task at a series of ''town
meetings'' it sponsored around the country with the central bank, says it is now
turing its attention toward organizing the unemployed.

''What this country has to see is a lot of angry unemployed people demonstrating
and demanding jobs,'' said Gail Cincotta, executive director of the group. ''We
learned some things in the 60's - how to organize people and how to build
coalitions. Without organization we would run the risk of something happening
spontaneously. This could be a rough summer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of an unemployment line grph of the jobless rate
from 1970 to 1981 table of the industries with highest unemployment

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHRISTMAS IS A VIDEO GAME

BYLINE: By SANDRA SALMANS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2291 words


L ITTLE round heads, pink, brown, freckled, frowning heads, pile up on trays at
the East Aurora, N.Y., factory, where they are grafted - at a rate of 150 per
minute - onto inch-high, peg-like bodies. These are the ''little people'' of
Fisher-Price Toys, the characters who since 1968 have populated countless
play-set farms, carousels and, lately, jetliners - all for the preschool crowd.
''We sell almost a predetermined amount each year,'' said Charles Riter, vice
president of research and development.

In the toy industry, the little people are what are known as staples, items that
have sold steadily for years. It is staples, plus video games, the latest gift
of electronic technology, that are keeping the industry rolling this Christmas.

Squeezed by the recession and bored with hand-held electronic games, consumers
have turned a bit schizoid this year, going back to lower-priced basics on one
hand and the high-technology, high-priced video game, the household answer to
the popular, quarter-a-game arcade machine, on the other. ''Video is hot,'' said
Thomas Kully, a toy industry analyst with William Blair & Company in Chicago.
''It's taking sales from not only the portable electronic games, but may also be
making board games rather mundane these days.''

And despite the slide in hand-held electronics games, electronics are becoming
an integral part of child's play. Even Fisher-Price, a division of the Quaker
Oats Company that has historically spurned more fashionable merchandise in favor
of durability and ''play value,'' is applying electronics ''where it makes good
products better,'' said Franklyn Barry Jr., president of the toy company.

Its two biggest money makers, in fact, are a phonograph and a tape recorder,
both equipped with microprocessors. This Christmas, the company expects to sell
as many of them as it can make. ''We see them becoming staples,'' Mr. Barry
said. ''Electronics are here to stay.''

Across the board, however, the toy makers are as susceptible to changes in the
economy as to technological trends. Final tallies can't be made before Dec. 25,
but most orders for this Christmas have already been shipped, and the signs so
far are that while the industry is outperforming the economy, it is not doing so
by much.

In a survey of its members, the Toy Manufacturers of America, a New York-based
trade association, found a 13.7 percent increase in the value of manufacturers'
shipments in the first three quarters of this year. Domestic shipments at the
end of last year were $4.6 billion which, according to the T.M.A., translates to
$6.3 billion at the retail level. After inflation, that would represent a modest
increase of about 3 percent.

Furthermore, the video explosion accounts for much of the expected sales gain
and that has basically been divided between two manufacturers: Atari, a division
of Warner Communications, and Mattel, one of the nation's largest toy companies,
which makes the Intellivision game.

Still, many of the industry's nonelectronic, standard toys are enjoying solid
growth - especially when promoted heavily on television. A ''little people''
jetport and a hiking set for young explorers, both introduced by Fisher-Price
this year, are selling 500,000 units apiece. So are such Fisher-Price classics
as the farm play-set, with two-inch-high farmers, and the play desk, a box with
chalkboard and alphabet letters. The baby boomlet has been good for the company,
which, according to Mr. Barry, sells 14 toys to every American home with
preschool children.

In a slightly higher age bracket, the familiar Barbie doll is running 20 percent
ahead of last year in unit sales, in this, her 22d year. ''There will be about 7
million Barbie dolls under the tree this Christmas,'' said Glen Hastings,
president of Mattel Toys U.S.A., Barbie's maker.

Barbie is classic and, analysts say, classics sell best in periods of economic
uncertainty. ''A lot of mothers are going to look at the Dolly Parton, Sasson
and Jordache dolls, and stay with Barbie,'' said Douglas Thomson, president of
the toy association.

Christmas 1981 is also a comeback year for Tiny Tears and Patti Playpal, two
dolls resurrected by Ideal Toy after a hiatus of several years. ''The idea was
to appeal to mothers who had the same dolls,'' explained Stewart Sims, a senior
vice president at Ideal in charge of marketing, adding that the lower prices
also made such purchases more attractive. ''There is some turning back to what
parents remember as the stalwart toys of their youth,'' said Barbara Isgur of
Paine Webber Mitchell Hutchins. ''Standard toys should do well this Christmas.''

So too should some relative newcomers that carry less-thanastronomic price tags.
Rubik's Cube, for example, which has sold more than 10 million units since it
was introduced in 1980, still leads the ''Toy & Hobby World'' magazine hit
parade and has helped move Ideal into the black this year.

Kenner, a subsidiary of General Mills, owns two best-selling toy lines -Star
Wars and Strawberry Shortcake - that may also be on their way to becoming
industry staples; its new hit this year is Fast 111s, die-cast cars with
individually-numbered license plates.

''We appear to have achieved the millenium in what one sets out to do in the toy
business,'' said Bernard Loomis, a large, jowly man who, as president of M.A.D.
(the marketing and design service of General Mills), sits amid an inches-high
cluster of R2D2's, Darth Vaders, Strawberry Shortcakes and Purple Piemen.

''The millenium'' translates roughly into selling a basic, and then piling on
derivative products, year after year. What Strawberry, Darth Vader and Barbie
have in common, apart from millions of advertising dollars, is that they offer
the consumer literally dozens of opportunities to buy. The Star Wars line alone
has more than 50 different figures, said Mr. Loomis, ''and there are kids whose
mission in life is to own them all.''

Increasingly, such childish collectibles are the name of the game.  The
Fisher-Price tape recorder, for example, tends to be more heavily discounted,
while its ''software'' - story books and tapes - sell at higher margins, Mr.
Barry said. ''Our strategy is to put out lines of products, with add-on
possibilities,'' Mr. Hastings said.  ''It's more profitable. It extends the life
of the product.'' The approach makes both retailers and parents happy, toy
makers say.

To apply razor-blade strategy successfully, as toy makers describe the add-on
marketing ploy, one must continually devise new blades.  ''New merchandise is
key,'' Mr. Loomis said. ''The way to keep properties alive is to bring out new
themes and subthemes each year.''

Strawberry's ''second thrust'' next year, for example, will be a ''pet parade''
that will undoubtedly feature a miniature menagerie.  Similarly, Star Wars -
more vulnerable in 1982, as the next movie is a year away - will have a
''dramatic new line,'' Mr. Loomis promised. And Mattel this year is introducing
four new Barbies (bringing the total to nine), as well as a Palamino horse by
the name of Dallas and a pool and sundeck for her house.

These days, the Barbies, including long-time sidekick Ken, are especially
important to Mattel, which, like Milton Bradley, Coleco and several other
toymakers, gambled and lost heavily on the boom in hand-held electronic games.
They saturated the market in 1980, producing huge store inventories at the end
of the year and a dearth of new orders in 1981. Manufacturers' shipments of
portable electronic games, which zoomed from zero base in 1976 to $550 million
in 1980, may drop to $300 million this year, according to Mr. Kully.  In many
cases, analysts say, the make-or-break factor for toy makers this year will be
the degree of their commitment to hand-held electronic games. ''Anyone who was
big in electronic games in 1980 has to get killed in 1981,'' Mr. Kully said.

That does not mean that consumers won't be buying thousands of games of
electronic soccer, football and auto racing this month; on the contrary, as many
units may be sold this year as in 1980. The retailers, left with a huge glut of
hand-held electronic games last Christmas, have slashed prices - in some cases,
by 50 percent - in an effort to clear their shelves. In addition, Mattel has cut
wholesale prices on its second-generation, one-player sports games by $10, or
about 40 percent - a move that Coleco, which makes two-player sports games, has
denounced as ''dumping.''

In the view of some industry analysts, the discounts on electronic games are
affecting sales of other games that are aimed at the same age market. ''The
entire industry is concerned about the depressed prices of electronic games,''
said Mr. Thomson. ''It has hurt board games, as it's very price-competitive,''
said Charles Lazarus, chief executive officer of Toys ''R'' Us, the largest toy
specialty retailer.

Still, although Milton Bradley is trimming by one-third the number of electronic
games it has on the market, Simon - its first, relatively unsophisticated foray
in electronics, has become an industry staple. The Simon family, which includes
pocket-sized and ''super'' versions, is projected to sell more than 1.5 million
units this year. Even some new electronic games ''are having a great year,''
said Mr. Thomson, who singles out PacMan and Space Invaders, both from Entex,
and learning games from Coleco, Mattel and Texas Instruments.

But the area attracting the most attention - from both consumers and the
financial community - is the burgeoning home video game business currently
dominated by Atari and Mattel's Intellivision.  Both companies tend to be coy
about releasing figures - ''we don't want people to know what a gold mine it
is,'' said an Atari spokesman - but Mrs. Isgur projects that Atari will sell 2
million units (at upwards of $139 each, retail) this year and Intellivision will
sell 600,000 (at $240 and up). The game cartridges -43 for Atari, 26 for Mattel,
retailing for $20 and up - are also money spinners.

Competition for the home video market, already intense, is likely to grow
fiercer. For 1982, Atari is planning a ''supermachine,'' to retail at a
suggested price of $336, with more sophisticated graphics and a new library of
cartridges. Intellivision, which claims its current technology is
state-of-the-art, projects sales growth next year of 40 to 50 percent. At
Coleco, ''entry into home video is under very intense consideration at this
time,'' said Arnold Greenberg, chief executive officer, indicating that the
company might have something in time for the January electronics show or the
February toy fair.

Among enthusiasts, home video is being hailed as the industry's savior, capable
of solving problems from the business's cyclical nature to its aging market. But
some analysts are questioning how long sales of high-priced video games can
outrun the recession. And others suggest that the toy makers' destructive
enthusiasm for portable electronic games may repeat itself in video. ''The toy
industry has a great knack for jumping aboard a bandwagon and manufacturing too
much merchandise,'' said Mr. Loomis.
THE RETURN OFG.I. JOE

Months before Christmas 1981, toy makers were already planning for the 1982
holiday season. For the industry, it will open officially in February with the
all-important Toy Fair in New York. A toy at the front of the parade will be a
familiar figure: G.I. Joe.

Introduced in 1964 by Hasbro Industries, a Pawtucket, R.I., toy maker whose
other old favorites include Potato Head and Snoopy Sno Cone, G.I. Joe fell from
grace - and production - six years ago.

His retreat, according to Stephen Hassenfeld, Hasbro's chairman, was due only
partly to the public's Vietnam-era disenchantment with the military. Other toys
- notably the $6 Million Man and the Evel Knievel doll - proved tough
competitors. But perhaps most important was the 11-inch height of the original
Joe (photo left). ''He was difficult to accessorize at attractive price
points,'' said Mr.  Hassenfeld, explaining that the costs of plastic and tooling
were prohibitively high.

Thus, the toy soldier making his debut in February (photo right, profile only
because details are still classified) will be scaled down to 3 3/4 inches, about
the same size as the Star Wars creatures, and sell at a suggested retail price
of $2.99. G.I. Joe will also have shed his World War II uniform, in favor of
accessories ''closer to tomorrow's rapid deployment force,'' Mr. Hassenfeld
said. And there will be a total of 11 recruits, including one woman warrior,
Shana O'Hara (code-named Scarlet), in counterintelligence.

As an extended product line, G.I. Joe will enable Hasbro to deploy the add-on
strategy beloved of toy makers such as Mattel and Kenner - whose Star Wars
characters are viewed as direct competitors. Still, Mr. Hassenfeld is not
counting his sales before they multiply. ''You can't force issues,'' he said.
''There's a lot of magic that has to come together for a line to work.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of xylophones at the Fisher Price factory photo of
G.I.Joe graph of toy sales from 1977 to 1981 graph of toy makers' major products
andrevenue in millions photo of Franklyn Barry Jr., president of Fisher-Price

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SCHOLARS TURN A COLDER EYE ON CHINESE REPRESSION

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1329 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


In the past two weeks, Americans followed with dismay the latest chapter in the
plight of Andrei D. Sakharov and his wife, Yelena G. Bonner, the Russian
dissidents who were conducting a hunger strike to protest Soviet authorities'
refusal to allow their daughter-in-law to emigrate. In this country, persecution
of Soviet dissidents frequently becomes front-page news. The Gulag Archipelago,
the Soviet system of forced labor camps has become synonymous with the moral
horrors of totalitarianism. Dissidents such as the Sakharovs, Alexandr
Solzhenitsyn or Anatoly Shcharansky have at various times become practically
household names and American groups often agitate on their behalf, sometimes
with successful results.

There has been no similar reaction to the widespread political persecution of
intellectuals in China. Probably no more than a handful of Americans know the
name of Lao She, one of China's most popular writers, who was drowned in the
late 1960's by Red Guards in a Peking lake. He was the author of a poignant
novel, ''Rickshaw Boy,'' about the tragic life of a rickshaw puller in pre-1949
China.  There have been no outcries about recent attacks in the Chinese press on
a prominent writer, Bai Hua, who wrote a movie that questions how successful the
Communists have been. Bai Hua has been forced to make a self-criticism and his
fate is unclear.
Culpable Silence?

Have Americans had a double standard when it comes to the Soviet Union's and
China's treatment of dissidents? Merle Goldman, a professor of history at Boston
University and author of a new book, ''China's Intellectuals: Advise and
Dissent,'' believes the answer is a culpable yes. Other China specialists argue
that Americans' different attitudes toward Moscow and Peking are based on
slowness in understanding China or on Chinese Communists' less brutal methods of
control.

John K. Fairbank, professor emeritus of Chinese history at Harvard, said he does
not believe there is a double standard because ''there are real differences in
style between the Russians and the Chinese, even if the Chinese still have their
security police and labor camps.'' The Chinese have made a ''public confession''
about the atrocities of the Cultural Revolution, unlike anything in Russia, and
have made a greater effort to correct past abuses than the Soviet Union.

But Mrs. Goldman, in an article in the current issue of the Radcliffe Quarterly,
charges that ''like those who knew about the Holocaust, my colleagues and I in
the China field did not speak out loudly and publicly about the persecution of
intellectuals'' in the anti-rightist campaign of 1957 and the Cultural
Revolution in the late 1960's. ''A whole generation of westernized intellectuals
were decimated,'' she observes - professors, scientists, doctors, lawyers,
artists, writers and architects. ''The institutions they helped to create - the
universities, research institutes, journals, libraries and other creative
enterprises, were also decimated,'' she said.
Ignoring Grim Facts

There are no overall government figures on the number of Chinese intellectuals
persecuted since the Communist triumph in 1949, but there are some indications.
A knowledgeable Chinese editor told Mrs.  Goldman, who is also an associate of
the Center for East Asian Research at Harvard, that between 400,000 and 700,000
intellectuals were arrested, imprisoned or sent to work in the countryside
during the anti-rightist movement alone in 1957-58. Only in 1978, two years
after the death of Mao Zedong, were the last group of these people, 110,000,
released from prison or labor reform camps, according to a Chinese Communist
Party document.

The Cultural Revolution of 1966-1976 engulfed an even larger number of people,
including party officials, army officers and factory managers as well as
intellectuals. The People's Daily, the Communist Party newspaper, once reported
that 100 million people were affected by the Cultural Revolution. In a speech in
1979, Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, disclosed that 2.9 million people
purged or imprisoned during the Cultural Revolution had since been
rehabilitated.

By comparison, in the Soviet Union today there are perhaps 10,000 or at most
several tens of thousands of political prisoners being held in the Gulag
Archipelago, aside from ordinary criminals. That is the estimate of Joshua
Rubinstein, the New England coordinator for Amnesty International and author of
''Soviet Dissidents, The Struggle for Human Rights,'' a book published last
year.

Political persecution in China reached such proportions, Mrs.  Goldman writes,
that Chinese who have survived ''describe their experience as comparable to the
Holocaust.''

That analogy, she said, is not entirely correct. ''Millions of people were not
killed systematically. Though Mao and his supporters set the anti-intellectual
tone,'' she observed, ''the persecution of the intellectuals was due more to the
chaotic nature of the time than to an organized government policy.''

But, Mrs. Goldman added, ''the situations were comparable'' in at least one
respect because, like the Jews in the Second World War, ''the intellectuals were
persecuted primarily for what they were, rather than for what they did.''
Reasons and Illusions

''Where were the Western China scholars when this calamity befell our
intellectual colleagues in China?'' Mrs. Goldman asks. ''We can't plead
ignorance; the Chinese newspapers were filled day after day with pictures of
intellectuals being paraded through the streets in dunce caps. As in the
Holocaust, we knew but we didn't want to believe. It was too horrible.''

Mrs. Goldman offers several reasons for Americans' greater severity toward the
Soviet Union. For one thing, she noted, it is frequently said that ''those who
study the Soviet Union hate it, while those who study China love it.'' ''We
scholars of China are enamored of its history, culture and people,'' she said.
''We didn't want to believe that a country that had developed such a high level
of civilization could be so cruel to its intellectuals.''

In addition, Mrs. Goldman contends, many Americans wanted to believe that Mao
and the Communists ''really had the answer to China's problems after so many
years of chaos, famine and weakness.'' In particular, some Americans on the far
left, dissillusioned by the Vietnam War and Watergate, looked on Mao's calls for
revolution and egalitarianism as a model for the United States, she said.

For those wanting to study in China itself, there may have been practical
considerations as well. As the United States moved toward normalization of
relations with Peking in 1979 and as it appeared possible that China scholars
would be able to see the country ''from which they had been barred since 1949,''
Mrs. Goldman noted, ''most did not want to jeopardize their chance to get a
visa.''

Michel C. Oksenberg, a professor at the University of Michigan and a member of
the National Security Council under President Carter, says he is troubled that
Americans may have a double standard toward Moscow and Peking but he believes it
is really a matter of American lateness in comprehending China.

The United States did not have diplomats, journalists or scholars in China
during the Cultural Revolution, he pointed out, and it is only recently, after
the normalization of relations, ''that we are getting a fine-grained feel of
China.''

In historical terms, Mr. Oksenberg added, the Cultural Revolution was more like
Stalin's vast purges in the 1930's when Americans who did not understand the
Soviet Union well were not as vociferous as they are now about human rights in
Russia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Chinese criminals being displayed during
Culteral Revolution photo of Andrei Sakharov and Yelena Bonner in Gorky

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NOOSE MEDIA BILL

BYLINE: By Frank Snepp

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: ,2,460,0Congress seems dead set on passing a ''names


of-agents'' bill that would make it a crime for anyone, even a journalist
working from public sources, to expose undercover United States intelligence
operatives. The question is, Why? Last year, the Supreme Court handed down a
ruling against me, in U.S. v. Snepp, that makes the bill all but redundant.

The Court's decision arose out of my failure to seek the approval of my former
employer, the Central Intelligence Agency, for ''Decent Interval,'' a book I'd
written about it. Though the Government never accused me of publishing anything
confidential, the Court decided that I had violated both a C.I.A. secrecy
agreement and an implicit ''fiduciary's'' obligation of trust by sidestepping
the C.I.A.'s censors. By way of punishment, the Court gagged me - that is,
deprived me of my right to write, without C.I.A. approval, about the espionage
business

- and stripped me of all my royalties.  Superficially, the case looked like a
simple breach-of-contract action. It wasn't, thanks to the Court's reliance on
the ''fiduciary'' principle. Even without signing a secrecy contract, the Court
indicated, a Government employee can become subject to official censorship
simply by assuming a position of trust.

You don't have to be a lawyer to appreciate what this means. In effect, the
Court gave the executive branch a free hand to regulate the speech and literary
output of any Government employee or exemployee.

But the fallout from the ruling wasn't limited to the Federal bureaucracy.
Traditionally, under the judicial concept of fiduciary duty, not only is the
''trusted'' employee liable for any breach of ''confidence'' or ''trust,'' so is
anyone who collaborates with him.  In my case, the Government considered suing
my publisher, Random House. It didn't, for fear of provoking a news-media
backlash. Even so, the option was there.

Just before leaving office, President Carter's Attorney General, Benjamin R.
Civiletti, had second thoughts about the legal monster spawned by my case, and
issued guidelines limiting the ways in which the Supreme Court's ruling might be
applied. But last September, the Reagan Administration revoked those guidelines.
Commenting recently on the action, Mr. Civiletti interpreted it as proof of his
successor's ''desire to pursue Snepp suits against any present or past
(Government) employee and any newspaper or publication....''

Meanwhile, under the ruling in my case, Philip Agee, a renegade former C.I.A.
agent, has been gagged. He can't expose any more C.I.A. operatives, as he has in
the past, without risking a contemptof-court citation and criminal sanctions.
And since Mr. Agee is on the board of advisers of the Covert Action Information
Bulletin, which likewise is given to ''naming names,'' his liability as a
''faithless fiduciary'' may well extend to its editors.  Certainly if the
Government could prove that Mr. Agee contributes actively to their
''names-of-agents'' column, it could use the Snepp precedent to shut down the
publication.

So why are Congress and the Administration pressing so hard for a
''names-of-agents'' bill?  The more generous explanation is that they've
forgotten the Snepp decision and what it stands for. But there may be a more
sinister reason. Snepp affords the media one safeguard that a ''names-ofagents''
bill wouldn't.

In order to silence the press under the precedent arising from my case, the
Government would have to show that a journalist got his offending lead - and it
need not be the name of a C.I.A. agent, or even a secret - from a Government
official or ex-official. The proposed legislation, on the other hand, would
allow for prosecution even if the journalist's source was a book from the public
library.

So much for the sanctity of investigative journalism.  Defenders of the bill say
that it isn't directed at mainstream journalists, and have attempted to build
protective caveats into both the Senate and House versions. The caveats amount
to little more than a litmus test of a journalist's ''intent'' (if he's
demonstrably anti-C.I.A., he gets clobbered). A far better guarantee of press
freedoms, and free speech, would be a scrapping of the bill altogether.

With the Snepp decision in its armory, the Government has more than enough legal
firepower to stop those against whom the bill is ostensibly aimed. Its passage
therefore would be an act of political cynicism, and one with a terrible message
for us all. It would mean that Congress and this Administration are merely using
the Agees and their ilk as pretexts for mounting a massive and totally
gratuitous assault on the press and the First Amendment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Frank Snepp, who was a Central Intelligence Agency analyst in Vietnam and wrote
about American blunders there, is is writing a book about national security and
the law.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IRVING KRISTOL: PATRON SAINT OF THE NEW RIGHT

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman; Walter Goodman writes frequently on American
political and social issues. He is the author of ''The Committee,'' a history of
the House Committee on Un-American Activities.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 90, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5556 words


The truth is that ideas are all-important.'' So wrote Irving Kristol a few years
ago for the magazine of a small liberal-arts college in Michigan that won his
heart when it spurned Federal aid. Similar tributes are wafted annually over
green lawns by recipients of honorary degrees who wouldn't know an idea from a
tax deduction, but the ideas that Kristol purveys can be felt today in tax cuts
and budget cuts, in the movement toward deregulation and away from social
programs, in breaks for the well-to-do and aches for the poor. The ideas that
inspire the Reagan Administration are hardly the invention of Irving Kristol, as
he would be the first to concede, but he has turned an assortment of academic
propositions into justifications for a set of White House policies.

''He's done something interesting,'' says Irving Howe, professor at City
University Graduate Center and longtime adversary of Kristol.  ''He's persuaded
the bourgeois managers that ideology matters, that they have a body of thought,
a morality on their side. That's a new thing for corporation people - that they,
too, have an idea and aren't just greedy and selfish. Everybody needs a fix.''

Short, comfortably soft, with graying wavy hair and a round face that betrays
his 61 years, Kristol is today the nation's pre-eminent communicator of the
ideas attached to the movement known as neoconservatism. (A neoconservative, he
tells us, is ''a liberal who has been mugged by reality.'') He does his
communicating through a professorship at New York University, a publishing house
that specializes in the social sciences, a quarterly journal with a skeptical
approach to liberal programs, think tanks of rightward tendency, a monthly
column in The Wall Street Journal and articles elsewhere - and, lately, friendly
connections in Washington.

Ben Wattenberg, a Lyndon Johnson liberal whom Kristol helped to recruit for
service in the neoconservative brigade, uses words like ''facilitator'' to
define Kristol's role. ''He gets this guy a job on that magazine, that guy to
write this article, this guy to teach in that university. He's a great
'mentioner' of the right people to the right people. He's at the center where
the neoboys' network interconnects.''

What does a ''facilitator'' do? Well, consider Kristol's part in the promotion
of the celebrated Laffer Curve, the theory put forward by Prof. Arthur B. Laffer
of the University of Southern California, that a reduction in taxes must
increase Government revenue by stimulating investment. Attracted to the idea in
the early 1970's, Kristol published two articles on the hypothesis in The Public
Interest, a quarterly that he helped to found and continues to edit.  Then he
assisted the author, Jude Wanniski, a writer for The Wall Street Journal, in
getting support for a book on the subject from the Smith Richardson Foundation,
which also contributes to The Public Interest, and from the American Enterprise
Institute, where Kristol is a senior fellow.

The study was published by Basic Books, a firm with which Kristol has long been
associated. The Laffer gospel was conveyed to Representative Jack Kemp, the New
York Republican whose political ambitions Kristol had abetted, and out of that
came the 1977 Kemp-Roth bill to reduce taxes by a third. After the 1980
election, Kemp passed on the good news to David A. Stockman, whose bid for a
Congressional seat had been aided by Kristol in 1975 and who, as the new head of
the Office of Management and Budget, was in a position to turn faith into works.
Despite Stockman's recent confession that he preached the doctrine without being
a true believer, Kristol's confidence in the supply-side approach remains
unshaken. As he sums up the missionary process, ''We persuaded Jack Kemp, who
persuaded Ronald Reagan. Reagan saw that the supply-side thesis had political
possibilities.''

Kristol sees possibilities in people as well as in ideas.  Forty-year-old
Stephen Miller, whose political odyssey has taken him from the radicalism of
Herbert Marcuse to the democratic socialism of the magazine Dissent to the
neoconservative American Enterprise Institute, confesses, ''I owe 99 percent of
my career to Saint Irving. He took an hour of his time to talk to me when I was
trying to find a job in New York. I didn't know him, and I wasn't even a
conservative. There are 15 or 20 people who would tell you the same thing. In
this world, Irving is a mover and shaker, and he goes out of his way to help
young people. Now I'm working on a book about political economy. Irving has
certainly shaped my thinking, pushed me along in that direction. He brainwashed
me.''

Kristol is a private sort of public figure. He shuns television appearances on
the grounds that the medium is not fit for ideas, but he enjoys watching the
occasional prizefight and detective shows like ''The Rockford Files.'' He
neither makes nor follows the social pages. His dinners out are mainly with old
friends: ''It's not easy to have a pleasant evening among people with whom you
have sharp political differences.''

He is cutting down on his lucrative lectures to business groups so that he can
stay at home more with his wife, the historian Gertrude Himmelfarb. (Their two
children, a son and a daughter in their 20's, are off on their own.) He is not
much of a theatergoer and no movie buff. His reading is heavy on mysteries,
economics, philosophy and public affairs - except, he says, for pieces like this
one, about Irving Kristol, which he ignores.

Notwithstanding, he cooperated affably in the present endeavor. We met several
times in the lived-in living room of his spacious apartment, with its splendid
view high over Central Park South. The Kristols moved there a few years ago from
the West Side - fabled neighborhood of the liberal intelligentsia from which he
has strayed. Settled in an armchair, puffing the customary cigarette, Kristol
made an easy, sedentary figure; no hint here of jogging or any less fashionable
exertion. ''I live,'' he said, ''a civilized bourgeois life.''

Nor was there, in his answers, much of the combative spirit that imbues his
prose. He advanced his views in a matter-of-fact manner that suggested that any
demurral was evidence of special pleading or feeble mindedness. His central
point, as always, was that the free market, even in the diluted form that we
know it, is the surest means yet devised to increase our material well-being at
the same time that it sustains our freedom.

His tone is the same at his weekly class at the N.Y.U. Business School, where,
as Professor of Social Thought, he lectures on ''Capitalism: Its Defend-ers and
Its Critics.'' On the afternoon I attended, he was a vision of conservatism in
his well-cut gray suit, tolerant of student interruptions and given to dry
asides. On the values of bourgeois society: ''No bourgeois mother raises her son
to die in battle. She raises him to go to medical school.'' As for the males,
''They like to show their courage under conditions where they wouldn't get badly
hurt.'' On women readers of 18th-century English novels: ''A woman reading
Richardson would fantasize about being seduced and raped, then come downstairs
to make dinner.'' On criticism of capitalism in serious fiction: ''You think of
something to undermine capitalism, and a capitalist will make money on it.''

Professor Kristol offered but a single piece of professional counsel to his
auditors, all M.B.A. candidates. ''If you're taking the train up to White Plains
or Chappaqua for an interview with I.B.M. and want something to read, don't
choose a novel. Men of affairs get uneasy about novel readers. It says to them
that you may not have your fantasy life under control.'' A modest acquaintance
with American history confirms that there is little that is new under the sun of
neoconservatism. In economics, it harks back to the 1920's. In foreign policy,
it evokes a spirit that flourished before World War I and again, for a while,
after World World II. Its social policy is heavy with nostalgia for more orderly
times. Insofar as its ideas seem novel, that is a tribute to the liberal
intellectuals who dominated public discourse on these matters for half a
century.

Lionel Trilling once remarked that the only intellectual tradition in America
was liberalism: If you wanted to find a conservative intellectual, you had to go
to England or France. What is new, then, is the resurgence of conservatism with
intellectual trappings, and, for that, Irving Kristol must be granted a fair
share of credit. He has helped to rescue the conservative image from Southern
rednecks, Midwestern blowhards and West Coast kooks, and it is owing in
considerable part to his efforts that conservatism in America no longer fits
Clinton Rossiter's description of it as ''the thankless persuasion.''

Born in Brooklyn in 1920, son of a garment worker who rose to be a
subcontractor, Kristol likes to point out that the neoconservative avant-garde
is made up largely of people who knew poverty in their youth and retain no
illusions about it. As he wrote in Fortune a few years ago, ''Those who have
been raised in poor neighborhoods - the Daniel Patrick Moynihans, Edward
Banfields, Nathan Glazers - tend to be 'tough-minded' about slums and their
inhabitants.'' Those tenderminded sociologists who spring from the middle class,
on the other hand, ''are certain that a juvenile delinquent from a welfare
family is a far more 'interesting' figure - with a greater potentiality for
redeeming not only himself but all of us -than an ordinary, lawabiding and
'conforming' youngster who is from the very same household.''

In 1936, Kristol enrolled in New York's City College, the way up and out for so
many of his place and generation, as well as a pressure cooker of radical
thought for a few. The boiling battles there were not between Democrats and
Republicans, equally dismissed as lap dogs of Wall Street, but between
Stalinists and Trotskyists.  Among the anti-Stalinists could be found such
future professors of distinction as Irving Howe, Seymour Martin Lipset, Daniel
Bell, Nathan Glazer and Irving Kristol.

''I recruited Irving,'' confesses Howe, an unreconstructed social democrat. ''It
was one of my great mistakes. But the experience served him well. He learned to
theorize and conceptualize. He learned the uses of the appearance of a coherent
argument.'' Kristol and Howe meet rarely now, mostly at funerals.

Like others in the group, Kristol soon moved away from Marxism, under the
influence of such premature antitotalitarians as Sidney Hook and James Burnham.
By the end of World War II, in which he served in Europe as a sergeant in the
infantry, he was no longer a socialist. ''The army was important for me. It
taught me how parochial the New York Jewish view of the world was. I came out of
it a liberal, or maybe a neoliberal.''

While most of his City College cohorts went on to advanced degrees after the
war, Kristol found his way into the heady universe of serious journalism. For
the next decade or so, he was associated as writer or editor with relatively
small, relatively liberal ''opinion-molding'' magazines - The New Leader,
Politics, Commentary, The Reporter, Encounter - that shared a resolute
anti-Communism. The deep split on the left in this period was between the
anti-Communists and the anti-anti-Communists, a division that still stirs old
wounds.

Kristol went further than many anti-Communists when he wrote an attack for
Commentary in 1952 on liberals who were then inveighing against Senator Joseph
McCarthy and other Communist-hunters. He flayed the critics for being moved to
indignation over what he viewed as pertinent questions directed by Congressional
investigators at witnesses like the Hollywood 10 but not being moved to disgust
by their impertinent answers. The piece, with its message that liberals were
soft on Communism, struck many liberals as being soft on McCarthyism, and it was
an early sign of sharper divisions to come.

Another episode from those years, still evoked by Kristol's critics, had to do
with the revelation that Encounter, the British-American journal that he founded
with Stephen Spender in London in 1953, was surreptitiously supported by the
Central Intelligence Agency. Kristol at the time still considered himself
vaguely on the left, and the magazine ran pieces by British Socialists like Hugh
Gaitskell and American leftists like Dwight MacDonald. He says that he would not
have taken the job had he known of the C.I.A. backing, but he cannot become
exercised over the matter.  ''In those years,'' he says, ''the Russians were
carrying on a tremendous campaign against America, charging germ warfare and
much else. There was certainly a case for the American Government responding.''
The sensible course, he suggests, would have been for Washington to find private
support for such a magazine.

By the end of the 1950's, when Kristol returned to America, he was dismayed by
the condition of liberalism. ''It seemed to me to have no intellectual energy.
It was clearly headed for trouble.'' The trouble, in his view, flowered in the
1960's with programs like the war on poverty. ''That seemed to me based on a
severe misperception.  It was based on the social psychologist's notion that
what the poor needed was therapy. The idea was to get people 'involved,' get
them to march on city hall as a way of generating self-confidence. It didn't
make sense. And it didn't work.''

Ever tough-minded about celebrations of The People, Kristol turned his scorn on
the celebrants within the predominantly liberal socialscience establishment.
Daniel Bell, a Harvard sociologist and an old pal from City College, shared his
opinion that ''there was a lot of sloppy thinking going around,'' and out of
their joint irritation was born, in 1965, The Public Interest.

''At first,'' Kristol says, ''we were neoliberal - I worked for Hubert Humphrey
in 1968.'' But the forces of what had not yet been named neoconservatism were
gathering steam. Irving Kristol, Nathan Glazer, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, James
Q. Wilson, Seymour Martin Lipset, Roger Starr -these were the names that soon
came to be identified with The Public Interest and its unflattering appraisal of
Great Society nostrums on welfare, criminal rehabilitation, affirmative action
and much else. The magazine's influence, and Kristol's along with it, grew
steadily through a decade of turmoil, as its contributors developed an
alternative to the prevailing liberal outlook.

Had it not been for the explosions of the ''counterculture'' and the ''black
revolution,'' Kristol might have remained vaguely attached to the Democratic
Party, as some neoconservatives still are, but by the end of the 1960's the
liberal alliance had burst asunder.  Among leftist intellectuals there were
those, exemplified for a time in The New York Review of Books, who celebrated
even acts of violence as a justifiable response to the oppressions of ''the
system''; there were those, in Irving Howe's Dissent, who decried this kind of
acting-out; and there were those, in Norman Podhoretz's Commentary, who were
driven or went willingly to the right. Kristol was an advance scout for this
last company.

By the time of George McGovern's nomination in 1972, it was clear to Kristol
that ''liberalism had turned left -the whole political spectrum had moved to the
left. In order to become a neoconservative, all you had to do was stay in
place.'' Daniel Bell, too, marks 1972 as a personal dividing point. Kristol
publicly supported Richard Nixon; Bell came out for McGovern. ''We had bitter
ideological arguments,'' Bell recalls. ''I gave up being co-editor of The Public
Interest, and we remained friends.'' His place was taken by Nathan Glazer, and
the magazine continues to be a scourge of liberal programs.

By now Kristol was entirely out of the conservative closet and starting to enjoy
the perquisites that have a way of solidifying one's attachment to a cause or a
party. He was invited to the White House to discuss policies that had been
treated in The Public Interest. He won the distinction of being ''a Nixon
intellectual.'' He was astounded when Watergate struck, confessing at the time
that he couldn't understand ''the pointlessness of all the lying and scheming,
the paranoia of it.''

What he missed in Nixon's response to Watergate, Kristol wrote in 1973, was
''his evident lack of puzzlement over these bizarre events.'' What some missed
in Kristol's response was his evident lack of indignation or at least
embarrassment. How could a man who was so sharp about the failings of humankind,
in the shape of liberal social scientists, young radicals and black militants,
fall for a Richard Nixon? Was it ideological predilection that prevented him
from recognizing the strains of dishonesty and paranoia that other Nixon
watchers had long since remarked?

He doesn't think so. ''Most of the things Nixon was charged with,'' he says,
''were the same kinds of things that other Presidents had done. The main charge
against him was that he once called Helen Gahagan Douglas a fellow traveler.
Well, she was.''

Kristol's solidarity with business was confirmed in 1972 when he began writing
his Wall Street Journal column -''It's a great platform'' - and it was soundly
institutionalized the following year when he joined the American Enterprise
Institute, which snugly fit his criteria for the kind of operation that
corporations ought to support. Warning his readers that the corporation was
''largely defenseless, a nice big fat juicy target for every ambitious
politician and a most convenient scapegoat for every variety of discontent,'' he
called on them to fight back by putting their money where their interests were.

''When you give away your money,'' he told them, ''you can be as foolish, as
arbitrary, as whimsical as you like. But when you give away your stockholders'
money, your philanthropy must serve the longer-term interests of the
corporation. Corporate philanthropy should not be, and cannot be,
disinterested.'' The corporate world responded; the American Enterprise
Institute's annual budget now runs around $12 million, and Kristol sits on the
boards of five corporations.

Kristol's admirers agree, as one puts it, that ''Irving is not an ideologue.
He's reality-centered.'' His detractors counter that he is not above adjusting
reality - the nature of Richard Nixon, for example - to suit his tastes. The
common complaint against him and other conservatives, neo or no, is that their
compassion is more readily touched by a corporation being badgered to install
safety equipment than by families having a hard time getting along. Kristol
differs from some of his political allies in not pretending to emotions he does
not feel. He warns against ''the unthinking politics of compassion'' as leading
to ''the politics of tyranny.'' He opposes reforms designed to help only the
poor -because, he says, ''dependency tends to corrupt and absolute dependency
corrupts absolutely.'' The purpose of social reform, as he sees it, is ''to
encourage a sense of political community, even of fraternity.'' This logic leads
him to the unorthodox position, for a conservative, of favoring national health
insurance on the grounds that it is designed to help everybody. Yet he wants
further cuts in the school-lunch program because the lunches go mainly to
middle-class children. And, anyway, he adds, ''there's something to be said for
parents making lunch. Kids shouldn't get used to the idea that life is one free
lunch after another.''

Was that a glint in his eye as, 14 floors above the city's miseries, he calmly
composed that provocative sentence for publication in The New York Times
Magazine? Can it be that one of his abiding pleasures is simply baiting the
bleeding hearts?  There is no single work containing the Kristolian canon; his
books are collections of articles. ''I'm a sprinter,'' he says, ''at best a
middle-distance runner.'' Yet he has his recurring themes; one goes like this:

Those people on the left -John Kenneth Galbraith is Kristol's favorite example
-may think of themselves as populists but they are, in fact, elitists who
despise the desires and tastes of the populace. They may call themselves
liberals but they are, in fact, socialists, for they look to Government to cure
every perceived inequity of the system, thereby moving the nation ever closer to
economic stagnation and dictatorship.

The prime promoters and beneficiaries of Government intervention, he never tires
of charging, are the social scientists, social workers, urban planners,
academics and bureaucrats who make up the ever-expanding ''New Class.'' They get
paid for running the programs they promote, and relish the accompanying power.
The fact that their programs don't work never stops them. Epater les clercs!

This ad hominem line does not, unsurprisingly, go down well on the left. Robert
Lekachman, who teaches economics at New York's Lehman College, doubts that
Kristol has much empirical evidence for his generalizations. ''He is probably
thinking of the newer regulatory agencies - on safety, the environment, equal
opportunity - which are staffed by people with that kind of ideological set. But
most of the older agencies are famous for their pro-business attitudes; the
regulators have been captured by their constituencies.''

As for college faculties, Lekachman observes, ''Kristol is indulging in an Ivy
League ethnocentrism. In a few schools, there are a few departments, mainly in
the social sciences, that do tend to be liberal, but the bulk of the faculty in
most places is quite conservative. If you're talking about personal interest, a
young academic can do a lot better for himself these days by associating with
the right-wing think tanks - as many are in fact doing.''

A drift to the right is noteceable among students as well.Some of them may find
themselves being recruited by Irving Kristol. In 1978, with funds from
right-thinking foundations, Kristol and William E.  Simon, the former Secretary
of the Treasury, set up the Institute for Educational Affairs, which spent $1
million this year to nourish conservative publications at Yale, Harvard, Chicago
and other campuses.

Kristol concedes some validity to the left's charges against capitalism, and
occasionally chides businessmen for failing to behave better, especially when it
wouldn't cost them much. But he urges, more forcefully, that they learn to react
''politically'' to political attacks, by supporting organizations like the
American Enterprise Institute.

A.E.I. is a boutique of ideas, serving up custom-made merchandise to a select
clientele. It provides the studies (60 of them last year) required by proponents
of big tax cuts, little regulation, more spending on arms and less spending on
welfare; it publishes books and magazines and distributes radio and Television
shows, and it brings the light to presidents of corporations at four or five
seminars a year. The theme is always ''The Corporation in a Cold Climate,'' and
the message, as Ben Wattenberg summarizes it, ''is that there are people in the
intellectual community who have a common interest with them in defending and
promoting the market economy. We tell them, 'We don't regard you as people who
are out to hurt America.' Irving tells them, 'Get in there and fight!' ''

''When I joined A.E.I.,'' Kristol says, ''it was made up mainly of a few
free-market economists. I wanted to open it up. The Nixon and then the Ford
Administration had no intellectual base; they were desperate for ideas. They
came to us for studies on every major domestic issue. A.E.I. would do the
scholarly analysis, and then do the educational work with Congress and the
media.''

One issue that invited A.E.I.-type scholarship and education was Government
regulation of industry, which, in Kristol's view, ''had clearly gotten out of
hand.'' Kristol was instrumental in creating a Center for the Study of
Government Regulation and a magazine, Regulation, to go along with it. ''We
asked questions like, how can drug regulation be improved? How can the Federal
Trade Commission and the Securities Exchange Commission be made less burdensome?
We played a key part in the movement for deregulation.''

The Reagan Administration has welcomed not only A.E.I.'s ideas but a score of
its card carriers and fellow travelers, notably Murray L.  Weidenbaum, chairman
of the Council of Economic Advisors; David R.  Gergen, White House
communications director, and Jeane Kirkpatrick, United States delegate to the
United Nations.

Kristol gives the Administration passing marks for its economic program - ''I
think it's going to work out'' - and he is willing to put off a balanced budget
in order to buy arms. ''My view is that, given our present situation, more is
better, whether it's tanks or guns or Marines or missiles.'' He is less
impressed with the Reagan record on foreign affairs. He is puzzled, for example,
as to why the flow of arms from Cuba and Nicaragua to El Salvador is permitted
to continue: ''If El Salvador is as important as the Administration says it is,
then we should stop those supplies. Otherwise, it will be another Vietnam.''

Of the Vietnam War he says, ''It wasn't clear to me that we should have gotten
involved, but once involved, we should have done what was necessary to win.'' He
follows up with one of those airy aphorisms that seem designed to provoke his
opponents into a frenzy of righteousness: ''A great power does not permit itself
to be defeated by a small power.'' Kristol is impatient with the guilt felt by
American liberals toward ''poor and distant nations to whom we have never done
any harm,'' and he decries the ''therapeutic ethic'' in both foreign and
domestic policy that responds to troubles by supplying social services to the
troublemakers. Time for another aphorism: ''The earth will be a place where
American ideals are respected only if the world also respects our interests.''

Kristol has joined such friends as Midge Decter, Norman Podhoretz and Jeane
Kirkpatrick on the board of directors of the Committee for the Free World, which
seeks to rouse the West to the Soviet threat, which they see behind terrorist
attacks, ''liberation'' movements and anti-American campaigns everywhere. They
do not take it amiss to be told that their outlook is reminiscent of the 1950's;
neoconservatives tend to be sentimental about that decade, when they were young
and America was confident. Think-tankers on the left, like Richard Barnet of the
Institute for Policy Studies, rejoin that this cold-war approach has been tried
and found wanting: ''The United States is more isolated than it has been since
World War II, owing to policies like those being promoted by Irving Kristol.''

It was in accord with his world view that Kristol's sole written comment on the
case of Jacobo Timerman, the Argentine journalist imprisoned by his country's
security forces, was given over mainly to chastising Timerman for not revealing
the full reasons for his arrest - omitting in his account his close connection
to an alleged financier of Argentine terrorists - and for painting what Kristol
maintains is a melodramatic picture of the condition of Jews in Argentina.

Human rights, Kristol says, is a ''hard subject that should be treated as a
practical, prudential issue.'' This view promises to be represented in the
Reagan Administration. Elliott Abrams, son-in-law of Norman Podhoretz and Midge
Decter, who has been named to replace Pat Derian as Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, is a contributor to The Public
Interest and Commentary. Kristol's A.E.I. colleague, Michael Novak, was named by
Mrs. Kirkpatrick to represent this country at the United Nations human-rights
conference in Geneva. Kristol is happy with these appointments. ''Pat Derian
thought she was Amnesty International. I always prefer quiet diplomacy, with the
U.S.S.R. as well as with Argentina. Quiet diplomacy got an awful lot of Jews out
of Russia.'' There is an assumption around that Kristol is specially concerned
with ''Jewish matters.'' That does not seem to be the case. Although, like other
Jewish supporters of the Administration, he parted with it on the sale of Awacs
to Saudi Arabia, he has never written directly about Israel, and although he
dines occasionally with the Israeli Ambassador, he denies that he has ever
approached anyone in Washington on behalf of a ''Jewish'' cause.

Kristol's Jewishness shows more in lamentations over the diminishing power of
religion in America and the consequent ''inner chaos of the times.'' He says he
is a believer, although ''I don't go to shul as often as I should.'' His
concern, however, is less with the cleansing of the soul than with the cleansing
of society.  ''People need religion. It's a vehicle for a moral tradition. A
crucial role. Nothing can take its place.''

Daniel Bell observes that although Kristol favors a free market responsive to
consumer tastes, he believes that when it comes to social behavior, strict rules
are required to get the masses to act properly. Kristol's social conservatism is
anything but faddish. He is troubled by drugs because they are used by many in
an asocial or antisocial way. He believes that pornography inevitably leads to
sadism, ''and that's a bad habit of mind for citizens to get into.'' He has
written, ''If you care for the quality of life in our democracy, then you have
to be for censorship.''

In his distress over the erosion of the social order and the weakening of
religion, Kristol reflects a Jewish conservatism, centered on family and on law,
that is far older than liberal Jewish attitudes on economic matters.
Prototypical city people, Jews found themselves on the line as the cities
suffered the shocks of the 1960's and 1970's. As a relatively privileged group,
they have interests that are threatened by abrupt change, and they are subject
to all the anxieties that beset a very small minority. So it is not surprising
that America's Jewish intellectuals, once bunched on the left, can now be found
in the van of the neoconservative cause as well.

Kristol, apostle to the gentiles, is translating age-old Jewish concerns into
language that his business auditors can take to heart.  He warns them that the
market economy, for all its benefits, cannot by itself satisfy most people for
very long; it offers no faith or goal that transcends material gain.
Neoconservatism to the rescue!  Michael Novak, A.E.I.'s point man on religion
and Commentary's favorite Roman Catholic, is completing a book entitled, ''The
Spirit of Democratic Capitalism,'' designed, he says, to ''articulate the ideals
inherent in the system.'' Novak is also on the board of a new Institute for
Religion and Democracy and on the editorial committee of a new quarterly
magazine, subsidized by a combination of foundations put together by Kristol,
that will attempt to redeem theologians who have fallen for the anticapitalist
sirens.

How are we to assess Kristol's influence? He pauses over the question. ''I'm not
a political person, not interested in a Government job. When you're an outside
person, as I am, you don't really know what influence you have.'' There are, of
course, all those A.E.I. enterprises and all those contacts with corporation
heads and all those Basic Books by authors who can also be found in The Public
Interest, Commentary and the American Spectator. But what about direct personal
influence on government, especially through former colleagues and students who
have found their way into Reaganland? ''I don't pick up the phone and tell them
how to run the country,'' says Kristol, ''but I will occasionally pick up the
phone, and some people return my calls.''

Kristol picked up the phone recently to talk to some acquaintances in Washington
about the threatened appointment, as chairman of the National Endowment for the
Humanities, of M. E. Bradford, a Texas professor who is too far to the right
even for the neoright. The job went instead to Kristol's choice, William
Bennett, of the neoconservative National Humanities Center.

Looking ahead, Kristol sees increasing polarization in American political
thought, with the dynamic new conservatism represented by himself and Ronald
Reagan confronting a form of neo-Marxism on the left. As for good old
liberalism, which has held stage center for almost 50 years, Kristol delivers an
epitaph: ''What we call liberalism has enacted its agenda; it's falling apart.
The good fight has been fought and won, only the victory is ambiguous. Certain
things didn't respond as they were supposed to. Crime is worse; education is in
trouble. These things are important to people, and liberals have no philosophy
to guide or inspire anybody.''

Liberals may not thank Kristol for this analysis, but they are in no position to
dismiss it. They are in the wings just now, tossing the occasional brickbat at
the neoconservative performers, but with no fresh act of their own. Ideas are
important, and for his part in compelling the left to face up to its past
failures, present weaknesses and future opportunities, even those who cannot
share his values owe some thanks to Irving Kristol.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Irving Kristol in his home study photo of
Elliott Abrams photo of Murray Weidenbaum photo of Jeane Kirkpatrick

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

NOTABLE BOOKS OF THE YEAR

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 12920 words


The following list has been selected from titles reviewed since the Christmas
issue of December 1980. Such a list can only suggest the high points in the main
fields of reader interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject
headings. Quoted comments are from The New York Times Book Review.

Autobiography & Biography

THE ALCOTTS. Biography of a Family. By Madelon Bedell. (Clarkson Potter,
$15.95.) A ''charming popular biography'' of Bronson Alcott - the noted
abolitionist and educator who was a friend of Emerson, Thoreau and Channing -
and of his wife, Abigail May, and their daughter, Louisa May.

ALICE JAMES. A Biography. By Jean Strouse. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.) A
''judicious and beautifully written'' full-length study of the sister of William
and Henry James, the only daughter in the talented, eccentric American family.

AMERICA, LOST & FOUND. By Anthony Bailey. (Random House, $9.95.) A memoir -
''tender as it is truthful, and as amusing as it is unpretentious'' - of the
author's youth as an English exile in America during World War II.

ANDREW JACKSON AND THE COURSE OF AMERICAN FREEDOM. Vol. II: 1822-1832. By Robert
Rimini. (Harper & Row, $20.) Second of three planned volumes in this vivid,
readable and scholarly study of Jackson's life, covering the years through his
first Administration.

ASKING FOR TROUBLE. Autobiography of a Banned Journalist. By Donald Woods.
(Atheneum, $12.95.) Chatty personal account of the career of the South African
white journalist who long fought inside, and is now fighting outside, his
country for the rights of the black majority.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY. Vol. I: Journey East - Journey West. By Mircea Eliade. (Harper &
Row. $17.95.) First 30 years of the life of the celebrated scholar of religions,
years in which he was a journalist, novelist, world traveler and Lothario and
was becoming the visionary he has been known as in his later life.

THE BEECHERS. An American Family in the Nineteenth Century. By Milton Rugoff.
(Harper & Row, $19.95.) Fascinating history of the Rev. Lyman Beecher, his three
wives, and the six very different children born of these unions, children who
included the famous Henry Ward Beecher and Harriet Beecher Stowe.  BERTOLT
BRECHT IN AMERICA. By James K. Lyon. (Princeton, $19.75.) A ''fascinating
study,'' written with ''empathy and reverence,'' of the playwright's six years
in the United States, 1941-47.

A BETTER CLASS OF PERSON. An Autobiography. By John Osborne.  (Dutton, $13.75.)
The most vivid chronicle of the making of an English playwright since Noel
Coward's ''Present Indicative.'' This is an account of Osborne's early years,
before he became famous as the voice of anger in British theater.

BLOOMING. A Small-Town Girlhood. By Susan Allen Toth. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A
''tender and finely textured memoir of growing up'' in Ames, Iowa, as a young
girl in the 1950's.

BRONISLAVA NIJINSKA. Early Memoirs. Translated and edited by Irina Nijinska and
Jean Rawlinson. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $22.50.) An illuminating memoir not
only of her own life as a ballerina but of the life and art of her famous
brother, Vaslav.

CATHERINE THE GREAT. By Henri Troyat. (Dutton, $15.95.) A ''compelling,
brilliantly written'' biography of the Russian Empress.  CHARLOTTE: LIFE OR
THEATER? By Charlotte Solomon. Introduction by Judith Herzberg. Translated by
Leila Vennewitz. (Studio Book/Viking, $75.) Almost 800 haunting gouaches, many
with bits of dialogue or comments by the artist, expressing her life as a child
of a family seared by a history of suicidal depression. Charlotte herself lived
through the horrors of the Nazi pursuit of Jews until she was deported for
death.

CLIFFORD ODETS. American Playwright. The Years From 1906 to 1940.  By Margaret
Brenman-Gibson. (Atheneum, $30.) First of two planned volumes in a monumental
psychobiography (the author is a psychoanalyst) of the often exuberant,
sometimes wild, sometimes tortured artist who was the premier proletarian
playwright of the years between the wars.

COSIMA WAGNER'S DIARIES. Vol. II: 1878-1883. Edited and annotated by Martin
Gregor-Dellin and Dietrich Mack. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $35.)
''Extraordinary and captivating'' details of the composer's life emerge from
this second volume of his wife's voluminous journal.

DAVID O. SELZNICK'S HOLLYWOOD. By Ronald Haver. (Knopf, $85.) An outsized,
lavishly illustrated tome that is a ''spectacular pop culture stunt ... full of
facts and judgments'' about the legendary moviemaker.

DEAREST FRIEND. A Life of Abigail Adams. By Lynne Withey. (Free Press/Macmillan,
$17.95.) Easily readable but carefully written portrait, not only of Abigail
Adams, but of an unusual and unusually sustaining marriage.

ELIZABETH CADY STANTON/SUSAN B. ANTHONY. Correspondence, Writings, Speeches.
Edited by Ellen Carol DuBois. (Schocken, $17.95.) Papers of the most respected
early philosopher of the American feminist movement and of the movement's first
great public leader, which bring to life the 19th-century struggle for women's
rights in a vivid language that speaks directly to our own times.

ELVIS. By Albert Goldman. (McGraw-Hill, $14.95.) Morbidly fascinating biography
of the King of Rock 'n' Roll, with an awesome cataloguing of his personal
degeneration before his death.

GEORGE ORWELL. A Life. By Bernard Crick. (Atlantic/Little, Brown, $17.95.) ''The
first full biographical account'' of Orwell to be written with the cooperation
of his late widow and unlimited access to the Orwell archives.

GRANT. A Biography. By William S. McFeely. (Norton, $19.95.) A ''fascinating
account'' of the magnificent soldier who made one of the worst Chief Executives
in American history. ''Biography at its best.''

THE HAMMONDS OF REDCLIFFE. Edited by Carol Bleser. (Oxford, $19.95.) A
collection of vivid and poignant letters comprising a narrative history of the
Hammond family of Beech Island, S.C., from 1855 to 1938. A family trapped in an
impossible dream of aristocracy.

HENRY JAMES LETTERS. Vol. III: 1883-1895. Edited by Leon Edel.  (Harvard, $20.)
This third volume of Leon Edel's edition of Henry James's correspondence covers
the years of his sister Alice's death and the writing of such novels as ''The
Bostonians'' and ''The Princess Casamassima.''

HIGH TIMES AND HARD TIMES. By Anita O'Day with George Eells.  (Putnam's,
$14.95.) Breezy, moving account of the life of the girl from Chicago who has
been a major jazz singer for four decades.

IPHIGENE. Memoirs of Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger of The New York Times Family As
Told to Her Granddaughter Susan W. Dryfoos. (Dodd, Mead, $14.95.) Recollections
personal and corporate of a lady who, at 89, is the daughter of one publisher of
The Times, the wife of a second, the mother-in-law of a third and the mother of
a fourth.

I REALLY SHOULD BE PRACTICING. By Gary Graffman. (Doubleday, $14.95.) ''Wryly
observed disasters and compensatory wonders'' as remembered by Mr. Graffman, the
concert pianist who ''turns out to be a marvelously light-fingered memoirist''
and a sharp observer of the piano and ''its all-but-human quirks.''

JOHN RUSKIN. The Passionate Moralist. By Joan Abse. (Knopf, $18.50.) Biography
that incorporates the latest scholarship but that concentrates on Ruskin as
reformer rather than as critic.

JOURNEY AROUND MY ROOM. The Autobiography of Louise Bogan.  (Viking, $13.95.) An
''imaginative construction'' - a ''mosaic'' assembled by Ruth Limmer from the
poet's journals, poems, criticism.

THE JOURNEYS OF DAVID TOBACK. By David Toback. As Retold by his Granddaughter
Carole Malkin. (Schocken, $10.95.) David Toback was a Lower East Side butcher
who in the 30's wrote remembrances of his Russian Jewish family from the turn of
the century. Carole Malkin has turned them into a fascinating picaresque novel.

THE KING OF FIFTH AVENUE. The Fortunes of August Belmont. By David Black. (Dial,
$24.95.) Richly told and readable life of the Rhenish immigrant who came to New
York in 1837 and became not only the first Jewish person in high society here,
but in reality the founder and shaper of that society.

THE LAST LAUGH. By S.J. Perelman. (Simon & Schuster, $12.95.) A collection of 17
pieces from The New Yorker. The tailpiece, called ''The Hindsight Saga,'' is
autobiographical and, according to Tom Wolfe, who reviewed the volume, the best
of all Perelman pieces.

LETTERS FROM AFRICA. By Isak Dinesen. Edited by Frans Lasson.  (Chicago, $25.)
The letters reflect not only the life of the writer arriving young and innocent
in Africa and growing into a hurt, sometimes cruel, always courageous artist,
but the rapid evolution of Africa itself into an increasingly industrial and
disturbed continent.

THE LETTERS OF J.R.R.TOLKIEN. Edited by Humphrey Carpenter.  (Houghton Mifflin,
$16.95.) A collection of 374 letters written over 60 years by the creator of
''The Hobbit,'' ''The Lord of the Rings'' and other related legends. Most of
these long letters are about the popular sagas.

A LIFE IN OUR TIMES. Memoirs. By John Kenneth Galbraith. (Houghton Mifflin,
$16.95.) The famed economist's 22d book once again reveals him as a ''raconteur
and a literary stylist,'' though he is ''curiously unrevealing about his inner
life.'' A ''total success'' as entertainment, the book, as history, is a
''modest addition to the public record.''

A LIFE IN TWO CENTURIES. An Autobiography. By Bertram D. Wolfe.  (Stein & Day,
$29.95.) A posthumous autobiography by one of the leading theoreticians of
Bolshevism, a perceptive account of a political life.

A LITTLE ORIGINAL SIN. The Life and Work of Jane Bowles. By Millicent Dillon.
(Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $18.95.) Account of the desperate life of the writer
whose brief but brilliant literary career ended when she was just over 40.

LOST IN AMERICA. By Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Singer called
this arresting memoir ''contributions to an autobiography I never intend to
write.'' Its two central stories are about his progress from Poland through Nazi
Germany to America and his subsequent journey to Canada, made in order to
re-enter the United States with immigration papers more secure than his Polish
documents.

MARIA CALLAS. The Woman Behind the Legend. By Arianna Stassinopoulos. (Simon &
Schuster, $15.95.) A ''lively'' biography, ''loaded with detail'' and containing
''the elements of a juicy libretto,'' that clarifies the tragic elements in the
life of one of the most exciting opera singers of our time.

MATTHEW ARNOLD. A Life. By Park Honan. (McGraw-Hill, $19.95.) A new biography of
the ''great and good man'' of Victorian letters and criticism, this is an
elegant and discerning account of how Arnold continued through his life to grow
- as a man, a writer, a seer.

MORNINGS ON HORSEBACK. By David McCullough. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.)
Beautifully told story of the life of Theodore Roosevelt up to 1886, when he
returned from the Badlands determined to make a career in politics; probably the
best explanation yet of how the ailing, unpromising child became the great
figure known as T.R.

NATIVE REALM. A Search for Self-Definition. By Czeslaw Milosz.  (Doubleday,
$12.95.) The ''beautifully written, elegantly translated'' autobiography of the
Lithuanian-Polish poet who won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1980.

NOTABLE AMERICAN WOMEN. The Modern Period. A Biographical Dictionary. Edited by
Barbara Sicherman and Carol Hurd Green, with Ilene Kantrov and Harriette Walker.
(Belknap/Harvard, $35.) Biographical essays about more than 400 American women
distinguished in many fields, all of whom died between 1951 and 1975.

PALM SUNDAY. An Autobiographical Collage. By Kurt Vonnegut.  (Delacorte,
$13.95.) An ''odd miscellany'' of prefaces, introductions, letters, talks,
reflections and ''what might generally be described as bathtub singing'' by the
popular American novelist.

A ROMANTIC EDUCATION. By Patricia Hampl. (Houghton Mifflin, $11.95.) An
autobiographical memoir by a young poet who came of age in the 1960's. ''Its
prose is strong, at times even brilliant . . . a quarry of richly imagined
lines.''

ROWING TOWARD EDEN. By Ted Morgan. (Houghton Mifflin, $10.95.) ''Enchanting''
fragments of the Pulitzer Prize-winning writer's life in Europe and America.

SELECTED LETTERS OF RAYMOND CHANDLER. Edited by Frank MacShane.  (Columbia,
$19.95.) Almost 500 pages of elegant essays, which is what Chandler's letters
were, about literature, screenplays, himself, history, humanity, and, of course,
about his own famous literary creations.

SELF-PORTRAIT OF A HERO. The Letters of Jonathan Netanyahu (1963-1976). (Random
House, $12.95.) The ''witty, poignant and even lyrical'' correspondence,
spanning 13 years, of a distinguished Israeli soldier who was killed leading the
Entebbe raid.

SEXTET. T.S. Eliot & Truman Capote & Others. By John Malcolm Brinnin.
(Delacorte/ Seymour Lawrence, $15.95.) Personal and wise portraits of six famous
literary figures by a keen, indefatigable keeper of journals.

SHOUT! The Beatles in Their Generation. By Philip Norman.  (Fireside/Simon &
Schuster. Cloth, $19.95. Paper, $9.95.) A ''meticulously detailed . . .
definitive biography,'' by a correspondent for The Sunday Times of London who
covered the Fab Four from the earliest days of Beatlemania.

THE SPECULATOR. Bernard M. Baruch in Washington, 1917-1965. By Jordan A.
Schwartz. (North Carolina, $27.50.) Masterly study of the interaction of policy
makers, politics and economics since World War I, organized around the public
life of the unofficial adviser to Presidents and written in a fine literary
style.

SWEET ROBIN. A Biography of Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester. By Derek Wilson.
(Hamish Hamilton, $35.) The first fully researched and detailed biography of the
famous friend of Queen Elizabeth I, and very good reading about a man who was
always center stage in a dramatic and dangerous era.

TENNYSON. The Unquiet Heart. By Robert Bernard Martin. (Oxford, $29.95.) An
''authoritative and shrewd'' portrait of the great Victorian poet, ''an
eccentric utterly lacking in manners, a brooding unkempt genius.''

TOWARDS THE MOUNTAIN. An Autobiography. By Alan Paton. (Scribner's, $16.95.) The
first volume of autobiography by the author of ''Cry, the Beloved Country'' -
the ''champion of the oppressed'' in his native South Africa.

TWELVE YEARS. An American Boyhood in East Germany. By Joel Agee.  (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) A chronicle of the journey through adolescence and
into young manhood, told in a ''neat prose style seasoned with just the right
amount of lyrical effusion'' by James Agee's son.

WALDO EMERSON. A Biography. By Gay Allen Wilson. (Viking, $25.) A darker Emerson
than those
seen in earlier biographies is presented by Professor Allen, who traces the
spiritual personal struggles of the man who was to become the essential American
for the intellectual world of his day.

WAYS OF ESCAPE. By Graham Greene. (Simon & Schuster, $12.95.) The author's
account of his ''incessant quest for adventure'' in the ''exotic, shabby
outposts of Africa, Haiti, Latin America, the Far East.''

W.H. AUDEN. A Biography. By Humphrey Carpenter. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.)
Well-researched life of the celebrated poet, including his somewhat tangled
romantic history. This is likely to be the biography for some years.

WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS. A New World Naked. By Paul Mariani.  (McGraw-Hill,
$24.95.) A critical biography that places Williams as ''the single most
important American poet of the twentieth century.''

WILL'S BOY. A Memoir. By Wright Morris. (Harper & Row, $11.95.) Short, touching
and often merry account of the late childhood and early teen years of the writer
whose father was a kind of picaro leading his son on a wild but wonderful trail
across the country.

WOODY GUTHRIE. A Life. By Joe Klein. (Knopf, $15.95.) ''The legend and the
life'' of the influential folk singer ''are intertwined ...  into a superbly
balanced biography.''

CHILDREN

THE CRANE WIFE. Retold by Sumiko Yagawa. Translated from the Japanese by
Katherine Paterson. Illustrated by Suekichi Akaba.  (Morrow. $8.95. Ages 5 to
8.) An old folktale about love, greed and sacrifice - delicate, dramatic and
subtle. ''Lovely ink-and-brush paintings catch every nuance.''

A FABULOUS CREATURE. By Zilpha Keatley Snyder. (Atheneum. $9.95.  Ages 11 to
15.) A richly textured novel set in the Sierras, where a boy and a girl work
together to save a magnificent stag.

FLIGHT. By Melvin B. Zisfein. Illustrated by Robert Andrew Parker.  (Pantheon.
Paper, $11.95. Ages 9 to 12.) From Icarus to the space shuttle Columbia, a
panoramic view of manned flight. Spectacularly illustrated with watercolors.

HOMECOMING. By Cynthia Voigt. (Atheneum. $12.95. Ages 12 to 16.) A first novel
about a family of four abandoned children, ages 6 to 13, who, with little money
or adult help, journey from Rhode Island to Maryland in search of a home.

THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD. By Lynne Reid Banks. Illustrated by Brock Cole.
(Doubleday. $9.95. Ages 10 to 14.) What happens when a 9-year-old boy finds
himself in possession of a live, fierce and imperious Iroquois Indian, who is
only three-inches tall.

JUMANJI. Written and illustrated by Chris Van Allsburg. (Houghton Mifflin.
$9.95. Ages 5 to 8.) Parents away, two children play a magic board game that
produces a rhino stampede in the living room, monkey havoc in the kitchen and
other bizarre occurrences. Superb draftsmanship.

LET THE CIRCLE BE UNBROKEN. By Mildred D. Taylor. (Dial. $11.95.  Ages 11 and
Up.) A powerful, compelling novel of black family life in Mississippi, l934.
Sequel to the author's Newbery Medal-winning ''Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry.''

THE MARZIPAN MOON. By Nancy Willard. Illustrated by Marcia Sewall.  (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. Cloth, $9.95. Paper, $4.95. Ages 7 to 10.) Wry, contemporary
fairytale about a poor priest, a magic crock and a covetous bishop. ''Laid-back
graphic accompaniment.''

McGOOGAN MOVES THE MIGHTY ROCK. Written and illustrated by Dick Gackenbach.
(Harper & Row. $8.95. Ages 6 to 9.) A balladeer and a rock with a heart of gold
travel to the sea in this tale of generosity and friendship ''told with a
lilt.''

ON MARKET STREET. By Arnold Lobel. Illustrated by Anita Lobel.  (Greenwillow.
$8.95. Ages 4 to 7.) Adapting the style of 17th-century French trade engravings,
Anita Lobel offers a decorative and dazzling alphabetical tour de force.

OUTSIDE OVER THERE. Written and illustrated by Maurice Sendak.  (Harper & Row/
Nordstrom. $12.95. Ages 5 and Up.) Lyrical, dreamlike, symbolic tale in which a
little girl saves her baby sister from goblins. With sly echoes of the great
master painters in the illustrations.

RAINBOW JORDAN. By Alice Childress. (Coward, McCann. $8.95. Ages 13 and Up.) A
tough, proud 14-year-old black girl tries to make her way despite an
often-absent mother. ''A heartbreakingly sturdy character.''

STRANGER WITH MY FACE. By Lois Duncan. (Little, Brown. $8.95. Ages 11 to 15.)
Spine-chilling tale about a 17-year-old girl with an evil twin sister.

TRAITOR. By Jean Fritz. (Putnam's. $9.95. Ages 10 to 14.) ''A fine, clear,
concise biography'' of America's most famous hero-villain, Benedict Arnold.

WHERE THE BUFFALOES BEGIN. By Olaf Baker. Illustrated by Stephen Gammell.
(Frederick Warne. $8.95. Ages 8 to 10.) An exciting American Indian legend with
stunning black-and-white illustrations ''conveying the hulking, surging,
rampaging strength of the shaggy buffaloes.''

Crime

APPLE CRUNCH. By Frederic Vincent Huber. (Seaview. $10.95.) How experts can get
into New York's computer system, louse up the works and hold up the city for $20
million. A lively, amusing caper.

THE BALLOON AFFAIR. By Marion Margery. (Dodd, Mead. $8.95.) A first novel by
three women from New Mexico, writing pseudonymously, about ballooning, solar
energy, politics and an unusual kidnapping.

BOGMAIL. By Patrick McGinley. (Ticknor & Fields. $9.95.) Murder comprises only
part of this mystery set in an Irish town. (The murderer, an unusual fellow, has
virtually memorized the 11th edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica and loves
the music of Schumann.)

CANARY. By Tony Cohan. (Doubleday. $13.95.) Learn how media hype can make a star
out of a no-talent singer in this mystery that combines murder with an
examination of the popular music record business.

DEATH AND THE GOOD LIFE. By Richard Hugo. (St. Martin's. $10.95.) Montana is the
locale of this police procedural, in which a sensitive and even soft-hearted cop
investigates some ax murders. Plenty of suspense and action, a surprise ending
and a believable group of characters.

DEATH BED. By Stephen Greenleaf. (Dial. $10.95.) A San Francisco private-eye
novel featuring John Tanner. The concept and writing refer back to Hammett and,
more recently, Ross Macdonald. But within the cliches of the genre, this is a
sturdy, well-plotted work.

DEATH OF A LITERARY WIDOW. By Robert Barnard. (Scribner's. $8.95.) The
traditional British mystery lives in Mr. Barnard's books. This one is witty and
civilized, with an ingenious ending. Among the nice things is a marvelous parody
of American academic literary criticism.

DEATH SCENE. By Betty Suyker. (St. Martin's. $10.95.) A young lady working for a
newsweekly gets mixed up with a Broadway murder. A fluffy, well-plotted first
novel, it has an ending that makes the pulse race a bit, as anything about
Shakespeare generally does.

DIVIDE THE NIGHT. By Wessel Ebersohn. (Pantheon. $10.95.) The second adventure
of Yudel Gordon, the South African police psychiatrist. A strong book, which
looks at some of the political currents in the tension-filled country, it is
also a procedural about a psychotic killer.

DOUBLE NEGATIVE. By David Carkett. (Dial. $9.95.) A fine first novel from a
professor of linguistics about a linguistics scholar.  This book has some
unusual ideas, including a solution to a murder that literally comes out of the
mouth of a babe - a 16-month-old infant.

ECHOES OF ZERO. By Ross H. Spencer. (St. Martin's. $9.95.) The story of a
curiously attractive man who is an eternal loser. He is a newspaper reporter,
his boss dies under suspicious circumstances and our hero starts investigating.

FOOL'S MATE. By Ritchie Perry. (Pantheon. $10.95.) Philis, the British agent and
latter-day James Bond, is active again, this time getting one of Idi Amin's
mistresses out of Uganda and safely back to England. Strenuous heroics, prime
escape reading.

MISSING WOMAN. By Michael Z. Lewin. (Knopf. $10.95.) Another in the series about
Albert Sampson, the Indianapolis private eye, who watches the complications pile
up after he is hired to track a missing woman. Sharp style, crisp dialogue,
believable characters.

THE MORDIDA MAN. By Ross Thomas. (Simon & Schuster. $13.95.) A tour de force
even for one of America's best storytellers. The plot involves the kidnapping of
the President's brother, Libyan terrorists, the C.I.A., an expatriate
millionaire and fancy doubledealing.

MURDER MYSTERY. By Gene Thompson. (Random House. $9.95.) Introducing a new
investigator - Dade Cooley, a peppery, 60-year-old, homespun, smart lawyer from
San Francisco. In construction, this book harks back to the traditional puzzle
mystery. but its pungent talk is of today.

NOT A THROUGH STREET. By Ernest Larsen. (Random House. $11.95.) A superior first
novel about a lady cabbie in New York whose boyfriend - a reporter - is murdered
before her very eyes.

PEOPLE OF DARKNESS. By Tony Hillerman. (Harper & Row. $9.95.) Another of Mr.
Hillerman's looks at modern Indian culture, as represented by the Navajo Sgt.
Jim Chee and a varied cast.

PHOTO FINISH. By Ngaio Marsh. (Little, Brown. $10.95.) A typically expert job,
featuring Supt. Roderick Alleyn and his wife. This classic British mystery is
set in New Zealand, with a house party, a tempestuous soprano, a locked-room
puzzle.

ROOFTOPS. By Tom Lewis. (Evans. $11.95.) An honest Hispanic officer has to deal
with a child killer and a rotten police lieutenant.  Written in a tough,
realistic manner, with nonstop action.

30 FOR A HARRY. By Richard Hoyt. (Evans. $8.95.) The number ''30'' used to be a
reporter's sign-off mark. John Denson, the Seattle private eye, joins a
newspaper in an effort to uncover a venal reporter who might well drag the paper
down.

Current Affairs & Social Comment

AMERICAN POLITICS: THE PROMISE OF DISHARMONY. By Samuel P.  Huntington.
(Harvard, $15.) A noted political scientist's ''illuminating'' analysis of why
our government doesn't work better.

AMONG THE BELIEVERS. An Islamic Journey. By V.S. Naipaul. (Knopf, $15.) A
''chronicle of a seven-month journey . . . to Iran, Pakistan, Malaysia and
Indonesia in search of Islam'' that ''displays all of Naipaul's major themes.''

THE BATTLE FOR PEACE. By Ezer Weizman. (Bantam, $15.95.) The former Israeli
Minister of Defense's ''explosively indiscreet'' memoirs of the period from the
Likud's electoral victory in May 1977 to the Camp David accords of September
1979.

BEGINNING TO SEE THE LIGHT. Pieces of a Decade. By Ellen Willis.  (Knopf,
$12.95.) ''A stimulating and satisfying collection,'' spanning a decade and a
half, by The New Yorker/Village Voice/Rolling Stone writer.

THE BIGGEST COMPANY ON EARTH. A Profile of A.T.& T. By Sonny Kleinfield. (Holt,
Rinehart & Winston, $14.95.) A mosaic portrait of the giant corporation by a
financial news reporter for The New York Times.

BREAKTHROUGH. A Personal Account of the Egypt-Israel Peace Negotiations. By
Moshe Dayan. (Knopf, $15.) A ''one-sided, tendentious, occasionally vindictive''
book that is nonetheless ''full of fascinating insights'' into the Camp David
accords, by one of the chief actors in the drama.

THE CHILD SAVERS. Juvenile Justice Observed. By Peter S. Prescott.  (Knopf,
$12.95.) The story of New York City's family court and the children it is
supposed to serve, written by the only journalist ever allowed more than
temporary admittance to this traditionally closed court.

DECADE OF DECISION. The Crisis of the American System. By Michael Harrington.
(Simon & Schuster, $11.95.) A ''humane and open-minded'' socialist analysis of
our current socio-economic plight.

FLOWERS OF EMPTINESS. Reflections on an Ashram. By Sally Belfrage.  (Dial,
$10.95.) An ''honest'' account by an ''intelligent and humorous journalist and
critic'' about her experiences in a religious commune in India.

GOVERNING AMERICA. An Insider's Report From the White House and the Cabinet. By
Joseph A. Califano Jr. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) This ''fascinating memoir''
by the former Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare provides a ''unique
account of making (or the failure to make) social policy.''

HARVARD ENCYCLOPEDIA OF AMERICAN ETHNIC GROUPS. Stephan Thernstrom, Editor.
(Harvard, $60.) ''Not just a book to sit on a reference shelf,'' this work is
''designed for a broad and varied audience.''

HOW COURTS GOVERN AMERICA. By Richard Neely. (Yale, $15.) The Chief Justice of
the West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals argues that elected ''legislatures
and executives . . . are far less democratic, and courts far more democratic,
than was once supposed.'' ''A lively popularization'' of ''the notion that
courts are and ought to be political actors.''

IN THE BELLY OF THE BEAST. Letters From Prison. By Jack Henry Abbott. (Random
House, $11.95.) This highly controversial account of life in prison emphasizes
''the deliberate manipulation of conditions to increase the amount of lethal
violence among the inmates themselves.'' ''As an articulation of penal nightmare
it is completely compelling.''

MRS. HARRIS. The Death of the Scarsdale Doctor. By Diana Trilling.  (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) The literary and social critic pictures the
sensational murder case ''as a kind of surrogate novel in which the eternal
themes of human experience . . . are rescued from the reductionism of television
and restored to the fullness of life.'' ''A good piece of reporting.''

MX: Prescription for Disaster. By Herbert Scoville. (MIT. Cloth, $15. Paper,
$6.95.) ''The best and the most accessible introduction to the entire issue of
strategic arms.''

NATIONAL DEFENSE. By James Fallows. (Random House, $12.95.) An analysis of the
''culture of procurement,'' written in ''spare, controlled prose unencumbered by
liberal cant.''

NEW RULES. Searching for Self-Fulfillment in a World Turned Upside Down. By
Daniel Yankelovich. (Random House, $15.95.) The president of a successful
polling firm turns the ''techniques of his trade'' to an analysis of the ''
'cultural revolution' occurring in our midst.''

PAPER MONEY. By Adam Smith. (Summit, $13.95.) The author of ''The Money Game''
and ''Supermoney'' tells the story of how our money got to be worth so little.

PHILOSOPHY AND PUBLIC POLICY. By Sidney Hook. (Southern Illinois, $17.50.)
''Exemplary and admonitory'' essays spanning 35 years and such diverse subjects
as T.S. Eliot, Leon Trotsky, human rights and reverse discrimination.

RADICAL PRINCIPLES. Reflections of an Unreconstructed Democrat. By Michael
Walzer. (Basic, $15.) Eighteen ''graceful'' essays on politics and philosophy by
a forthright egalitarian.

RUSSIAN JOURNAL. By Andrea Lee. (Random House, $13.50.) An account of a year in
Moscow that ''is such a subtly crafted recollection of both the bleak and golden
shadings of Russian life that its tones belong more to the realm of poetry than
journalism.''

THE SECOND STAGE. By Betty Friedan. (Summit, $14.95.) The woman who identified
the ''feminine mystique'' in 1963 argues that it is now time to go beyond the
''feminist mystique.'' ''A new plea for cooperation between men and women.''

SOUTH AFRICA. Time Running Out. The Report of the Study Commission on U.S.
Policy Toward Southern Africa. (Univ. of California. Cloth, $19.95. Paper,
$8.95.) The findings and recommendations of a blueribbon Rockefeller Foundation
commission: They advise American corporations not to expand their South African
operations, and the United States Government to exert more effective pressure.

Essays & Criticism

AMBITION. The Secret Passion. By Joseph Epstein. (Dutton, $13.95.) A ''clear,
straightforward analysis'' of ''the fuel of achievement'' by the editor of The
American Scholar.

THE ART OF BIBLICAL NARRATIVE. By Robert Alter. (Basic, $13.95.) A literary
analysis of the narratives of the Hebrew Bible, by ''a true descendant of those
midrashic exegetes.''

BACHELORHOOD. Tales of the Metropolis. By Phillip Lopate. (Little, Brown,
$13.95.) ''An unusually original and winning collection of essays, with a few
poems and vignettes.''

BORGES: A READER. A Selection from the Writings of Jorge Luis Borges. (Dutton.
Cloth, $16.50. Paper, $10.) ''A compendious anthology of writings both familiar
and unpublished, prose and poetry, early and late, it reveals as no other
collection of Borges ever has the obsessively literary nature of his enterprise.

CAMERA LUCIDA. Reflections on Photography. By Roland Barthes. (Hill & Wang,
$10.95.) ''More intimate than theoretical . . . an intricate, quirky and
ultimately frustrating meditation linking photography to death,'' by the late
French critic.

CIVIL WARS. By June Jordan. (Beacon, $12.95.) Two decades of essays, lectures
and letters, which form a kind of autobiography of the poet. ''A book of
thorough and unwavering radicalism.''

DEEP BLUES. By Robert Palmer. (Viking, $14.95.) ''A storehouse of black history,
filled with rich detail and dialogue'' about the blues tradition in American
music.

DISNEY ANIMATION. The Illusion of Life. By Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston.
(Abbeville, $49.95.) A ''detailed and handsome book'' about the Disney studio
and its films.

DOES GOD EXIST? An Answer for Today. By Hans Kung. Translated by Edward Quinn.
(Doubleday, $17.50.) A ''major work by a major theologian'' on the great
perennial question of philosophy.

A DOUBLE DYING. Reflections on Holocaust Literature. By Alvin H.  Rosenfeld.
(Indiana, $17.50.) An ''exemplary series of critical essays ... lucid enough for
a general audience and detailed enough for academics,'' about the unique hold of
the Holocaust on the artistic imagination.

EARLY AUDEN. By Edward Mendelson. (Viking, $20.) A history of Auden's writings
during the years 1927-39, as interpreted by his literary executor.

ERNEST HEMINGWAY: SELECTED LETTERS. 1917-1961. Edited by Carlos Baker.
(Scribner's, $27.50.) This ''gigantic collection of letters to wives, lovers,
friends, enemies, generals, writers and strangers'' reveals the ''fearful
division'' of the man and the writer.

FEROCIOUS ALPHABETS. By Denis Donoghue. (Little, Brown, $14.95.) An analysis of
the ''ideological strife among modern critics, a war of words about words,'' by
a ''critic endearingly useful to writers and readers alike.''

FROM BAUHAUS TO OUR HOUSE. By Tom Wolfe. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $10.95.)
''Postwar modern architecture in America is the villain'' of this book-length
essay that ''attempts to take on the theoretical constructs and rhetorical
clouds that surround the making of art.''

THE GEOGRAPHY OF THE IMAGINATION. Forty Essays. By Guy Davenport.  (North Point.
Cloth, $20. Paper, $10.) Essays on Homer, Whitman, Joyce and others, by a critic
of ''learning, discipline, sensibility and versatility.''

GREEN THOUGHTS. A Writer in the Garden. By Eleanor Perenyi. (Random House,
$15.50.) Charming, highly literate essays on gardens and gardening: ''a book to
keep by the bedside when one is tired of the problems of the day.''

LECTURES ON RUSSIAN LITERATURE. By Vladimir Nabokov. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$19.95.) Lectures that are ''learned, very rich in critical insight, often
funny'' on Gogol, Turgenev, Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov and Gorki.

LETTERS FROM THE COUNTRY. By Carol Bly. (Harper & Row, $12.95.) A collection of
31 essays - ''a very readable mixture of sociology, secular sermons and good
stories'' - about life in a small Minnesota town.

LOURDES. A Modern Pilgrimage. By Patrick Marnham. (Coward, McCann & Geoghegan,
$12.95.) A skeptic, writing with ''quiet precision,'' mixes ''irony with
thoughtful sympathy for both the pilgrims and their faith.''

MASTERS. Portraits of Great Teachers. Edited by Joseph Epstein.  (Basic,
$14.95.) A collection of 16 essays about great teachers ranging from Nadia
Boulanger to J. Robert Oppenheimer, as remembered by some famous students.

THE MEANINGS OF MODERN ART. By John Russell. (Museum of Modern Art/ Harper &
Row, $35.) The author, an art critic for The New York Times, ''draws upon the
full cultural spectrum - architecture, photography, music, literature, and
politics - in explaining the artistic achievements of what he is convinced is
'one of the big centuries' in art history.''

THE NEW GROVE DICTIONARY OF MUSIC AND MUSICIANS. Edited by Stanley Sadie. (St.
Martin's, $1,900.) Twenty volumes, 12 years in the making, with 22,500 articles
written by 2,300 contributors: ''A triumph of contemporary musicology ... the
most ambitious and comprehensive musical dictionary and encyclopedia ever
attempted.''

PERSONAL IMPRESSIONS. By Isaiah Berlin. (Viking, $13.95.) The fourth and final
volume of essays and memoirs by ''one of the great thinkers and writers of our
age'' - essays on Churchill, Roosevelt, Pasternak and others.

PREOCCUPATIONS. Selected Prose 1968-78. By Seamus Heaney. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $15.) ''Nimble and elegant'' lectures and reviews by the gifted Irish
poet.

SHAKESPEARE'S DIVISION OF EXPERIENCE. By Marilyn French. (Summit, $15.95.) Miss
French, who was known primarily as a Joycean scholar before her novel ''The
Women's Room'' brought her fame, turns her critical eye to Shakeapeare. A
''provocative'' study of the division of experience in his plays according to
principles of gender.

SHAW'S MUSIC. The Complete Musical Criticism in Three Volumes. By Bernard Shaw.
(Dodd, Mead, $150.) Shaw's criticism, ''every scrap of it, has been pulled
together into one edition for the first time.'' The work of ''a serious,
musically knowledgeable critic who combined an irresistible buoyancy of spirit
with a born comedian's ability to force a smile out of a tax inspector.''

THE SHOCK OF THE NEW. By Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $29.95.) A ''consistently
entertaining and informative'' survey of modern art by the art critic of Time
magazine.

THE SKYSCRAPER. By Paul Goldberger. (Knopf, $25.) An ''interesting and
provocative'' history of the American skyscraper, by the architecture critic of
The New York Times.

TOO OLD TO CRY. By Paul Hemphill. (Viking, $11.95.) ''Appealing'' essays and
reporting on American life by a Southern journalist - a ''true professional.''

VIEWS FROM A WINDOW. Conversations with Gore Vidal. Edited by Robert J. Stanton
and Gore Vidal. (Lyle Stuart, $14.95.) Selections from interviews with the
novelist and critic, covering sex, education, writers and writing.

WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF NO CONTEXT. By George W.S. Trow. (Little, Brown, $12.95.)
An examination of ''contemporary media culture and the sensibility it fosters''
by an ''original and idiosyncratic'' writer.

Fiction

AMERICAN ROSE. By Julia Markus. (Houghton Mifflin, $11.95.) In her second novel,
the author of ''Uncle'' depicts the lives of several generations of a
French-Jewish family in Europe and America.

ANGEL OF LIGHT. By Joyce Carol Oates. (Dutton, $15.) This 12th novel by ''our
most productive writer of serious fiction'' is a psychological examination of
alienated youth and ''an uncovering of the personal roots of public violence.''

THE ART OF LIVING. And Other Stories. By John Gardner. (Knopf, $12.95.) Ten
stories that ''develop the common theme of art and its vexed relation to life''
by the author of ''October Light'' and ''On Moral Fiction.''

AT PARADISE GATE. By Jane Smiley. (Simon & Schuster, $12.95.) A man's three
grown daughters and his wife are downstairs in the family home one Sunday
afternoon, waiting for him to die. A fine, quiet, introspective novel.

BABY LOVE. By Joyce Maynard. (Knopf, $10.95.) ''A disquieting look at the
separateness and the loneliness sometimes experienced between the sexes'' by a
young writer of ''uncommon promise.''

BLACK MOUNTAIN BREAKDOWN. By Lee Smith. (Putnam's, $10.95.) The ''sweet, sharp
sensations of a life-hungry adolescent'' named Crystal whose ''trajectory'' from
Black Rock, Va., to New York City and back is well described.

THE BOOK OF EBENEZER LE PAGE. By G.B. Edwards. (Knopf, $13.95.) A ''Proustian''
novel, set in the Channel Island of Guernsey. Ebenezer Le Page is a ''classic
bachelor ... the ironic observer of his constrained, ingrown little society.''

THE CARE OF TIME. By Eric Ambler. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $11.95.) Another
''brilliant, polished performance'' from one of the masters of the modern spy
story. The hero is enlisted to work on the ostensible memoirs of a 19th-century
Russian terrorist.

CITIES OF THE RED NIGHT. By William S. Burroughs. (Holt, Rinehart, $14.95.) If
you missed ''Naked Lunch'' in 1959 and are excited by descriptions of hangings
and garrotings, this should prove a veritable ''gallows of delight.''

COLLECTED STORIES. By Frank O'Connor. Introduction by Richard Ellmann. (Knopf,
$20.) A splendid collection of tales by the Irish short story writer who
''distrusted every technique except the ones he inherited from the 19th-century
masters and, according to his own light, practiced.''

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF CAROLINE GORDON. Introduction by Robert Penn Warren.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) A half-century of stories set mostly in
Kentucky, including the Aleck Maury tales. They display Miss Gordon's ''crisp
vitality and her constant alertness to the natural world.''

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF ELIZABETH BOWEN. (Knopf, $17.95.) A tribute to the
Anglo-Irish novelist, critic and short story writer who died in 1973: 79 stories
written over a period of 50 years. ''

THE COMPANY OF WOMEN. By Mary Gordon. (Random House,. $12.95.) The story of the
only child of a widowed mother and of her relationship to the priest who is her
surrogate father. This second novel by the author of ''Final Payments''
demonstrates that Miss Gordon has become her generation's ''pre-eminent novelist
of Roman Catholic mores and manners.''

THE COUNTRY. By David Plante. (Atheneum, $9.95.) A ''superb'' continuation of
the story of a French Catholic family begun ''brilliantly'' in his first novel,
''The Family.''

CREATION. By Gore Vidal. (Random House, $15.95.) This fictional
memoir-autobiography of one Cyrus Spitama, grandson of the prophet Zoroaster,
offers the prolific novelist the opportunity to display his capacity for erudite
historical commentary as well as entertainment.

DADDY'S GIRL. By Beverly Lowry. (Viking, $13.95.) A pop poet and country disco
singer is the heroine of this energetic third novel by a talented Texas writer.

DARLIN' BILL. A Love Story of the Wild West. By Jerome Charyn.  (Arbor House,
$11.95.) A comic historical novel that follows its heroine from Texas to
Oklahoma in pursuit of her drifter lover.  ''Zany . . . shrewd, tough, funny and
triumphantly detailed.''

EARTHLY POWERS. By Anthony Burgess. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A long novel
that recounts the life of an 81-year-old homosexual Roman Catholic and
incorporates real events and people in the fictional hero's history of the 20th
century. ''Bursting with manic erudition, garlicky puns, omnilingual jokes.''

EASY TRAVEL TO OTHER PLANETS. By Ted Mooney. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $11.95.)
Peter, a dolphin, ''is a kind of aquatic Piers Plowman'' in this ambitious first
novel.

ELLIS ISLAND. And Other Stories. By Mark Helprin. (Delacorte/ Seymour Lawrence,
$10.95.) An ambitious collection of stories that range from the turn of the
century to the present and from a mythical Alpine village to New York City.

EXERCISES IN STYLE. By Raymond Queneau. Translated with an introduction by
Barbara Wright. (New Directions. Cloth, $12.95.  Paper, $4.95.) First published
in France in 1947, this volume recounts in 99 different versions a simple
anecdote about two passengers arguing on a Parisian bus.

A FEW GREEN LEAVES. By Barbara Pym. (Dutton, $10.95.) The final book by the late
English novelist who could coax ''comedy and sadness from the most banal moments
without ever managing to be dull,'' set in an Oxfordshire village with the
old-fashioned social structure typical of all her fiction.

GEMINI. By Michel Tournier. Translated by Anne Carter. (Doubleday, $14.95.) The
prize-winning French novelist ingeniously uses a pair of identical twins to
''explore a near infinity of dualities.''

A GIFT HORSE. And Other Stories. By Kate Cruise O'Brien.  (Braziller, $8.95.)
Fifteen stories set in contemporary Ireland that ''acquire the gravity . . . of
a sustained novel or memoir.'' The author ''writes with a spare, conversational
and lightly sardonic touch.''

THE GLITTER DOME. By Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord Press/William Morrow, $12.95.)
An ''intricate and swiftly paced'' story of the search for the murderer of a
movie mogul by a ''writer of genuine power, style, wit and originality.''

GORKY PARK. By Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $13.95.) A police procedural,
set in the Soviet Union, that mixes ''the gritty atmosphere of a Moscow police
squad room with a story of detection as neatly done as any English manor-house
puzzlement.''

GRAPHITE. By Varlam Shalamov. Translated by John Glad. (Norton, $14.95.) A
second selection of stories and fragments about prison life in northeastern
Siberia by the author of ''Kolyma Tales.''

THE HANGWOMAN. By Pavel Kohout. Translated by Kaca Polakova-Henley. (Putnam's,
$14.95.) ''Gallows humor, Czech-style - combining the domestic and fantastic,
the common touch with the bizarre twist. ... What was Kafka's prophecy is
Kohout's bad news.''

THE HERITAGE. By Siegfried Lenz. Translated by Krisha Winston.  (Hill & Wang,
$16.95.) The theme of this ''epic fable'' by the author of ''The German Lesson''
is the ''vast gulf between Germany's past and present'' - ''a colossal
achievement.''

HERMA. By MacDonald Harris. (Atheneum, $16.95.) His ninth novel, the tale of
Herma, an opera singer and hermaphrodite, and Fred Hite, her daredevil manager,
is ''nothing if not ambitious. A Horatio Alger story as seen through the eyes of
Krafft-Ebing.''

THE HOTEL NEW HAMPSHIRE. By John Irving. (Henry Robbins/Dutton, $15.50.) The
story of a large, eccentric family that sets up house in various unlikely hotels
here and abroad is a ''hectic gaudy saga with the verve of a Marx Brothers
movie.''

HOUSEHOLD SAINTS. By Francine Prose. (St. Martin's, $10.95.) This tale of life
in New York City's Little Italy is both a modern fable and an old-fashioned
story about the patterns of family life that weave their way through generations
- told with ''wisdom and humor.''

HOW GERMAN IS IT. By Walter Abish. (New Directions. Cloth, $14.95.  Paper,
$5.95.) The contradictions and dualities of language are the real focus in this
satire on the new Germany by a writer who delights in assaulting ''the
reassuring familiarity of everyday things.''

IF ON A WINTER'S NIGHT A TRAVELER. By Italo Calvino. Translated by William
Weaver. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $12.95.) A meditation on the pleasures of
reading in the form of a novel in which the reader is enticed into reading the
beginnings of 10 incomplete novels - ''charming, and funny, and very
intelligent.''

IN THE GARDEN OF THE NORTH AMERICAN MARTYRS. By Tobias Wolff.(Ecco, $10.95.) A
surprisingly various and accomplished first collection of 12 short stories by a
writer who ''risks every kind of ending, and that perhaps is the surest sign of
a storyteller who is willing to stretch his talent.''

THE ISSA VALLEY. By Czeslaw Milosz. Translated by Louis Iribarne.(Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $13.95.) A ''novel of exile'' in which the ''sober irony'' of the
expatriate Polish poet and Nobel laureate ''is replaced by a lush, deeply felt
celebration of the Lithuanian countryside of his childhood.''

JULY'S PEOPLE. Nadine Gordimer. (Viking, $10.95.) Revolution forces a South
African white family to seek refuge in the village of their black manservant in
this ''flawlessly written tale''; the author ''demonstrates with breathtaking
clarity the tensions and complex interdependencies between whites and blacks in
South Africa.''

LIARS IN LOVE. By Richard Yates. (Delacorte, $14.95.) Seven disturbing stories
from the author of ''Revolutionary Road'' and ''Easter Parade.'' The protagonist
of all the stories is essentially the same character; it's ''as if Yates were
under some enchantment that compelled him to keep circling the same half-acre of
pain.''

LIFETIME. By Scott Sommer. (Random House, $9.95.) An ''impressive collection''
of two novellas and three stories, informed by a ''hip, post-1960's despair ...
all relationships in the corrupted world of these fictions are transient.''

LOITERING WITH INTENT. By Muriel Spark. (Coward, McCann & Geoghegan, $12.95.)
The story of a young writer in postwar London living on ''the grubby edge of the
literary world'' - ''a wise and mature work, and a brilliantly mischievous one .
. . about a writer's love affair with art.''

THE LONE PILGRIM. By Laurie Colwin. (Knopf, $9.95.) A collection of stories in
which the author's ''tireless enthusiasm'' and ''adroitly concocted''
observations compensate for the stereotypical romantic situations.

MACHO CAMACHO'S BEAT. By Luis Rafael Sanchez. (Pantheon, $10.95.) A ''funny,
mordant'' first novel by the Puerto Rican playwright and essayist. ''An
extended, raucous song'' set in contemporary San Juan.

THE MEETING AT TELG-TE. By Gunter Grass. Translated by Ralph Manheim. (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, $9.95.) ''An imaginative tribute'' to the founder of Group 47,
the postwar writers' group that became one of the most powerful forces on the
German literary scene.  It takes the form of a complex historical analogy and is
written in ''pseudo-Baroque prose.''

MEMOIRS OF AN ANTI-SEMITE. By Gregor von Rezzori. (Viking, $13.95.) The ''chief
dynamics'' of this ''often discomfiting'' tale are provided by the narrator's
complex relation to Jews - ''a novel as autobiography'' in which the author
''envisions himself as a character in a design arranged from the data of his
life.''

THE MEN'S CLUB. By Leonard Michaels. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $10.95.) A short,
funny novel about seven middle-aged, middle-class men in Berkeley, Calif., who
form their own consciousness-raising group and tell stories about the women in
their lives.

MIRACLE PLAY. By Susan Richards Shreve. (Morrow, $12.95.) The emotionally
engrossing story of the Howells family of Bucks County, Pa., covering more than
a century of overlapping life histories.

THE MISSING PERSON. By Doris Grumbach. (Putnam's, $11.95.) A Hollywood novel, a
Marilyn Monroe novel, whose tone ''lies midway between realistic piety and
satiric scorn,'' by the author of ''Chamber Music.''

THE MONTAUK FAULT. By Hebert Mitgang. (Arbor House, $12.95.) International
intrigue, worldwide disaster and the politics of a metropolitan newspaper are
all combined in this gracefully written and ''refreshingly'' unusual
''cataclysmic novel.''

MOURNERS BELOW. By James Purdy. (Viking, $13.95.) The author's 11th novel
''takes place in a timeless drift that vaguely resembles World War II.'' Purdy
''uses locale to isolate hysteria and deal with that terrible anger of being
unloved.''

NUNS AND SOLDIERS. By Iris Murdoch. (Viking, $14.95.) In this, Miss Murdoch's
20th novel, the religious, sexual, social and philosophical games and the
elaborate contortions and interminglings of the characters' lives and loves are
as dexterous and mannered as ever.

THE OFFICERS' WIVES. By Thomas Fleming. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A ''satisfying . .
. sprawling tale of military life'' from the Korean War to the aftermath of
Vietnam as seen through the lives of three West Point military couples.

ON HEROES AND TOMBS. By Ernesto Sabato. Translated by Helen R.  Lane. (Godine,
$17.95.) Published for the first time in English, this 20-year-old novel by an
Argentine writer sets a tragic family melodrama against the background of
Argentina's tumultuous recent history.

ON THE STROLL. By Alix Kates Shulman. (Knopf, $12.95.) Her third novel is about
a bag lady, a young pimp and a 16-year-old runaway whose paths cross in New York
City's Port Authority Bus Terminal. The book's strength is the ''evocation of
the blasted landscape through which these wanderers move.''

ORIGINAL SINS. By Lisa Alther. (Knopf, $13.95.) Five Southern children and how
they grew. The author of ''Kinflicks'' seems to have forsaken humor for sober
social commentary.

OTHER PEOPLE'S WORLDS. By William Trevor. (Viking, $10.95.) The Dublin-born
novelist's tale of an unsuspecting widow's involvement with a ''bounder'' and
her subsequent discovery of his unsavory background - ''filled with narrative
surprises and shrewd social observation.''

THE POLYGAMIST. By B.H. Friedman. (Atlantic/Little, Brown, $11.95.) A professor
of Islamic studies is guided through his affairs with two women by the ghost of
his ex-wife - ''a droll anecdote about the magic that keeps life going.''

POPPA JOHN. By Larry Woiwode. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $10.95.) A
''fastidiously controlled novel about an unemployed actor's brush with madness,
and his subsequent physical collapse and partial recovery.'' By the author of
''What I'm Going to Do, I Think.''

THE RADIANT FUTURE. By Alexander Zinoviev. Translated by Gordon Clough. (Random
House, $13.95.) A spirited novel of ideas ''in the form of dialogues and
intellectual confessions and anecdotes by an unnamed narrator.'' By the
Soviet-born author of ''The Yawning Heights.''

REINHART'S WOMEN. By Thomas Berger. (Delacorte, $13.95.) Carl Reinhart returns a
fourth time, now a middle-aged housekeeper for his daughter Winona. ''It's his
peculiar combination of innocence, ignorance, appetite, crudity, moral confusion
and readiness to mix it up'' that makes Reinhart represent the
''under-represented.''

RHINE MAIDENS. By Carolyn See. (Coward, McCann & Geoghegan, $13.95.) The second
novel by the author of ''Mothers, Daughters'' deals, in alternating sections,
with Grace, a bitter aging woman living in Coalinga, Calif., and her daughter,
Garnet, a Brentwood matron in search of self.

RIDDLEY WALKER. By Russell Hoban. (Summit, $12.95.) ''Haunting and fiercely
imagined,'' this ''short, swiftly paced tale juxtaposes preliterate fable and
Beckettian wit'' in its ''wrenchingly vivid report on the texture of life after
Doomsday.''

SAINT AUGUSTINE'S PIGEON. By Evan S. Connell. (North Point, $12.50.) Collected
stories by the author of ''Mrs. Bridge'' that are distinguished by a ''delicate
modulation of mood'' and the ''firmness and grace'' of their language.

THE SECOND CHANCE. And Other Stories. By Alan Sillitoe. (Simon & Schuster,
$12.95.) Fiction written from an astute working-class perspective by the author
of ''Saturday Night and Sunday Morning'' and 24 other books.

THE SIRIAN EXPERIMENTS. The Report by Ambien II, of the Five.  Canopus in Argos:
Archives. By Doris Lessing. (Knopf, $11.95.) The third in a series of ''space
fictions'' set in the galactic empire of Canopus. ''A combination of fantasy and
morality'' by a writer who earned her ''reputation as one of the most
intelligent and discriminating English novelists'' in the realistic mode.

SISTER WOLF. By Ann Arensberg. (Knopf, $9.95.) An eccentric daughter of
Hungarian emigres turns her Berkshire estate into a sanctuary for wild animals
and becomes involved with a mysterious stranger. An eerie, demonic first novel
with ''grace and power.''

SIXTY STORIES. By Donald Barthelme. (Putnam's, $15.95.) Barthelme's technique in
his ''dry and clear'' stories has been to use his fiction ''to give us lessons
in dancing to sadness,'' a message sometimes cast as ''let's try and enjoy
ourselves, as intelligently as possible.''

SONS OF EARTH. By Richard Rhodes. (Coward, McCann & Geoghegan, $13.95.) ''An
intelligent, suspenseful novel about a renowned astronaut whose son is kidnapped
by a sociopathic creep'' - ''an almost prophetic case study.''

THE SOURCE OF LIGHT. By Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $13.95.) An ''intensely
romantic'' novel covering one year in the life of Hutchins Mayfield, a
25-year-old North Carolina poet. A continuation of ''The Surface of Earth.''

THE STORIES OF ELIZABETH SPENCER. (Doubleday, $14.95.) ''Stories of width, depth
and shapeliness'' in which a ''fairly narrow band of life -the Southern
bourgeois female - is seen as a sufficient mirror of the world.''

STORYTELLER. By Leslie Marmon Silko. (Seaver. Cloth, $17.95.  Paper, $9.95.) A
collection of native American short stories, anecdotes, folk tales, poems,
historical and autobiographical notes and photographs celebrating the author's
Pueblo and Mexican heritage and the ''ancient and sacred'' art of storytelling.

SWEETSIR. By Helen Yglesias. (Simon & Schuster, $13.95.) A ''novel about a
small-town working-class woman (that) neither simplifies nor patronizes her.''
Sally Sweetsir accidentally murders her husband, and the author ''lets us hear a
real, anguished voice in the act of self-discovery.''

TAR BABY. By Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $11.95.) The author of ''Sula'' and ''Song
of Solomon'' ''has succeeded in writing about race and women symbolically'' in
this lush novel set mostly on a Caribbean island.

THE TEMPTATION OF EILEEN HUGHES. By Brian Moore. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$11.95.) An allegorical novel addressing itself to ''mankind's need to believe
in God, any God,'' by an author prized for his ''wonderfully graceful synthesis
of the funny, the sardonic, the poignant and the near tragic.''

THE THIRTY YEARS PEACE. By Peter O. Chotjewitz. Translated by Robert and Rita
Kimber. (Knopf, $12.95.) Set in Germany, this striking political novel casts ''a
cold spotlight'' on the ''drab and unmitigated sterility'' of life under the
''conditions of late capitalism and imperialism.''

THRONE. The Further Adventures of Private Ivan Chonkin. By Vladimir Voinovich.
Translated by Richard Lourie. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) A ''rich,
inventive satire about Stalinist Russia,'' including: ''Corrupt, lying
politicians. Sleazy officials on the take. Third-rate writers toadying for
official favor.''

TICKETS. By Richard P. Brickner. (Simon & Schuster, $12.95.) ''A well-accounted,
opera-obsessed newsmagazine reporter'' meets ''a talented fiction writer,
genuinely troubled by her husband's determination to push her career.'' The
result is, ''for most of its length, a flawless contemporary romance.''

TRAILERPARK. By Russell Banks. (Houghton Mifflin, $11.95.) Thirteen interwoven
stories set in a trailerpark in New England about a ''motley crew'' of folks who
live there.

TRIPLETS. By Joyce Rebeta-Burditt. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The inner circle around
Jill Dunn Kenyon, triplet, divorcee and executive, is pain and self-examination.
The outer circle, work place and people, is manic slapstick satire. The
combination is provocative.

TSOTSI. By Athol Fugard. (Random House, $8.95.) A ''relentless and
claustrophobic'' novel by the South African playwright that traces the
self-awakening of a black gang leader and drifter.

WARLOCK. By Jim Harrison. (Delacorte, $13.95.) A poet and serious novelist pays
a kind of homage to the pulp caper. The result is an unevenly paced but
''stylish entertainment'' with pleasures ''farcical, reflective, luscious,
gritty.''

THE WATER CASTLE. By Ingeborg Lauterstein. (Houghton Mifflin, $12.95.) In this
first novel, a young girl survives the chaos of Austria in 1937 and comes to
early maturity. The tale ''transcends pedestrian historical fiction and eschews
simplifications about the holocaust and its prelude.''

WHAT WE TALK ABOUT WHEN WE TALK ABOUT LOVE. By Raymond Carver.  (Knopf, $9.95.)
A remarkable collection of 17 tales that are ''a set of variations on the themes
of marriage, infidelity and the disquieting tricks of human affection'' in
suburban and lower-middleclass America.

WHERE THE JACKALS HOWL. And Other Stories. By Amos Oz. Translated by Nicholas de
Lange and Philip Simpson. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $12.95.) A harsh and
brooding set of eight stories about kibbutz life by the distinguished Israeli
writer. A ''strong, beautiful, disturbing book.''

THE WHITE RAINBOW. By Alan Harrington. (Little, Brown, $14.95.) An Aztec
fundamentalist cult believes in human sacrifice. The principal characters are a
''rich, leukemia-battling, Yankee-hating Mexican radicalized at Columbia in the
Mark Rudd days'' and ''Harvard's Wunderkind in his mid-30's, gifted linguist,
man of Viking beauty.''

WINTER GARDEN. By Beryl Bainbridge. (Braziller, $8.95.) A ''graceful, disturbing
thriller'' about the search for an English sculptor who mysteriously disappears
after traveling to Russia.

YOU CAN'T KEEP A GOOD WOMAN DOWN. By Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$10.95.) Collected stories in which the noted black poet and novelist dares to
''engage in fictional terms ... some of the major racial-sexual-political issues
of our time.''

History

THE AGE OF THE CATHEDRALS. Art and Society, 980-1420. By Georges Duby. (Chicago,
$22.50.) A social history of the late Middle Ages by a distinguished French
scholar whose ''insights whiz to and fro like meteorites.''

AMERICAN CATHOLICS. A History of the Roman Catholic Community in the United
States. By James Hennesey, S.J. (Oxford, $19.95.) A ''fascinating'' historical
survey of Catholics in America, with emphasis on the interplay of
assimilationist and separatist forces and the political role of the church.

AT DAWN WE SLEPT. The Untold Story of Pearl Harbor. By Gordon W.  Prange. In
collaboration with Donald M. Goldstein and Katherine V.  Dillon. (McGraw-Hill,
$22.95.) This ''result of half a lifetime of research'' is a ''brilliant
re-creation of the thoughts and personalities of the officers on both sides who
fought that day.''

COMING ALIVE. China After Mao. By Roger Garside. (McGraw-Hill, $12.95.) ''One of
the most cogent and elegant accounts of revolutionary China to have appeared in
the West,'' by a former First Secretary of the British Embassy in Peking.

THE DECLASSIFIED EISENHOWER: A Divided Legacy. By Blanche Wiesen Cook.
(Doubleday, $17.95.) Based on newly released documents, this useful history of
the cold war depicts both Ike the pacifist and Ike the warrior.

ETHNIC AMERICA. A History. By Thomas Sowell. (Basic, $16.95.) ''A concise
history of major ethnic groups ... significant as a quiet but powerful attack on
liberal beliefs about minorities, racism, segregation and affirmative action,''
written by a distinguished conservative economist.

EXPLAINING AMERICA: THE FEDERALIST. By Garry Wills. (Doubleday, $14.95.) Part
Two of the author's ''America's Political Enlightenment'' - an ''inventive''
interpretation of Madison and the Federalist Papers.

1587. A Year of No Significance: The Ming Dynasty in Decline. By Ray Huang.
(Yale, $19.95.) The author of this ''unusual and thoughtful book'' about the
220th year of the Ming Dynasty shows the historical ''significance of the
insignificant.''

THE HOUR OF OUR DEATH. By Philippe Aries. (Knopf, $20.) A ''profoundly learned,
richly detailed history of death in the West during the past thousand years.''

INFILTRATION. By Albert Speer. (Macmillan, $15.95.) ''An important work'' in
which the recently deceased Minister of Armaments under Hitler examines
Himmler's attempts to establish an industrial empire.

THE INTELLECTUAL RESISTANCE IN EUROPE. By James D. Wilkinson.  (Harvard, $20.) A
''thought-provoking'' study of the writers - Sartre, Camus, Boll, Pavese, Silone
and others - ''for whom World War II was an opportunity for translating ethical
ideals into political reality.''

JOAN OF ARC. The Image of Female Heroism. By Marina Warner.  (Knopf, $19.95.)
''Outstanding for its ambition and earnestness,'' this cultural history traces
the various myths about the Maid that have emerged in the five centuries since
her death.

THE LISLE LETTERS. Edited by Muriel St. Clare Byrne. (Chicago, $250 until Dec.
31, 1981; $300 thereafter.) ''One of the most extraordinary historical works to
be published in the century,'' this six-volume work, 50 years in the making,
includes the selected letters of the family of Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount
Lisle, and commentary by Miss Byrne, who has created from the letters a ''vast
tapestry of Tudor life.''

THE MAKING OF MODERN ZIONISM. The Intellectual Origins of the Jewish State. By
Shlomo Avineri. (Basic, $15.50.) ''The book about Zionism for people who have
honest doubts about Zionism.'' The author traces ''the development of Zionist
thought,'' focusing on its leading exponents.

MARY CHESNUT'S CIVIL WAR. Edited by C. Vann Woodward. (Yale, $29.95.) The
fullest version ever published - and ''editorially the most careful by far'' -
of the Civil War ''diaries'' made famous by Edmund Wilson in ''Patriotic Gore.''
Though Mr. Woodward, the noted Southern historian, does not label the diaries a
hoax, he discloses that Mrs. Chesnut actually composed them more than 15 years
after the end of the war.

MINNESOTA RAG. The Dramatic Story of the Landmark Supreme Court Case That Gave
New Meaning to Freedom of the Press. By Fred W.  Friendly. (Random House,
$12.95.) The ''bizarre'' story of Near v. Minnesota, the 1931 Supreme Court case
that is ''the critical wellspring of modern First Amendment law.''

MOTHER LOVE: MYTH AND REALITY. Motherhood in Modern History. By Elisabeth
Badinter. (Macmillan, $13.95.) In this translation of a best-selling book in
France, a philosopher argues that the historical record does not support the
notion of a maternal instinct.

THE OXFORD BOOK OF AMERICAN LITERARY ANECDOTES. Edited by Donald Hall. (Oxford,
$15.95.) A collection of tales about American writers that ''is itself a perfect
anecdote about our literary period.''

PHILADELPHIA. Patricians and Philistines, 1900-1950. By John Lukacs. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $17.50.) A history of a ''city behind the times,'' built around
portraits of seven illustrious Philadelphians who lived there in the first 50
years of this century.

PIONEER WOMEN. Voices From the Kansas Frontier. By Joanna L.  Stratton. (Simon &
Schuster, $16.95.) Memoirs of some 800 women who led lives of quiet courage,
endurance, fear, isolation and loneliness in Kansas between 1854 and 1890.

POLITICAL PILGRIMS. Travels of Western Intellectuals to the Soviet Union, China
and Cuba, 1928-1978. By Paul Hollander. (Oxford, $25.) An expose and analysis of
''sentimental idiocies of Western tourists'' in Communist countries.

THE POLITICS OF GENOCIDE. The Holocaust in Hungary, Volumes I and II. By
Randolph L. Braham. (Columbia, $60.) ''Immense and meticulous documentation'' of
how Hungarian Jews survived until the German occupation and an examination of
why their destruction came so suddenly and catastrophically.

PRACTICING HISTORY. Selected Essays. By Barbara Tuchman. (Knopf, $16.50.) ''A
book to celebrate'': 33 pieces, written over 35 years, by the best-selling
historian.

THE PURSUIT OF A DREAM. By Janet Sharp Hermann. (Oxford, $17.50.) An examination
of three successive communal experiments in black self-determination (the first
of which was undertaken by the elder brother of Jefferson Davis) in Davis Bend
and Mount Bayou, Miss.  ''Historical writing at its best.''

RED STAR IN ORBIT. By James E. Oberg. (Random House, $12.95.) A ''crisply
written'' history of the Russian space program - including the long-hidden story
of a disastrous explosion at a Soviet rocketlaunching site in 1960 - written by
a technician at NASA's Mission Control.

THE RETURN TO CAMELOT. Chivalry and the English Gentleman. By Mark Girouard.
(Yale, $29.95 until Jan. 1, 1982; $35 thereafter.) A ''contribution to the art,
rather than the science, of sociology''; the ''chronicle of an idea that
blossomed not simply into art and literature, but actually into a way of life.''

RUSSIA IN THE AGE OF CATHERINE THE GREAT. By Isabel de Madariaga.  (Yale, $40.)
A ''panoramic view of Russia's social, political, economic and cultural
development'' during the 34-year reign of Catherine the Great.

SENTIMENTAL IMPERIALISTS. The American Experience in East Asia. By James C.
Thomson Jr., Peter W. Stanley and John Curtis Perry. (Harper & Row, $17.50.)
Three scholars analyze the history of American involvement in Asia over the past
150 years. A ''description and deflation of a series of illusions'' about the
East.

SURPASSING THE LOVE OF MEN. Romantic Friendship and Love Between Women From the
Renaissance to the Present. By Lillian Faderman.  (Morrow. Cloth, $18.95. Paper,
$10.95.) A ''welcome and needed'' history of ''women who loved other women and
proclaimed that love in passionately expressive letters, diaries, poetry and
fiction.''

TASTE AND THE ANTIQUE. The Lure of Classical Sculpture, 1500-1900.  By Francis
Haskell and Nicholas Penny. (Yale, $45.) An analysis of changing taste over four
centuries: ''a pioneering effort of true intellectual distinction.''

THE TERRIBLE SECRET. Suppression of the Truth About Hitler's ''Final Solution.''
By Walter Laqueur. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) ''Few come out ... unblemished'' in
this thorough account of how news of the Holocaust was disseminated and ignored
during World War II.

THERE IS A RIVER. The Black Struggle for Freedom in America. By Vincent Harding.
(Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) ''More than a history of black protest: It
is also a personal testament of hope'' by ''an influential ... and significant
interpreter of the historical roots of the 'freedom movement.' ''

THE TRANSATLANTIC SLAVE TRADE. A History. By James A. Rawley.  (Norton, $24.95.)
''The first comprehensive and scholarly history of the slave trade.'' ''Cool and
dispassionate . . . generally intelligent and persuasive.''

VICHY FRANCE AND THE JEWS. By Michael R. Marrus and Robert O.  Paxton. (Basic,
$20.95.) An ''exhaustive,'' ''powerful'' and sober analysis of French
anti-Semitism during the Occupation.

WASHINGTON DESPATCHES, 1941-1945. Weekly Political Reports From the British
Embassy. Edited by H.G. Nichols. (Chicago, $40.) ''There will never be a better,
more luminous view of how things looked'' in Washington during World War II than
is provided by this collection of diplomatic dispatches, most of which were
written by Isaiah Berlin.

WHITE SUPREMACY. A Comparative Study in American and South African History. By
George M. Fredrickson. (Oxford, $19.95.) An analysis of race relations on both
sides of the Atlantic: ''One of the most brilliant and successful studies in
comparative history ever written.''

Science & Social Science

BASIN AND RANGE. By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $10.95.) Another
foray by The New Yorker's ''veritable master of expertise'' - this time into the
geology of the American continent.

COSMOS. By Carl Sagan. (Random House, $19.95.) ''A cleverly written,
imaginatively illustrated summary'' of the author's ''geological,
anthropological, biological, historical and astronomical ruminations about our
universe.''

FORMS OF TALK. By Erving Goffman. (Pennsylvania. Cloth, $20. Paper, $7.95.) Five
essays dealing with the varieties of ordinary discourse - including
breakfast-table theatrics. Mr. Goffman uses his ''considerable gifts for
rendering the everyday as bizarre and amusing.''

GALAXIES. By Timothy Ferris. (Sierra Club, $75.) A ''stunningly beautiful,''
lavishly illustrated large-format book that summarizes our current knowledge
about galaxies.

HIROSHIMA AND NAGASAKI. The Physical, Medical, and Social Effects of the Atomic
Bombings. By the Committee for the Compilation of Materials on Damage Caused by
the Atomic Bombs in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. (Basic, $37.50.) Compiled by a
committee of some 34 Japanese specialists, this ''inch-by-inch inspection of one
of the greatest horrors humankind has yet managed to impose upon itself'' is
''extraordinary in its grasp of detail, relentless in its search for relevant
data and almost a miracle of persistence.''

AN IMAGINED WORLD. A Story of Scientific Discovery. By June Goodfield. (Harper &
Row, $12.95.) For almost five years, June Goodfield followed the daily steps of
an immunologist. The result is an ''authentic and deeply stirring portrait of
the workings of a scientific mind.''

THE INNER AMERICAN. A Self-Portrait From 1957 to 1976. By Joseph Veroff,
Elizabeth Douvan and Richard A. Kulka. (Basic, $36.) A ''significant'' survey
documenting ''a steady relaxation of traditional definitions of work, marriage,
parenthood and self in the American public.'' ''Mandatory reading for anyone
seriously interested in what is happening to America.''

JANE BRODY'S NUTRITION BOOK. By Jane Brody. (Norton, $17.95.) ''An excellent
summary and guide for contructing a nutritious, healthy and tasy diet,'' by the
personal-health columnist for The New York Times.

LAWS OF THE GAME. How the Principles of Nature Govern Chance. By Manfred Eigen
and Ruthild Winkler. (Knopf, $19.95.) A ''remarkable, fascinating and very
profound'' book about chance and necessity that refers to everything from
statistical mechanics and game theory to energy and population problems.

LIFE ITSELF. Its Origin and Nature. By Francis Crick. (Simon & Schuster,
$12.95.) ''The doyen of modern molecular biology considers the grand panorama of
cosmic evolution and offers the highly unorthodox proposal that life on earth
originally came from other planets.''

LUCY. The Beginnings of Humankind. By Donald C. Johanson and Maitland A. Edey.
(Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) An account of the discovery of the oldest and most
complete specimen of a two-legged ancestor -''Lucy,'' the four-foot-tall
prehuman who walked the African plains nearly 4 million years ago.

THE MAPMAKERS. By John Noble Wilford. (Knopf, $20.) The story of cartography
from its beginnings in Egypt to its complicated (and often computer-based)
manifestations today in the charting of space and of the oceans. By a science
correspondent for The New York Times.

THE MINDS OF BILLY MILLIGAN. By Daniel Keyes. (Random House, $15.50.) The
strange true story of a man with 24 separate personalities, by the author of
''Flowers for Algernon.''

THE MISMEASURE OF MAN. By Stephen Jay Gould. (Norton, $14.95.) ''A historical
account of man's attempts to measure intelligence.'' The ''most significant work
yet'' by a noted scientist and writer.

NISA. The Life and Words of a !Kung Woman. By Marjorie Shostak.  (Harvard, $20.)
This fascinating book is the result of an anthropologist's interviews with a
member of a Kalahari tribe about her experience of sex, marriage, work and
motherhood.

ON BECOMING HUMAN. By Nancy Makepeace Tanner. (Cambridge. Cloth, $29.95. Paper,
$10.95.) A revisionist look at the world of hunters and gatherers: ''The first
book to marshal evidence supporting the central role of gathering and females in
human evolution.''

PATHFINDERS. By Gail Sheehy. (Morrow, $15.95.) Through interviews and surveys,
the author of ''Passages'' charts ''the territory that can be reached through
courage and flexibility'' along life's rocky road.

PSYCHOANALYSIS. The Impossible Profession. By Janet Malcolm.  (Knopf, $9.95.)
''Journalism become art'': an ''intricate minuet of revelation'' about the
''fractious discipline'' of psychoanalysis.

SAND RIVERS. By Peter Matthiessen. (Viking, $19.95.) Another ''clear triumph''
based on a safari into the Selous Game Reserve in Southern Tanzania by the man
who has ''taken the earth ... as his literary territory.''

THE SOUL OF A NEW MACHINE. By Tracy Kidder. (Atlantic/Little, Brown, $13.95.)
The story of a small company's race to design a new computer, told by the author
''with such pace, texture and poetic implication that he has elevated it to a
high level of narrative art.''

THE TIGRIS EXPEDITION. In Search of Our Beginnings. By Thor Heyerdahl.
(Doubleday, $17.95.) A five-month log of catastrophe and narrow escape aboard
the reed boat that the author of ''Kon-Tiki'' sailed from the Persian Gulf to
Djibouti.

THE UNITY OF NATURE. By Carl Friedrich von Weizsacker. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Cloth, $20. Paper, $12.95.) An able physicist, turned philosopher of science,
proposes that physics is approaching its goal of unifying science. An
''exhilarating glimpse of a strong mind at work.''

VILLAGES. By Richard Critchfield. (Anchor/Doubleday, $17.95.) A ''remarkable''
account of the lives and adventures of the people who live in the 20 Asian,
African and Latin American villages that the correspondent for The Economist has
visited during the past 14 years.

VIVIENNE. The Life and Suicide of an Adolescent Girl. By John E.Mack and Holly
Hickler. (Little, Brown, $13.95.) A child psychoanalyst and a teacher give a
''dispassionate, yet psychologically acute, account'' of a 14-year-old suicide.

THE WOMAN THAT NEVER EVOLVED. By Sarah Blaffer Hrdy. (Harvard, $17.50) A
sociobiologist ''marshals what is known of sex roles in primates to show the
absurdity of conventional claims about the 'natural' status of women.''

Poetry

BEFORE SLEEP. By Philip Booth. (Viking. Cloth, $12.95. Paper, $5.95.) A unified
book about coming to terms with age and death.  These poems, ''for all their
spareness, have substance enough.''

A COAST OF TREES. By A.R. Ammons. (Norton. Cloth, $12.95. Paper, $4.95.) The
voice is that of a ''reflective, perambulatory naturalist.'' The diction is a
mix of ''lofty argument and plain wordplay; botany, metaphysics, punning and
alliteration tumble freely one after another through the poems.''

THE COLLECTED POEMS. By Sylvia Plath. Edited by Ted Hughes. (Harper & Row.
Cloth, $17.50. Paper, $7.95.) The volume contains 224 poems written between 1956
and the writer's death in 1963, and another 50 chosen from poems written before
1956.

THE COMPLETE POEMS. By Anne Sexton. With a Foreword by Maxine Kumin. (Houghton
Mifflin, $20.00.) The entire collection of work by the poet who committed
suicide in 1974, including a large number of poems posthumously published.

THE COMPLETE POEMS OF MARIANNE MOORE. (Macmillan/Viking, $16.95.) The definitive
edition. As the poet wrote, ''Ecstasy affords/ the occasion and expediency
determines the form.''

FROM THE COUNTRY OF EIGHT ISLANDS. An Anthology of Japanese Poetry. Edited and
translated by Hiroaki Sato and Burton Watson. (University of Washington. Cloth,
$17.50. Anchor/Doubleday. Paper, $9.95.) A selection spanning 1,300 years and
the work of over 80 poets.

ONLY THE DREAMER CAN CHANGE THE DREAM. Selected Poems. By John Logan. (Ecco,
$14.95.) His ''best poems deal with personal relationships ... the life with
others and the inner life.''

PAUL CELAN: POEMS. A Bilingual Edition. Selected, translated and introduced by
Michael Hamburger. (Persea, $20.) Contains ''some of the most intriguing,
paradoxical, pure and anomalous poems in the German language.'' The poet was a
survivor of the Holocaust who killed himself in Paris in 1970.

THE REVISIONIST. By Douglas Crase. (Little, Brown. Cloth, $10.95.  Paper,
$5.95.) First book: ''an important subject (America); a consistent and supple
attitude toward it; and a style rich enough to answer to it.''

SELECTED POEMS 1958-1980. By Gilbert Sorrentino. (Black Sparrow. Cloth, $20.
Paper, $7.50.) ''His writings possess an almost unassailable moral and artistic
integrity . . . he gives us not only poems but excitement.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
We regret that the following nonfiction book was inadvertently omitted from the
list of Notable Books of the Year, which appeared in the Dec. 6 issue of The
Book Review.

THE SAGE OF MONTICELLO. Vol. VI, Jefferson and His Time. By Dumas Malone.
(Little, Brown, $19.95.) This final volume of the series covers Jefferson's last
17 years, mostly spent at Monticello, during which time his greatest
accomplishment was the creation of the University of Virginia. ''A masterly
achievement of scholarship, the finest biography of Jefferson we have or are
likely to have and a monumental triumph of a senior American historian.''

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GO, SADIE LOU! GRIDIRON SPIRIT CATCHES

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS NATANSON

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 28, Column 3; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1131 words


One Sarah Lawrence football fan to another, after the opening kickoff: ''Now the
way I understand it, you get one down and if you make four yards, you
automatically get another. I think.''

YEARS before she became Yoko Ono Lennon, Yoko Ono used to write avant-garde
poetry there. Years before she turned into the first actress on the Supreme
Court, Jill Clayburgh learned how to act there. Meredith Monk got her dancing
start there, Joanne Woodward enrolled as a continuing education student in the
1970's. Barbara Walters, ABC-TV, was once Barbara Walters, Class of '51. Carrie
Fischer was already Carrie ''Star Wars'' Fischer when she took up studies on
campus.

Sarah Lawrence College of Yonkers has long been associated with what its
founder, back in 1926, called the ''education of women for whom intellectual
interest would continue as an animating principle throughout life.'' It has only
been in the last 14 years that the college has been noted for the ''education of
women and men for whom intellectual interest would continue as an animating
principle throughout life.'' It will probably be another couple centuries before
Sarah Lawrence College is ever noted for its Cotton Bowl championships.

But, Cotton Bowls aside, there is something other than artistic agony at Sadie
Lou. There's football. Women's touch football. And men's touch-tackle.

In fact, the gridiron spirit was very much in evidence on a recent weekend. On a
Saturday afternoon that saw everything from a Sarah Lawrence defensive end
wearing an authentic World War II aviator's helmet to a pair of authentic Sarah
Lawrence cheerleaders (''Sar-ah Law-rence meta-physics tran-scend Vassar!''),
the Lawrencians posted a doubleheader victory over archrival Vassar College from
Poughkeepsie, N.Y.

Men's game: 7-0 Sarah Lawrence. Women's game: 19-0 Sarah Lawrence.  And all in
front of a crowd of several hundred curious souls on the college's front lawn,
where a woman named Sarah Bates Lawrence once tended one of the prettiest
gardens in Yonkers.

Sarah Lawrence-Vassar football? The men's affair was the first intercollegiate
gridiron event for the two schools in a decade, stirring memories of the
now-legendary battles of 1969 (18-6 Vassar), 1970 (59-52 Sarah Lawrence), and
1971 (33-24 Vassar). The original series, staged in the early years of
co-education at both traditional women's institutions, witnessed more beards,
bandanas, and capes than any college football match in history, along with the
specter of what one former Sarah Lawrence linebacker, Fred Schruers, described
as ''Vietnam-era conscientious objectors beating the hell out of each other on
the field.'' For Vassar-Sarah Lawrence, '81, the C.O.'s were replaced by M.D.'s
- marathon dancers.

Sarah Lawarence's brilliant freshman receiver Akwasi Taha had danced for 15
consecutive hours the night before the game in the school's annual Dance-a-Thon
Fund-Raiser, caught not a wink of sleep, then celebrated Game Day by making two
key interceptions on defense, hauling in five offensive receptions for 100
yards, and catching a last-second touchdown pass from the junior quarterback
John McDonough to break a scoreless deadlock.

''And after the game,'' Mr. Taha confirmed later, ''I went to another party.''
''I think there were some of us who expected to be creamed out there,'' conceded
Mr. McDonough, who once played seventh-grade basketball with a current National
Basketball Association star, Greg Kelser. ''Vassar has six times as many men on
campus as Sarah Lawrence - 950 to 154. Vassar also has intramural football; we
don't have intramural anything. Some of those Vassar guys even brought
mouthpieces. Frankly, I don't think they were too happy about losing.''

Mr. McDonough's daring bootlegs, Mr. Taha's sleepless catches, and some
crunching hits by a 6-2, 220-pound late arrival named Chan Suh (''We told
Chan,'' reported one of his teammates, ''to take off his glasses and get the
quarterback'') certainly helped the Green Machine cause, though the dimensions
of the Sarah Lawrence field may have proven the most decisive factor. The
college's front lawn is all of 75 yards long and narrow enough to turn a split
end into a tight end in a hurry.

''Vassar was wonderfully organized,'' explained Michael Druck, a Sarah Lawrence
junior who was referee. ''Which was precisely the problem. The Vassar
quarterback would call, say, a flanker-10 in the middle, he'd get perfect pass
protection, he'd look for the flanker, the flanker would disappear into the
bushes trying to run the pattern, and then panic would ensue.''

There was certainly less panic for the Sarah Lawrence women's squad, whch marked
the college's first-ever women's intercollegiate football contest with a full
arsenal of nicknames: senior quarterback Lauren (Buzz) Fishbein, who scored the
first historic touchdown on a 10-yard flea-flicker pass from junior halfback
Nora (Cleats) Conant; sophomore safety Annie (Guam Bomb) Bordallo, who had a
50-yard interception runback for one touchdown and also caught a 20-yard scoring
peg from the senior backup quarterback, Elsa (Moose) Hagberg. For all the terror
suggested by a Buzz, a Moose, or a Cleats, however, the Sarah Lawrence women
were as polite as polite could be, even joining the Vassarites for a joint team
picture when all was done.

''Just because it's football doesn't mean it has to be nasty and bitter,''
argued Fishbein, a one-time organizer of women's softball in Verona, Italy.
''Football is an incredibly intellectual game, when it's played the right way.''

Could be. Intellectual cause or not, Fishbein hopes to lead the troops against
Vassar again in the spring (''They did invite us up,'' she confirmed).
Meanwhile, Mr. Druck, a sports trivia buff when he's not building marine
aquariums in the Sarah Lawrence biology lab, insists that the borrowed quarter
he used for the opening coin toss will be worth hundreds of dollars some day.

As for the first-year men's coach, Allen Davis, the inaugural success has
prompted a wise announcement. ''I think I'll retire,'' said Mr. Davis, also the
college's Associate Dean for Student Affairs, ''while I'm still undefeated.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Nicholas Natanson, who graduated from Sarah Lawrence College in 1977 is now
assistant director of the school's public relations office.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of football team

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FATHER DRINAN SHOWS POLITICS IS IN HIS BLOOD

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 711 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


You can take the man out of politics but you can't take politics out of the man.
Or so it seems in the case of the Rev. Robert F. Drinan.

It has been a year since Father Drinan cast his final vote in the House of
Representatives, bowing to orders from Pope John Paul II that Catholic priests
not hold elective office.

Did he steal quietly into the night? Was the voice that denounced Richard M.
Nixon, the Vietnam War and the Federal Bureau of Investigation to be stilled?

In no way. Today, as president of the group Americans for Democratic Action,
Father Drinan is as much the political gadfly as he ever was. Only his targets
are different.

Crisscrossing the Nation

Since early September, he has crisscrossed the nation several times, giving more
than three dozen speeches, deploring the arms race, pleading for an effective
human rights policy, opposing the sale of Awacs planes to Saudi Arabia and
citing the plight of the poor and minority groups.

Indignation, occasionally leavened with touches of humor, spews forth like water
from a broken main as he discusses his two current bete noires: the President
and Moral Majority.

In Salt Lake City recently, he said, ''Reagan is wrong on almost everything and
the people feel betrayed.'' In Pittsburgh, he said, ''Ronald Reagan is educating
the middle class to hate the poor.'' And in Milwaukee, he said, ''Reagan is an
extremist, a very dangerous extremist. He's a dangerous man.''

Equally dangerous, in his view, is Moral Majority, the far-right evangelical
coalition that played a role in Mr. Reagan's election last year.

Speaking in Raleigh, N.C., two weeks ago, Father Drinan denounced Moral
Majority's ''hysterical fear'' of Communism and its support for a major arms
buildup.

''I can't be objective about the Moral Majority,'' he told a church assembly.
''As a clergyman, I'm embarrassed by their ignorance.'' To a gathering at Temple
Beth Am in Merrick, L.I., he said: ''I think there's danger in flag-waving
fundamentalists. They oversimplify the world.'' And to a crowd in Dallas, he
said that the Rev. Jerry Falwell, Moral Majority's leader, ''is more laughable
all the time.''

His writings in Catholic periodicals and other publications have also been
highly critical of Mr. Reagan and Moral Majority. And he has testified in
Congressional hearings on various social issues since leaving the House.

Have Pope John Paul II and others in the Catholic hierarchy criticized this
continued political involvement?  In his small office at Georgetown University
School of Law, where he teaches legislation and international human rights,
Father Drinan squirmed in his chair for a minute or so as he pondered the
question.

''No,'' he finally replied. ''When the question of becoming president of A.D.A.
came up, my superiors said, 'Take it.' So I did.''

After all, he added, the papal ban that closed his 10-year Congressional career
''applied only to elected public officials.'' Stacks of dog-eared copies of The
Congressional Record vie for space on his office shelves with books on world
hunger, arms control, human rights and religion.

''My problem,'' he said, ''is that I'm interested in everything.'' Still very
much the man of the cloth, he lives in a simple room in the Jesuit community at
Georgetown University, rising early to pray from his breviary and ending the day
by joining other Jesuit priests in celebrating mass.

While he has not returned to the House floor since leaving Congress, Father
Drinan swims almost daily in the House pool near the Capitol. He also jogs and
rides a bicycle that his Congressional staff gave him as a farewell present.

Does he miss being in Congress?  He slumped down in his seat, a rare frown on
his face, before replying: ''I don't know how to answer that.'' Well, then, is
he happy?  The frown disappeared and he laughed loudly.  ''Define your terms,''
he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rev Robert F. Drinan

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Jurate Kazickas Bride of Roger Altman

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 254 words


The marriage of Jurate Kristina Kazickas, a writer, to Roger Charles Altman, who
was Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for domestic finance in the Carter
Administration, took place yesterday on Cat Cay in the Bahamas. The Rev. James
N. English of Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in Washington performed the
ceremony at the San Luis Rey Chapel.

The bride, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Joseph P. Kazickas of Greenwich, Conn., and
East Hampton, L.I., will continue to use her own name. A graduate of the
Ursuline School and Trinity College in Washington, she has been a volunteer
teacher with the Consolata Catholic Mission in Nyeri, Kenya; a photojournalist
in Vietnam, a feature writer with the Living Today department of The Associated
Press in New York and an assistant editor of the Washington Life section of The
Washington Star. Her father is chairman of the Neris Coal Export Corporation in
New York.

Mr. Altman, son of Mrs. Sidney Altman of Boston and the late Mr.  Altman, was
graduated from the Roxbury Latin School and Georgetown University and received
an M.B.A. degree from the University of Chicago. He is a managing director of
Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb Inc., having joined Lehman Brothers in 1969 and become
a partner in 1974.  He has been previously married and divorced. His mother is a
retired librarian. His father was vice president of Morris Alper & Sons, food
brokers in Boston.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 'CHILD BRIDE,' STORY OF A CULT IN ARIZONA

BYLINE: By RICHARD F. SHEPARD

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 422 words


THE tragedy of a cultish life that becomes institutionalized over decades only
to fall victim to the outside world is the theme of ''Child Bride of Short
Creek'' on NBC-TV from 9 to 11 tonight.

This two-hour film, based on a story by Michael Fessier Jr., is a dramatization
of an incident of the early 1950's, when the Arizona state police raided a tiny
polygamous settlement in the desert. The group, started 45 years previously, had
as its ''president'' a farmer who believed that the settlement's isolation from
the world was ordained by God.

Joyce Eliason's adaptation, directed by Robert Lewis, spins out this pathetic
tale with a touching sympathy that yet retains an objectivity in a situation
reflecting little credit on the ways of the sect or, at the same time, on the
expediency and intolerance of those who would crush it. It is woven about the
very human plot of the community leader, portrayed with wonderful credibility by
Conrad Bain, who wants to marry a 15-year-old girl, Jessica, played with all the
radiance of a swiftly maturing woman by Diane Lane. Jessica falls in love with
the leader's son, a war hero back from Vietnam who knows he wants to leave his
father's ''kingdom'' and stop being a ''freak.'' Christopher Atkins, in this
role, represents the breakaway generation that wants a different way from the
one he was born into.

In the telling, there are no complete villains and no complete heroes. The men
who subjugate the women in polygamy and ignorance are following the dictates of
their beliefs, channeling their lust into an accepted form of social behavior.
The women are seen accepting their lot, content perhaps but not happy, while the
girls are curious and lively people, some of them eager to try the life of the
world forbidden to them.

The setting is beautifully grim, with the town a patch of green in the midst of
arid wastes fringed by towering buttes. The experience is conveyed by vignettes
of community life, folk dancing and psalm singing and even patriotism as
Americans. If viewers find it a life constricting and injurious to those who
follow it, they will also be shocked at the breakup, by the sudden police raid,
of what had been a stable, established manner of living.

''Child Bride of Short Creek'' is unusual in maintaining a balance, in evoking
thought and sympathy and, above all, in sustaining interest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUA CHARGES U.S. 'LIES' INVITE AN ATTACK

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 563 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Dec. 7


Nicaraguan Government officials said today that what they termed lies by the
United States were an invitation for other Central American countries to attack
Nicaragua.

''We have been hearing plain lies about Nicaraguan involvement in El Salvador,
lies that there are Cuban combat soldiers in Nicaragua, lies about 1,000
planes'' having been sent from Vietnam, Sergio Ramirez, a member of the
three-man junta, said at a news conference.

Daniel Ortega Saavedra, coordinator of the junta, said that these charges, and
statements by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  at the meeting last week
of the Organization of American States that Nicaragua's military presented a
threat to stability in the region, were an invitation to other Central American
countries to attack Nicaragua.

Mr. Ortega said that Nicaragua also had ''to consider as serious'' American
threats of a blockade or other military action in view of the support of the
United States for the dictatorship of Gen.  Anastasio Somoza Debayle and its
involvement in other Latin American countries, most recently El Salvador.

Charges Called Unfounded

Accusations by American officials that Nicaragua is supporting the Salvadoran
guerrillas are unfounded, Mr. Ortega said. He added that the charges were being
made to justify a United States military presence in El Salvador.

Mr. Ramirez sidestepped questions about whether, as American officials have
charged, the Soviet Union has supplied tanks to Nicaragua and whether Nicaraguan
pilots are being trained in Bulgaria to fly fighter planes that the Soviet Union
will supply later. He said that many of the country's tanks had belonged to
General Somoza's National Guard and that some were parked near the children's
playground in the Central Plaza as a memorial to the revolution here.

As for pilots being trained in Bulgaria, he said only: ''Why? We don't have any
jets.'' It is ''a right of self-defense,'' said Mr. Ramirez, that a ''little,
weak and poor country that feels threatened by somebody so powerful'' will
strengthen its armed forces.

''We are not going to send a single soldier outside our borders, but if somebody
invades we're going to defend to the last man,'' he added.

Talks on Army Rejected

Mr. Ramirez said that Nicaragua would not enter into discussions with the United
States about the size of Nicaragua's army, but that it would discuss with other
Central American countries the size of all countries' armies.

The confrontation was not between East and West, Mr. Ramirez said, but between
Nicaragua and the United States. ''The United States doesn't respect the right
of Nicaragua to be a free, independent country,'' he said.

But both Mr. Ramirez and Mr. Ortega stressed that they hoped for improved
relations with the United States. ''We can't develop our country without
assistance from the United States,'' Mr. Ramirez said.

They called the meeting between Foreign Minister Miguel d'Escoto and Secretary
of State Haig last week a positive first step and said further meetings were
planned.

But, Mr. Ramirez said, Nicaragua would not sever relations with Cuba as a
precondition for better relations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FORBIDDEN TO HELP CAMBODIAN CHILDREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 327 words


To the Editor:

In recent years, the Cambodian people have had to endure enormous suffering,
arising from the massive bombing of their country during the Vietnam War, the
brutal policies of the Pol Pot Government and the resulting widespread famine.
Under Pol Pot, Cambodia's educational system was systematically dismantled.
Educated people, especially teachers, were killed or forced to flee. Schools
were closed and allowed to fall into disrepair; textbooks and libraries were
destroyed.§choolchildren in the United States and Canada are trying to collect
86,000 kits, consisting of pencils, paper and other school supplies, to send to
Cambodia to help the children rebuild their schools. This aid, part of a
Mennonite Central Committee program, also includes such items as carpentry tools
for school repair, hospital equipment, soap, water pumps and canned beef.

However, the Reagan Administration has refused to grant the Mennonites an export
license, except for the canned beef and soap, claiming that school supplies in
particular are not emergency relief.

This decision is deplorable. For many years, Unicef has taken the position that
primary school aid is an integral part of emergency assistance. The U.S.
position is made even more morally indefensible by the recent vote in support of
seating the Pol Pot regime at the U.N. The Mennonites and other religious groups
must be allowed to practice the teachings of their faith and provide aid on the
basis of human need, not on racial, creedal or political grounds.  G. DALE HESS
Cranbury, N.J., Nov. 28, 1981 The writer and 11 co-signers of the letter are
members of the Princeton House Church.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 339 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 9, 1981 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SCOTT AS GENERAL IN 'TAPS'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 719 words


''TAPS,'' which opens today at the Gotham and other theaters, is a solemn,
ponderously silly film about the dangers of a military education.

The setting is the mythical Bunker Hill Academy, whose commandant, Gen. Harlan
Bache (George C. Scott), passed over for promotion in the real United States
Army, now devotes himself to shaping the minds of young men, aged 8 to 18, in
what he acknowledges to be the ''dinosaur'' disciplines of Honor, Duty and
Loyalty to flag and country.

When the Bunker Hill trustees decide to turn the 141-year-old school into a
condominium complex, and after poor old General Bache is removed from the campus
following a tussle between his cadets and some townies, the cadet corps, led by
senior cadet Brian Moreland (Timothy Hutton), decides it's found a cause worth
fighting and dying for.

Using weaponry that Bache has thoughtfully stockpiled for years (''Enough,''
says one man, ''to start World War III''), the cadets take control of the
school, vowing to hold it until the trustees reverse their decision. The young
men go to full combat status, breaking out their camouflage uniforms and
walkie-talkies, manning the walls with machine guns and passing out grenades to
one and all, including the 8-year-olds.

''Taps,'' I suppose, means to be the terrible last word on the military mind run
amok, and on the sort of thinking that led the United States into Vietnam not
long ago. Though it has been seriously directed by Harold Becker (''The Onion
Field,'' ''The Black Marble'') and seriously written by Darryl Ponicsan and
Robert Mark Kamen, the movie is less serious than absurd, though without ever
being funny.

It takes great pains to dramatize ideas that could offend only the John Wayne
who made ''The Green Berets.'' Indeed, the antimilitarist position is laid out
with such unconvincing high-mindedness by a National Guard officer, played by
Ronny Cox, that one longs for the reappearance of the staunchly nutty old
General Bache, who disappears from the movie one-third of the way through, never
to be seen again.

Considering the dreary circumstances, the performances are quite good,
especially those of Mr. Scott, who can do this sort of thing before breakfast;
Timothy Hutton, an Oscar winner for ''Ordinary People''; Sean Penn, as the one
cadet at Bunker Hill with a grain of sense; Tom Cruise, as a murderously gung-ho
cadet, and Evan Handler, as a cadet who remains a humane civilian at heart.

The film was photographed - very handsomely - at Valley Forge Military Academy
and Junior College in Pennsylvania. Just so we don't get the wrong idea, a note
in the credits says the events in the film are not meant to reflect ''the
educational philosophy or teachings'' of that school.

''Taps,'' which has been rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''), contains
some vulgar language and some fleeting, though serious, violence.

Cadets in Revolt

TAPS, directed by Harold Becker; screenplay by Darryl Ponicsan and Robert Mark
Kamen, from the novel ''Father Sky'' by Devery Freeman; adaptation by James
Lineberger; director of photography, Owen Roizman; edited by Maury Winetrobe;
produced by Stanley R. Jaffe and Howard B. Jaffe; released by Twentieth Cen-
tury-Fox Film Corporation. At the Gotham, Third Avenue and 58th Street; 34th
Street Showplace, near Second Avenue; Criterion, Broad- way and 45th Street, and
other theaters. Running time: 130 minutes. This film is rated PG.

Gen. Harlan Bache . . . . . George C. Scott
Brian Moreland . . . . . Timothy Hutton
Colonel Kerby . . . . . Ronny Cox
Alex Dwyer . . . . . Sean Penn
David Shawn . . . . . Tom Cruise
Charlie Auden . . . . . Brendan Ward
Edward West . . . . . Evan Handler
Derek Mellott . . . . . John P. Navin Jr.
Bug . . . . . Billy Van Zandt
J.C. Pierce . . . . . Giancarlo Esposito
Bily Harris . . . . . Donald Kimmel
John Cooper . . . . . Tim Wahrer
Hulk . . . . . Tim Riley
Shovel . . . . . Jeff Rochlin
Rusty . . . . . Rusty Jacobs
Mst. Sgt. Kevin Moreland . . . . . Wayne Tippett
Dean Ferris . . . . . Jess Osuna
Lieutenant Hanson . . . . . Earl Hindman
Sheriff . . . . . James Handy
Marshal . . . . . Steven Ryan
Deputy . . . . . Michael Longfield
Cadets . . . . . John Taylor, Eugene Krumenacker, David McGinley, John Faucher,
Declan Weir, Ryan Helm, Lou Milione, John McBrearty, Frank Chambers, John
Newmuis, Paul Lyons, Tom Hutchinson


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of Timothy Hutton

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 9, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

19 Vietnam Refugees Drown

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 53 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Dec. 8


A Vietnamese refugee boat capsized in a monsoon in the South China Sea off the
coast of northeast Malaysia last week, drowning 19 passengers. Refugees in
another boat that arrived at the Malaysian state of Kelantan today said that
seven children were among the victims.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 9, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

KENNEDY GAVE SPECIAL FORCES THEIR EMBLEM

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 326 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 8


The Special Forces were established by the Army in 1952 to provide the United
States with an unconventional-warfare unit capable of carrying out commando and
intelligence operations, but it was not until the Presidency of John F. Kennedy
that the forces really flourshed.

Influenced by the writings of Mao Zedong and Che Guevara, President Kennedy
believed that the United States needed a strong unconventional-warfare force to
battle Communist guerrillas. In the early days of his Administration, he moved
to enlarge the Special Forces. Against the strenuous objections of the Army, he
also authorized the force to wear the green beret.

For the Special Forces, a symbol of Mr. Kennedy's commitment to oppose what he
called the ''subterranean war,'' the green beret became a symbol in its own
right. Soon the unit, trained to operate behind enemy lines, became regarded as
an elite force.

Members of the Green Berets were trained in the use of small and heavy weapons,
radio operations and demolition. The first Green Berets were dispatched to
Vietnam as advisers as early as 1960, but the Special Forces as as a whole were
not deployed there until September 1964.

The Green Berets achieved their high point in Vietnam.  In Vietnam, however,
members of the Special Forces were diverted into counterinsurgency activities
rather than the unconventional-warfare techniques many of them were eager to
use. Instead of raising partisan armies behind enemy lines, for example, they
were instructed to set up static defense posts, and by the end of the war, in
their estimation, their role had diminished in glamour and importance.

From their wartime peak of 13,000 men, the Green Berets now number 4,000.  Two
groups are stationed at Fort Bragg, N.C., and one is at Fort Devens, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 9, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Looser Reins for the C.I.A.

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 552 words


Could the Central Intelligence Agency, the nation's vital eyes and ears abroad,
once again turn back to spy on law-abiding Americans and gather their names in
surveillance files?

Presidents Johnson and Nixon let that happen and Presidents Ford and Carter
issued orders against it. Last spring the Reagan Administration, which had
pledged to ''unshackle'' the spy service, raised the possibility of a return to
domestic spying with the first draft of a new intelligence order. Now the
President has signed a revised order that is not reassuring.

The true domestic powers of the C.I.A. are to be spelled out in another, secret
set of directives. The secrecy isn't new; the Carter Administration also kept
two sets of books. But as the C.I.A. was the first to complain, some of the
secret Carter procedures were more restrictive than the published ones. The
Reagan rules are likely to be too permissive unless Congress increases its
vigilance in overseeing the procedures.

When Congress created the C.I.A. in 1947, it envisioned an agency relatively
unfettered by law, operating almost exclusively abroad while the F.B.I. stood
guard on the home front. But the line between foreign and domestic activities is
often fine. Consider, for example, the agency's need to create a cover for a spy
by setting him up in some innocent-looking American setting before he is sent
abroad on assignment.

This sometimes necessary ability to operate in the United States was subject to
abuse. An extreme example was Operation Chaos, inspired by President Johnson's
conviction that opponents of the Vietnam War, even those who broke no law, had
foreign sup-port. He ordered the C.I.A. to prove it, and the agency attempted to
do so by compiling thousands of surveillance files that named hundreds of
thousands of Americans.

The post-Watergate reforms required reasonable suspicion of a foreign connection
before Americans could be catalogued or spied on.  That also protected American
businessmen from surveillance in their activities abroad. The Reagan order
unshackles the agency in varying degress, by requiring less suspicion of foreign
ties as a condition of domestic surveillance. Thus only Congressional oversight
can make sure that the C.I.A. does not again abuse its powers.

Mr. Reagan did not, however, turn back the clock to the days when Presidents
decreed no limits at all. Rather than discard the Ford-Carter orders, he
substituted his own. And it specifically recognizes the right of the Senate and
House intelligence committees to obtain confidential oversight information. The
rule of law thus remains embedded in the strange soil of intelligence.
More is needed, however, if civil liberties are to be truly protected. The Ford
and Carter orders were, by design, only first steps toward the safeguard of a
Congressional charter for the C.I.A.  The 1978 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Act made another advance by requiring court warrants for wiretaps and bugs.

The Reagan Administration shows no enthusiasm for a C.I.A. charter. The work of
Congress, however diligently it polices the executive order, won't be finished
until it produces one.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 9, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Keep the Angola Amendment

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 392 words


The Reagan Administration wants Congress to repeal the five-yearold Clark
Amendment, which forbids any aid - covert or overt - to insurgents in Angola.
There are some good reasons for removing such a narrowly directed restraint on
diplomacy, and they were cited in the Senate when it granted the President's
request for greater freedom of maneuver. But at the moment there are better
reasons for keeping the law, which the House ought to weigh as it votes today.

A little too piously, the Administration argues that it wants only to
re-establish executive authority, that it has no current plan to supply arms to
the rightist rebels led by Jonas Savimbi - who just happens to be visiting
Washington this week. What makes that argument suspect is that the concern for
tidiness has produced no comparable demand to eliminate a hundred other specific
prohibitions on aid, to Cuba or Vietnam, for instance. Only Angola has touched
the tender point of principle.

The repeal is plainly intended to emphasize Washington's objection to the
presence in Angola of 20,000 Cuban troops and Soviet military advisers.

The Luanda regime insists that they are needed to deter South Africa's attacks
on the Angolan bases of insurgents fighting for neighoring Namibia. They will
depart, it says, once Namibia gains genuine independence from South Africa. And
by all accounts, Angola has welcomed American efforts to achieve that
independence.

So whether or not Congress should bind the executive as much as it has in recent
years, a pragmatic judgment would find the Administration putting sand in the
gears of its diplomacy. It asks Angola's collaboration on Namibia and wants the
Cubans out; yet it pushes for a repeal that threatens intervention and is thus
likely to provoke the opposite result.

President Reagan promised in his campaign to aid Mr. Savimbi, whose insurgency
is championed by those who think Angola's Government is hopelessly compromised
by reliance on Moscow. But a Namibia settlement that includes the departure of
the Cubans would do much more to advance Mr. Savimbi's claims for a share of
power. If there is no intention to intervene in Angola, this is an odd time to
declare it legally possible again.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 9, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
A TALK WITH HAIG (I)

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 876 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 8


During his first year in office, Secretary of State Haig has been the object of
intense curiosity, not only in this capital but in many other capitals of the
world.

This started in the first days of the Reagan Administration, when he sent a
memorandum to the White House outlining the authority he thought he should have
under the President, over the formulation and administration of the nation's
foreign policy. His requests were not unreasonable, but were regarded in the
White House as excessive and were rejected.

Later, when President Reagan was shot, Mr. Haig appeared in the White House
press room and indicated that he was ''in charge.'' Later still, when the allied
capitals were concerned with massive antinuclear protests, he told Congress that
NATO had considered a ''demonstration'' nuclear explosion to warn the Russians
against any military invasion of Western Europe. And beyond that, he complained
publicly that there was some kind of conspiracy within the Reagan Administration
to ''get'' him.

All this, plus his tendency to emphasize military answers to political
questions, led to speculation about his judgment and eventually to veiled
discussion about his health. I asked to talk to him on the record about the last
year and his vision of the next year, and suggested that these personal
questions should be addressed. He agreed.

Q. I find this a disagreeable subject ... but wherever I go, I'm asked about
your health. It's a factor in the minds of many people and I think it ought to
be laid to rest. The basis of the question is always the same: that is to say,
that one day you seem to be serene; a week later you seem to be very tight and
concerned about your position and your turf. And that always goes back to
questions about your triple-bypass heart operation (on April 1, 1980). Not so
much about the operation itself but about what medication you may be taking.

HAIG. I take none whatsoever. I haven't taken any since three months after my
operation... It's absolute nonsense. That doesn't mean I can make any
predictions about myself for the future... I don't have to tell you that that
(rumor) was planted and fed and nourished.

Q. It wasn't planted on me. This is something that originally came to me from
some of your closest friends, who wish you well...  HAIG. I haven't changed my
style in 20 years that I'm aware of, and that style is to get mad when things go
wrong. (Anger) is a management vehicle. I don't know anyone who in a tense
period would suggest that I'm a rattle-ass. I do think that some of the concerns
I expressed early on with the Administration (about decision-making) were proven
on the mark.

The Secretary would not talk about his relations with Richard Allen, the head of
the National Security Council in the White House, now on administrative leave
pending an official inquiry into charges of conflict of interest.

''Let me just say this,'' Mr. Haig observed. ''I think the President is aware of
the problem... He will deal with it in his own way....''

On another peripheral question, I asked him about his days with President Nixon
in the White House, and about Mr. Nixon's diplomatic theory of ''calculated
unpredictability.''

Q. As I remember it, Nixon had a technique of confusion in dealing with the
Soviets. That is to say, a way to make them in the Kremlin, when they were
considering various options, think that Washington was totally unpredictable,
and therefore keep them off balance. Are you doing that?

HAIG. No. I think that what Nixon was referring to - and I can't speak for him -
was very close to the de Tocqueville thesis of democratic society, namely that
the people of a democracy are capable of unusual reactions once events have
brought them beyond the bounds of rational tolerance. The problem is how you
deal ... with the creation of a consensus ... to avoid miscalculation. That was
the process that had begun in the wake of Watergate and Vietnam - in my view -
when we were, for a host of domestic internal reasons, unable or unwilling to
deal clearly with affronts to our interests in Africa, the Middle East, perhaps
even in Iran and Southeast Asia.

On reorganizing the State Department next year he had little to say, except to
praise his present team.  But all these preliminary questions, including ones on
his selfinflicted wounds, which he admitted, and his relations with the press,
which have not been excessively happy, were not really the main things on his
mind.

He talked more about the play of economics and unemployment in the free nations
on foreign policy in the coming year, and the agony of the poorer nations - a
quarter of the human race now existing on the verge of starvation, yet
providing, as he insisted, more trade for the U.S. than Europe and Japan
combined.

But he agreed it was important to get personal questions out of the way before
the policy questions could be addressed, and his views on policy in the past and
coming year will be reported here later.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REPORT ON BURGER IS DISPUTED

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1316 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 10


A dispute developed today among former Nixon Administration officials over
assertions in a book by John D.  Ehrlichman that Chief Justice Warren E. Burger
had ''openly discussed the pros and cons of issues before the Court'' with
President Nixon.

That assertion is contained in the galley proofs of Mr.  Ehrlichman's memoirs,
''Witness to Power.'' Former Attorney General John N. Mitchell denied the
assertion that Chief Justice Burger had discussed Court issues with him, Mr.
Nixon and Mr. Ehrlichman. ''I've talked to President Nixon and he confirms that
he, too, has no recollection of such discussions,'' Mr. Mitchell said.

Nixon and Burger Silent

Neither Mr. Nixon nor Chief Justice Burger had any comment, their spokesmen
said. ''It is the general practice of the Justices not to respond to
allegations, especially when they involve a former litigant before this court,''
said Barrett McGurn, the Court spokesman. And Nicholas Ruwe, an aide in Mr.
Nixon's New York office, said that he had spoken to the former President and
that Mr. Nixon had said he would have no comment on the book.

Mr. Ehrlichman also says in the book that on two occasions Mr.  Nixon expressed
his belief that ''America's blacks could only marginally benefit from Federal
programs because blacks were genetically inferior to whites.'' Mr. Nixon, he
added, did not believe that blacks could ever achieve ''parity in intelligence,
economic success or social qualities'' but felt that ''we should still do what
we could for them, within reasonable limits, because it was 'right' to do so.''

And the book says that Mr. Nixon instructed Mr. Ehrlichman to have the Central
Intelligence Agency put a ''full cover'' on the President's brother, Donald.
When the agency refused, Mr. Ehrlichman said, the Secret Service agreed to keep
track of Donald Nixon's activities to spot anything that might embarrass the
President.

According to the galley proofs of the book, Mr. Ehrlichman, the chief domestic
affairs adviser, who served a prison term for his role in the Watergate
conspiracy, said that on several occasions ''Nixon and Burger talked about
Nixon's view of the death penalty, the rights of criminals and similar
law-and-order issues.''

The only discussion cited by Mr. Ehrlichman that related to a specific issue
pending before the Court took place, Mr. Ehrlichman said, at a breakfast meeting
at the White House on Dec. 18, 1970 when, he said, Mr. Nixon raised with the
Chief Justice ''the enormous importance'' of school busing cases.

''The President pointed out to the Chief Justice the enormous importance of the
'school cases' before the Court,'' Mr. Ehrlichman wrote, relying on notes he
said he made at the meeting. ''They discussed the issues of forced integration
of the schools, the relative merits of 'tracking' and desegregation in Northern
schools and the President's intention to 'set the course' for the country.''

Key Case Before Court

That discussion, Mr. Ehrlichman said, took place while an important busing case
from North Carolina, Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education, was
pending before the Court. Chief Justice Burger wrote the Court's unanimous
opinion giving lower courts the latitude to use busing, among other remedies, to
bring about school desegregation.

The Justice Department, reflecting the Nixon Administration's position, involved
itself in the case with a brief that argued for minimal busing.

Michael Korda, editor in chief of Simon & Schuster, the publisher, said that Mr.
Ehrlichman ''absolutely'' would not talk to reporters about his book at this
time.

In the galley proofs, Mr. Ehrlichman says that, as a member of a Federal appeals
court, Judge Burger wanted the Chief Justice appointment so ''passionately''
that he even promised to resign before the end of Mr. Nixon's term to allow the
President to appoint a younger man.

Making Sure of Right Choice

He said that Mr. Nixon had asked Mr. Mitchell to talk to Judge Burger before his
appointment ''to make sure he would be Nixon's kind of Chief Justice: a strict
law-and-order man, a politician who could and would produce results, a Justice
dedicated to undoing the excesses of the Warren Court.''

He continued: ''Burger convinced Mitchell and Nixon that he was all of that, and
more. He was even willing to create another vacancy when Nixon wanted one. If
Burger was confirmed as Chief Justice he would serve for a time and then step
down, Nixon told me a few days prior to Burger's confirmation. The President
said he had Burger's promise that Burger would retire before Nixon did so that
Nixon could then appoint another, younger Chief Justice to carry on the Nixon
mandate far beyond the Burger and Nixon years.''

Mr. Mitchell, in a telephone interview, said the idea of Chief Justice Burger
stepping down from the Court before the end of the Nixon Presidency had come
from Mr. Ehrlichman and had never been ''conveyed to Burger.''

Next to foreign policy, Mr. Ehrlichman wrote, nothing interested Mr. Nixon as
much as the Supreme Court and his chance to change its direction. He said the
former President would often ''daydream'' about whom he might appoint to rescue
the Court ''from the influence of the Ivy League'' who ''thought the Court was
their own private playground.''

Disappointment With Mitchell

Mr. Ehrlichman says that Chief Justice Burger was ''a Richard Nixon discovery''
and that Mr. Nixon had become increasingly disappointed in Mr. Mitchell's
efforts to recruit candidates for the Court, as well as his general performance
as Attorney General.

''Over the years,'' he wrote, ''Nixon was outspokenly critical of Mitchell's
mistakes, and Richard Moore, Egil Krogh and I spent countless hours trying to
repair them. Matters customarily managed by the Justice Department were moved
into the White House at Nixon's discretion.

''I had plenty of other things to do; I didn't need the added burden of being
Mitchell's keeper. And I surely didn't want his job.  But over the nearly four
years of Mitchell's tenure, Nixon's confidence in him steadily waned as a result
of one disappointment after another. It is not remarkable that the President was
looking for a 'second opinion' on Mitchell's recommendations.''

The galley proofs also present an unflattering portrait of Chief Justice Burger
as a man with ''aggrandizing tendencies'' who had requested the use of White
House aircraft, who had wanted the President to press his case for making an
annual State of Justice address to the Congress and who had constantly
communicated with the White House about the illneses and frailities of other
Justices.

Resignation of Justice Black

On Sept. 17, 1971, only minutes before the White House received the resignation
of Justice Hugo Black, Mr. Ehrlichman says ''Burger telephoned me to say that a
messenger was bringing the President a letter from Hugo Black. 'This is it,'
Burger said. His voice conveyed excitement and triumph.''

Mr. Ehrlichman also recalled Chief Justice Burger's visit to the White House on
the night of Mr. Nixon's television address explaining his decision to invade
Cambodia.

''I walked down to the small basement lobby and there was Burger, all dressed
up, carrying a thick, square envelope addressed to the President,'' Mr.
Ehrlichman wrote. ''He just wanted to drop it off, he said, because he wanted
the President to know how much he supported him in this latest move in Vietnam.
''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Chief Justice Warren E. Burger and President
Nixon (Page A32)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN REQUESTS AMERICANS TO QUIT LIBYA IMMEDIATELY

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1568 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 10


President Reagan appealed to Americans today to leave Libya immediately and
invalidated American passports for travel to that country.

But he stopped short of embargoing Libyan oil, seeking additional sanctions
against the Libyan Government or telling the estimated 1,500 Americans in Libya
that they must return home.

A senior Administration official said Mr. Reagan was still considering a series
of ''political, diplomatic, eco-
Text of U.S. statement, page A12.
nomic and other measures'' aimed at ending the ''current lawless behavior'' of
Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader. He said that it was ''obvious to
all'' that an embargo on oil imports had been ''discussed,'' but that no new
steps were imminent.

The purpose of Mr. Reagan's order, the official said, was to ''secure the lives
and property of United States citizens in Libya.'' He added: ''Beyond that,
there is no plan. We rule out nothing. We plan nothing.''

Allies Decline to Back Steps

In Brussels, where a North Atlantic Treaty Organization ministerial meeting was
under way, the allies declined to back the American steps against Libya. The
rebuff came after Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. had said he would
welcome ''their understanding and support.'' (Page A12.)

Libya challenged the United States to prove its assertion that Americans working
in Libya were in danger, Reuters reported, quoting a statement from the official
Libyan press agency. It described the United States move as unacceptable
nonsense and said Americans working in Libya lived in peace and enjoyed a higher
standard of living than Mr. Reagan himself.

The President's action today marked the culmination of a series of meetings on
Libya. They have been conducted in an atmosphere of urgency because of reports
by American officials that Colonel Qaddafi had dispatched squads of terrorists
to assassinate Mr. Reagan and other senior officials. Mr. Qaddafi has denied the
reports.

''In the past six months Libya has broadened and accelerated its efforts to
undermine neighboring states and to work against United States interests,'' said
William P. Clark, the Deputy Secretary of State, who announced Mr. Reagan's
action today. ''As a consequence, the security climate for American citizens in
Libya has worsened.''

Mr. Clark, who is serving as Acting Secretary of State while Mr.  Haig is in
Europe, said there was an ''increased risk'' to the Americans remaining in
Libya. He also said the President was ''prepared to take other available legal
measures to require that Americans leave Libya'' should they ignore his appeal
to depart voluntarily.

Enforcement at Issue

State Department officials acknowledged this evening, however, that Mr. Reagan's
directive would be difficult to enforce.  It leaves open the possibility that
Americans could travel legally to Libya - via Italy, for example -without a
passport. Today's directive does not apply to journalists.

The effect of the directive on Libya's ability to export oil to the United
States through American companies was seen as minimal. An Administration
official said there would be a ''modest, near-term effect'' as the companies
substitute ''third-country nationals'' for their American employees. He said the
action today wasn't based on achieving a cutback in oil activity.

As recently as October, Mr. Reagan himself publicly cast doubt on the
effectiveness of an oil embargo. The President said such a move would require
similar action by other oil importing countries if it were to have a damaging
impact on Libya. Senior aides to the President emphasized today that the United
States has undertaken no effort to persuade its allies to cooperate in an
embargo.

A senior Administration official, who briefed reporters under ground rules
requiring that he not be identified, said the Administration would refuse to
disclose any evidence to support its contention that American lives or property
in Libya were threatened by the Libyan Government.

But he and other officials cited several instances of what were termed threats
Libya has posed to other countries. He said this behavior would have led to Mr.
Reagan's action even if there had been no recent reports of assassination
squads.

As examples of objectionable Libyan behavior, the official cited what - said was
Libya's attempt, after the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt,
''to feed instability in the region and to bring increased pressure to bear on
the Sudan.''

He said Libya had ''supported terrorist organizations throughout the world'' and
he cited the Irish Republican Army, the Red Brigades in Italy and ''some of the
extreme groups claiming to act in the Palestinian cause.''

'Stepped Up Plotting'

In the last three months, the official said, Colonel Qaddafi had ''stepped up
plotting against United States targets'' and threatened such ''moderate
regimes'' as Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia, the Sudan and Somalia. He said the United
States had moved to help ''strengthen'' those countries against external
threats.

Administration officials, at the briefing and in interviews, emphasized that the
action today was ''protective.'' But they declined to discuss whether it would
serve as a prelude for stronger actions. Some American officials, for example,
are known to have argued that an oid embargo could impel the Libyan Government
to take Americans hostage.

''Today's action is primarily designed to protect Americans there,'' an official
said, ''but there's no doubt that ultimately it will give the President more
flexibility with regard to Libya.''

For several months, the Reagan Administration has requested that American oil
companies evacuate American citizens from Libya. The oil companies have reduced
their American personnel somewhat, but in general, they have declined the
Administration's request.

The companies maintain that Americans are well-treated in Libya, despite Colonel
Qaddafi's anti-American statements, and they dismiss the Administration's fears
that Americans could be seized as hostages should there be a future
confrontation with Libya.

Mr. Reagan's action today received a generally favorable reaction in Congress,
where there has been increasing sentiment in favor of some sort of forceful
action against Libya in light of the recent reports on assassination plots. Some
on Capitol Hill suggested that an oil embargo would be appropriate, but
Administration spokesmen said Mr. Reagan would oppose such legislation for now.

Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., the Senate majority leader, said the action was ''a
prudent thing to do under the circumstances.'' Referring to the seizure of
American hostages by Iran for 14 months, Mr. Baker added:

''Let's not have another Iranian situation, let's get our Americans out, let's
see how the situation unfolds and develops, let's see how Colonel Qaddafi
reacts, and let's decide what, if any, additional steps are necessary. That's
the way I read the statement.''

Senator Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island, the ranking Democrat on the Foreign
Relations Committee, said, ''One shoe has been dropped and that was pretty much
a light shoe - a carpet slipper.'' Senator Edward M. Kennedy, the Massachusetts
Democrat, went further, calling for an immediate halt of oil imports.

Today's action by Mr. Reagan makes Libya the only country to which travel is
restricted by Americans. Similar restrictions on travel to Albania were lifted
in the 1960's, and travel to China was lifted in 1971. President Jimmy Carter
allowed the bans on travel to Cuba, Cambodia, Vietnam and North Korea to lapse
in 1977. There was a ban on travel to Iran imposed from April 1980 to last
January, when the Americans held hostage there were released.

Administration officials said the other steps available to the United States to
restrict travel to Libya involved the International Emergency Economic Powers
Act and the Export Administration Act.

Those acts allow the Government to control commercial transactions, without
which travel would be nearly impossible. Should the acts be invoked, the
officials emphasized, the purpose would be to restrict travel, not to bring
about a shutdown of oil import activity.

At today's briefing, the Administration official said Mr. Reagan had presided
over two distinct reviews of Libyan relations since taking office.

In May, Mr. Reagan closed the Libyan diplomatic mission in Washington and
expelled its staff, citing ''a wide range of Libyan provocations and misconduct,
including support for international terrorism.''

In June, the official said today, Mr. Reagan took a series of unspecified steps
upon receiving recommendations from the National Security Council members.

A second review of Libya was begun in September, he said, prompted in part by
Libya's signing of a pact with Ethiopia and Southern Yemen. He said that ''the
timeliness of this review was highlighted'' by Libya's activities after Mr.
Sadat's assassination on Oct. 6.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of William P. Clark (Page A12) Photo of David R.
Gergen (Page A12)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA AND INDIA STARTING TALKS ON BORDER DISPUTE

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Dec. 10


Nearly two decades after they fought a short, fierce border war, China and India
took a major step today toward improving relations by opening negotiations on
their Himalayan frontier dispute.

The delicate talks, the details of which are being kept secret, were agreed to
when the Chinese Foreign Minister, Huang Hua, visited India in June.

No specific agenda has been announced, and Peking-based diplomats following the
talks do not expect any breakthroughs at this initial session, which is to end
Monday. An Asian diplomatic analyst said he believed that the two sides would
start by seeking a framework for dealing with the complex and emotional border
issue. The talks will also cover scientific and cultural contacts and trade.

Late tonight the New China News Agency reported that in today's talks ''the two
sides expressed common aspirations for the settlement of the Chinese-Indian
border problem and the development of relations between the two countries and
reached identical views on procedural matters.''

'Sincere and Friendly'

It did not specify how long the talks lasted but said officials of the two
nations had split into discussion groups. The atmosphere was described as
''sincere and friendly.''

The Chinese have cordially welcomed the Indian delegation, which arrived Monday
night. At a banquet here Tuesday, the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Han
Nianlong, said China was ''very pleased'' about the talks and hoped that ''with
our common efforts, our discussion will surely proceed smoothly and our friendly
relations will grow.''

Eric Gonsalves, the head of the Indian delegation, responded by saying, ''We
have no way to go other than forward with our friendly relationship.'' Mr.
Gonsalves, who is Secretary of the Ministry of External Affairs, had made a
preparatory visit here last year.

In another tentative sign of improving relations, it was announced last week
that Prime Minister Indira Gandhi had accepted an invitation from Prime Minister
Zhao Ziyang to visit China sometime in the future. The invitation, originally
extended when Mr. Huang visited New Delhi in June, was renewed when Mr. Zhao met
Mrs. Gandhi at the economic conference in Cancun, Mexico, in October.

Two Areas at Issue

The border dispute led to full-scale fighting in 1962. India has accused the
Chinese of seizing nearly 14,500 square miles in the Aksai Chin and Ladakh
region of their common western frontier. The Chinese in turn have said that
India holds about 56,000 square miles of former Chinese territory on their
eastern frontier.

Last year China declared that it was not asking for the return of territory
''illegally incorporated into India by the old colonialists'' and proposed that
both nations make concessions by accepting the realities of the present border.
India rejected this as acquiescing to China's seizure of its land.

The root of the dispute is that India adheres to the so-called McMahon line
drawn between India and Tibet by the British in 1915, while China bases its
claim on a tributary-based ''traditional and conventional'' frontier.

Because the positions are so entrenched, the decision to negotiate at all is
viewed as something of a breakthrough. The Chinese had previously contended that
the border dispute was so formidable that both sides should concentrate on other
aspects of their relations.  The Indians maintained that no real improvement was
possible until the border question was settled.

Thaw Began Five Years Ago

After Chinese troops overran the disputed border region in the west in October
1962, diplomatic ties were virtually frozen until five years ago, when China and
India decided to restore ambassadors.  A slow thaw followed.

In early 1979 Atal Bihari Vajpayee, then India's Foreign Minister, visited
Peking only to return home prematurely because China had attacked Vietnam, which
India supported. Prospects for improving relations were further stalled when
Mrs. Gandhi recognized the new Vietnamese-backed regime of Heng Samrin in
Cambodia in place of the ousted Pol Pot regime backed by China.

But last year Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese leader, was quoted as telling an Indian
visitor to Peking that he saw no reason why the border problem could not be
solved by repeated discussions. In June, when Mr. Huang visited India, he told
reporters that he thought that ''a fair, comprehensible and reasonable''
solution could be found.

The Chinese have since allowed small groups of Indian pilgrims to visit holy
sites in Tibet. The overland trade route between India and China remains closed,
except for what gets smuggled through Nepal.  Nonetheless, Chinese-Indian trade
has grown from virtually nothing two years ago to an estimated $100 million
annually, running heavily in India's favor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of Asia

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV Weekend;
VIETNAM VETERANS SPEAK; CHRISTMAS SPECIALS BEGIN

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 35, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words


VIETNAM veterans, described as ''the forgotten warriors of a war America does
not want to remember,'' are the subject of an exceptionally insightful and
poignant documentary on CBS-TV, Channel 2, tomorrow at 10 P.M. ''Bittersweet
Memories: A Vietnam Reunion'' represents an unusual venture for television. It
was produced in cooperation with Newsweek magazine, which this week is featuring
a cover story on the soldiers of Charlie Company, who saw combat in Vietnam in
the 1960's. Of the 80 men interviewed for the story, 30 were brought, along with
some of their wives, by CBS News to a threeday gathering in Florida.

The idea for the reunion was devised by Howard Stringer, who produced the
program with Andrew Lack and Bill Willson. The veterans are seen talking among
themselves and being interviewed separately.  The reporter catalyst happens to
be Bill Moyers, who recently returned to CBS from public television. The Moyers
manner is especially suited to this kind of project. In a one-to-one interview,
he is sharp without being hostile or patronizing. In a group setting, he steers
the conversation without being obtrusive. He has an enviable gift for connecting
powerfully with all sorts of people.

What the program establishes clearly is that broad generalizations about the
Vietnam veteran can be hazardous. Most are annoyed with what seems to be the
widespread impression that they returned as seriously disturbed drug addicts.
''We're ordinary people, have an ordinary job, pay ordinary taxes, and we do our
ordinary work every day,'' one of them states at the outset.

Attitudes and feelings cover a broad spectrum. One woman, describing her
husband's lingering nightmares, concedes that the war has, in a sense, become
his mistress, and she is jealous. Another thinks Vietnam was a positive
experience for her husband, giving him stamina and discipline. No one apologizes
for ''doing his duty,'' but some refuse to be sentimental about the experience.
One veteran says simply, ''We blew it, worse than America has ever blown it
before - we made the biggest mistake we've ever made.'' He wants to make ''damn
sure that it doesn't happen in El Salvador or anywhere else.''

There is a lot of back-slapping camaraderie, and there are a few tears.
Throughout, however, there is the clear message that after about a decade of
calculated neglect, the Vietnam veteran is ready to talk about his experiences.
Why? One tells Mr. Moyers: ''Somebody asked us. Nobody has ever before asked us
what happened.''

The vogue in Christmas specials these days is to combine traditional songs with
a glossy travelogue. Last week, for instance, we had Anne Murray in Nova Scotia
and Johnny Cash in Scotland. The performer who probably started this business of
electronic picture postcards is Perry Como, who for years has been traveling to
far and appropriate settings for his holiday specials. Tomorrow evening at 10 on
ABC-TV, Channel 7, he can be found in Canada, using Montreal and Quebec as
backdrops for renditions of such traditional fare as ''Silent Night'' and
''Adeste Fidelis.'' His guests include Dorothy Hamill and Debby Boone. As usual,
the serenely unflappable Mr. Como makes very easy listening.

On a local level, special Christmas programming is getting a rare original
effort Sunday at 7 P.M. on WPIX, Channel 11. ''A Magic Garden Christmas,'' made
by Cap Productions, features two women named Carole Demas and Paula Janis. The
most prominent residents of their colorful garden, which includes even a
lollipop tree, are the bird Flapper and a pink furry creature named Sherlock.
The music, under the overall direction of Ian Herman, has songs about saying
hello, buying Christmas trees, racing down mountains and thanking people for
their love. The hosts have very pleasant voices. This one is strictly for the
smaller kiddies.

Sunday night at 9, CBS weighs in with another of its annual ''Circus of the
Stars'' extravaganzas. The idea, which started years ago with French performers
in Paris, is to gather together a lot of recognizable names for an evening of
feats and stunts. The packaging is flashy, but the business at hand is taken
very seriously indeed.  The ''ringmasters'' this time are Linda Evans, Elliott
Gould, Bob Newhart and Brooke Shields.

The female stars are given an opportunity to pour themselves into skimpy outfits
from the very first act, with Catherine Bach of ''The Dukes of Hazzard.''
Wrapped in a piece of leopard skin, Miss Bach would be memorable for just
standing still. As it turns out, though, she is the co-star to three elephants,
which she orders about with no-nonsense authority. At one point, she puts her
leg in the mouth of one creature and is lifted completely off the ground. Miss
Bach is not kidding around.

Some of the other routines feature Marjoe Gortner taming lions, leopards and a
panther; Sally Kellerman holding balloons as targets for a knife thrower; Mike
Connors escaping from a box being crushed by a truck; Danielle Brisebois, Brodie
Greer and Richard Hatch walking a tightrope, and Tab Hunter and Steven Ford, son
of Gerald Ford, putting horses through tricky paces. An announcer periodically
reminds us that this is unbelievable or, at the very least, astonishing. You may
or may not believe him.

Sunday at 11 on WNET-TV, Channel 13, a special edition of the ''Inside Story''
series, which focuses on broadcasting issues, looks at a number of the new
critics of television, motivated mostly by religious beliefs, who contend that
programming is what one minister calls ''a moral swamp'' of four-letter words
and suggestive material. Hodding Carter, the program's host, oversees a broad
survey of the television scene, beginning in 1961 when Newton Minow of the
Federal Communications Commission came up with his handy ''vast wasteland''
phrase.

Most views in the current confrontation are represented, fairly and adequately,
from the Moral Majority's Rev. Jerry Falwell to the heads of networks and
production studios. Despite network protestations to the contrary, some
producers insist that pressures about certain aspects of content have increased
significantly.  Elisabeth Coleman, a producer, has recorded certain groups
monitoring programs for sexual material or objectionable language. The methods
of compilation are startlingly arbitrary.

Mr. Carter concludes that the networks will never be willing or able to satisfy
the demands of all the new critics and that a call for a consumer boycott of
some advertised products is inevitable. The public can then decide to turn that
boycott, like the television set, on or off. This is a valuable review and
summary of an extremely sensitive issue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Perry Como

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JERRY WURF, LEADER OF FEDERATION OF MUNICIPAL WORKERS, DIES AT 62

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 942 words


Jerry Wurf, president of the nation's largest union of public employees, the
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, died of a heart
attack yesterday at George Washington University Hospital in Washington. He was
62 years old.

Mr. Wurf, who lived in the Cleveland Park section of Washington, had suffered
from a painful disease of the nerve endings recently and had been hospitalized
for about a month after surgery, according to a hospital spokesman, Irene Haske.

Although he was never a public employee, Mr. Wurf was a union leader for more
than 40 years and, more than any other person, was credited with building public
employee unionism in this country into a labor force numbering more than 18
million workers.

In the 1950's and early 1960's, he guided and built District Council 37, the
large public employees' union in New York City, into a major component of the
national union.

President for 17 Years

And for the last 17 years, Mr. Wurf was president of the national union, known
as the A.F.S.C.M.E., and was largely responsible for building its membership
from 200,000 to more than one million, including police officers, firefighters,
sanitation and hospital workers, office clerks and other employees of the
nation's cities, counties and states.

A Brooklynite with a foghorn voice, curly iron-gray hair and bushy eyebrows
behind horn-rimmed spectacles, Mr. Wurf was a powerful and persuasive speaker.
He was known as a maverick in the union movement because he did not readily fall
into line with whatever cause was being advanced by the leadership.

''On some issues,'' Mr. Wurf said in an interview last September, ''there is
knee-jerk solidarity, and on other issues there is no solidarity.''

Although he did not oppose the striking air traffic controllers, for example, he
made no secret that he did not favor their tactics.  As head of the largest
component union in the A.F.L.-C.I.O., he often found himself at odds with George
Meany, its longtime president, and while he led many walkouts, he repeatedly
declared that he did not favor strikes for their own sake.

Believer in Arbitration

He always believed that arbitration procedures should be established in
situations, like the controllers' strike or even among police and fire fighters,
in which public workers were locked in confrontations with the Government that
neither side could win.

Even so, it was under Mr. Wurf's leadership and tough negotiating stances that
his union made rapid gains at the bargaining table. And it was a walkout of
District Council 37 that led to the demise of New York State's Condon-Wadlin
Act, which required the dismissal of public employees who struck. That statute
was replaced by the Taylor Law, which prescribes fines and other less severe
penalties.

Mr. Wurf in recent months had been in the forefront of labor's opposition to the
Reagan Administration's budget cuts. His last major address, in fact, was at the
Solidarity Day rally in Washington Sept. 19.  His illness forced him to miss the
A.F.L.-C.I.O. convention in New York City in November and a meeting of the
federation's executive council with President Reagan on Dec. 2.

Mr. Wurf had supported Jimmy Carter in the last Presidential election, after
first having leaned toward the candidacy of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.  Over the
years, Mr. Wurf had become known as something of a plunger on political losers.
He was among the first to endorse the Presidential candidacy of Edmund S. Muskie
in 1971, and he later supported George McGovern.

Born 1919 in New York

Jerome Wurf was born in New York City on May 18, 1919, the son of a textile
jobber.  He attended New York University and, when he graduated in 1940, found
work as a cafeteria busboy and cashier.  He soon was organizing his fellow
workers.

In 1947, Arnold Zander, the founder and president of the federation, hired Mr.
Wurf as an organizer and later gave him the job of building District Council 37,
which is now headed by Victor Gotbaum.  It had less than 1,000 members when he
joined, but the membership had swelled to 38,000 by 1964, when he won the
national union presidency from Mr. Zander.

When he assumed the presidency, he took over a union that was nearly bankrupt
and had ties to the Central Intelligence Agency and other questionable features.
He began by selling union housing projects and some union buildings and began
putting the union on a sound financial footing.

He also severed links to the C.I.A. and saw the union through a series of major
tests, including a strike by black sanitationmen in Memphis in 1968 to protest
racial discrimination

In April 1978, his union became the largest unit of the A.F.L.- C.I.O. when it
absorbed a former competitor, the Civil Service Employees Association of New
York. In recent years, it has aggressively recruited women and blacks, two
groups often ignored by the labor movement because of their traditional
resistance to organization.

Mr. Wurf was named a vice president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. in 1969, but his
influence in the governing body was often vitiated by his oppositon to its
postures.  Among other things, he opposed United States military involvement in
Vietnam, which Mr. Meany strongly supported.

Mr. Wurf is survived by his wife, Mildred, two daughters and a son. Funeral
arrangements have not been announced.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jerry Wurf (page A1)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 12, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE APPROVES FOREIGN AID BILL AS G.O.P. DIVIDES

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1302 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 11


With Republicans almost evenly divided, the Democratic-dominated House gave
President Reagan a hard-won victory today by adopting its first foreign aid
appropriation bill in three years.

The $11.4 billion measure was approved by a vote of 199 to 166.  It had the
support of 84 Republicans, while 87 voted against it.

Sizable numbers of Republicans have usually voted against foreign aid as
fruitless and wasteful, but many were won over this time by intensive lobbying
by President Reagan, Secretary of State Alexander Haig Jr. and Treasury
Secretary Donald T. Regan.

"You just can't discount this guy in the White House," representative Silvio O.
Conte, Republican of massachusetts, said after the vote.  "He wields a
tremendous amount of power.  These people all were massaged plenty."

Senate Back Spending Bill

In a more predictable victory for the Administration, the Republicancontrolled
Senate approved, 60 to 35, a $413 billion omnibus continuing resolution to
finance the Government through March 31.  The continuing resolution, a device
that authorizes the Government to spend money in the absence of formal
appropriation bills, was identical with one the House approved Thursday.  The
President is expected to sign it Monday.

The President issued a statement saying: "The continuing resolution just passed
by the Congress represents another difficult step forward in this nation's
struggle to restore responsible economic and fiscal policy. It is a step away
from the big spending that wreaked havoc in the past and toward our goal of once
again living within our means."

Target Set on Deficit

Mr. Reagan's senior advisers have settled on a target of no more than $55
billion to $60 billion for the budget deficit for 1984, the fiscal year in which
Mr. Reagan originally promised to balance the budget, Administration economists
project a deficit of $160 billion if taxes and spending were unchanged.  (Page
33.)

Thus far, only three of 13 appropriation bills for the fiscal year 1982 have
been signed into law.  They cover the legislative branch, energy and water, and
the District of Columbia.  Two more, financing the Interior Department and the
Housing and Urban Development Department, have been approved by Congress and are
on their way to the White House.

Foreign aid spending has been entirely controlled by continuing resolutions for
the last three years, in which no separate appropriation for that purpose has
been made.  The omnibus measures provided $9.7 billion for foreign aid, an
amount Mr. Reagan said deprived him of needed flexibility in the conduct of
foreign policy.  This sum would be superseded by the $11.4 billion appropriation
bill already approved by the Senate.  Differences with the House bill are
expected to be resolved in a House-Senate conference.

The drama today occurred in the House chamber, where foreign aid attracted some
unaccustomed Republican allies.  Almost the entire debate was on the Republican
side, with Democrats mostly listening in silence.

Supporters of the bill invoked the President's argument that the funds would
enhance United States security, help provide economic and political stability in
foreign countries and, in the case of the Export-Import Bank, create jobs for
American workers.

Opponents argued that the United States could not buy friends, questioned aid to
some unfriendly and unstable regimes, and said foreign aid was especially
difficult to support at a time of cuts in domestic social programs.

Most of the debate focused on an effort to reduce the United States contribution
to the International Development Association, which provides 50-year loans to
some of the world's poorest nations with no interest.

Debate on Contribution

The Appropriations Committee had recommended that the United States contribution
be increased from $850 million, the amount recommended by Mr. Reagan and
negotiated by the previous Administration.  Opponents sought to reduce the
financing to the current contribution.

The House voted, 282 to 113, to adopt a compromise proposed by Representative
Jack Kemp, Republican of upstate New York, which set the financing at $725
million.  He said that the compromise was supported by the Administration.
"This is an investment in peace and stability," Mr. Kemp argued.

He warned that the President would not sign a bill that cut more money out of
the International Development Association and asked, "Are you willing to risk
the whole bill, and aid to Israel, Egypt, Sudan and Somalia, simply to squeeze
another $200 million out of I.D.A.?"

Support for Association

Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois, called the association "an
economic weapon against Communism," and asked: "Must we always use guns?  Must
we always use nuclear weapons?"

"We'll never have enough money for the people of our country to do everything we
want to do," Mr. Hyde said.  "But we do not live in isolation.  We cannot pull
the blanket up over our head."

But Representative Mickey Edwards, Republican of Oklahoma, who sought no
increase in United States contributions to the association, said, "It's a way to
save the taxpayers $330 million without taking away a single education loan or a
single food stamp."

Similarly, Representative Philip M. Crane, Republican of Illinois, told his
Republican colleagues, "We have as a party consistently argued against foreign
giveaway programs.  We exercise absolutely no control over these funds."

Several opponents described association as a giveaway program for India, which
receives more than 40 percent of I.D.A. funds.

After another debate, the House voted to increase to $4.4 billion, from $3.9
billion, the funds for the Export-Import Bank, which provides low-interest loans
to foreign buyers of American products.

Representative Conte, who proposed the increase, said it was needed for one
reason: to provide jobs for American workers.

Supporters argued that most industrial nations subsidized their exports.  But
opponents countered that the bank had to borrow at higher interest rates than
its money on loan, that the funds contributed to the growing national deficit
and that the entire program was a high price to pay for American jobs.

Warning by Democrats

Democrats warned that one Republican proposal, to prohibit foreign aid funds to
Angola, Cambodia, Cuba, Laos, Vietnam, Syria or Libya, meant that the United
States could not participate in multilateral institutions, such as the World
Bank, that do not recognize a nation's ability to restrict the use of its
contributions.  The Democrats said that they would not support the foreign aid
bill if that provision were adopted. It was defeated by a 44-to-21 vote.

In a computer printout made by the Appropriations Committee after the vote,
military assistance in the bill was placed at $3.4 billion in loan guarantees
and direct credits and forgiven loans; $1.3 billion was earmarked for the Agency
for International Development; and $1.8 billion for the International Bank for
Reconstruction Development.

In the Senate, the omnibus spending bill was approved after democrats offered a
series of amendments intended to embarrass Republicans by calling attention to
some of the more sensitive areas included in the $4 bililon cut in social
programs.

Alan Cranston, Democrat of California, the Senate minority whip, said, "Every
attempt by the Democrats to humanize this brutal budget was voted down by the
Republicans time after time under direction of the White House in virtually
straight party-line votes."

The President saw things differently.  He said that the vote represented "only
another installment in a long and hard program to get the Federal budget under
control," adding, "We must not rest.  The nation expects continued
follow-through."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Howard H. Baker Jr., and Senator Mark O.
Hatfield

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 12, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE CZAR IN CHARGE OF NUCLEAR ARMS

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1233 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 11


At one time the Atomic Energy Commission and an 18-member joint Congressional
committee were in charge of America's mightly nuclear arsenal.

Nowadays, however, much of the responsibility for it and for the Reagan
Administration's big planned weapons buildup rests in other hands. They belong
to Herman E. Roser.

Mr. Roser, a 59-year-old career civil servant who was appointed Assistant
Secretary of Energy for defense programs by President Reagan, is not actually a
one-man sucessor to two major Federal bodies, but he does function as a sort of
nuclear weapons czar.

His name is virtually unknown to the public, or even to the movement that
opposes nuclear arms. Yet Mr. Roser is directly in charge of a weapons complex
that employs 54,000 people and whose annual budget of almost $5 billion exceeds
that of such departments as State, Interior, Justice and Commerce.

He supervises the design, testing, production, storage and security of all
nuclear warheads. But neither he nor his nominal chief, Energy Secretary James
B. Edwards, has much to do with decisions about whether the nation actually
needs, say, the MX missile.

Not How Many or What Kind

''It's not our function to determine how many or what kind of weapons systems we
should have,'' Mr. Roser said in an interview at his trim, very secure office in
suburban Maryland. The Pentagon, acting through the Military Liaison Committee
and with the coordination of the National Security Council, ''asks us what we
can furnish that can meet their requirements,'' he said.

That statement in itself reflects how much authority has changed since the days
immediately after World War II when, after a bitter fight between military and
civilian scientists, the Atomic Energy Commission was set up with the explicit
idea of maintaining civilian control over nuclear weapons.

In principle, the commission was to review the Pentagon's annual weapons
requests and determine whether nuclear warheads should be developed and built.
In practice, the commission generally went along with the Pentagon's ''buy
orders,'' although it occasionally rejected some warheads wanted by the
military, as it did, for example, in the Kennedy Administration.

Not a Dr. Strangelove

Mr. Roser, who was born in New Mexico, has spent his career working on nuclear
weapons, but it would be hard to imagine anyone less akin to the maniacal Dr.
Strangelove stereotype. In Washington, where he dons three-piece suits instead
of the Western sport shirt and string tie garb he prefers, he looks like a Wall
Street banker or a corporation president.

It is also hard to find, even among those skeptical of the Administration's arms
policy, anyone who will whisper a critical word about him.

''He is the perfect example of the technical professional civil servant,'' said
John Deutsch, a former Under Secretary of Energy who is now a professor of
chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. ''There's no person in
the country more qualified for the job.''.

John J. Burke, a former Atomic Enercy Commission official who plucked Mr. Roser
from the ranks of the Zia Company, a contractor at Los Alamos, in the early
1960's, added, ''I regard him as the quintessential public service executive.''

Up From Retrenchment

As deputy manager and then manager of the Energy Department's giant Albuquerque
Operations Office, Mr. Roser was widely credited with carrying the nuclear
weapons porgram through what one official calls the ''retrenchment mode'' of the
1970's when the topic of nuclear arms was about as popular as the Vietnam War.

What he did was keep up the standards and morale of an agency at a time when few
people had any use for things military. In the words of N. Douglas Pewitt,
assistance science adviser to President Reagan, nuclear weapons ''were sort of
in the dustbin of the Federal bureaucracy and I think he did an exceptionally
good job of keeping up the standards.''

Albuquerque Operations embraces nine major facilities stretching from California
to Florida, including production plants, test sites, the warhead final assembly
plant in Amarillo, Tex., and research laboratories that are often locked in
competition with one another.

Very Few Who Can Say 'No'

Some people lament the fact that with the 1977 demise of the Joint Committee on
Atomic Energy and the disappearance in 1975 of the Atomic Energy Commission
there has been a diminution of civilian control over the nuclear stockpile.

Today there is no one outside the White House who can say ''no'' to the Defense
Department's weapons requests, which are transmitted annually in top-secret
''stockpile memorandum.''

Although the joint committee did, at least, sometimes veto elements of the
Pentagon shopping list, some officials say that its oversight job has been
spread so thinly among many committees that none seems to care.

''We used to have strong civilian control,'' said John T. Conway, former
executive director of the joint committee, now a lobbyist for nuclear utilities.
''But we don't have that today. It's so diversified - with no expertise.''

In addition to working these days on the latest generation of missiles, Mr.
Roser is involved in a program begun by the Carter Administration to modernize
the weapons-making plants themselves, many of which date from World War II.

''We have some rebuilding to do,'' he asserted. But to call the facilities
dilapidated, as some have done, he said, ''is probably an overstatment.''

As Always, Time and Money

One of his biggest problems, Mr. Roser said, is inflation, which has raised the
Government's weapons costs no less than its other programs. He pledged at his
Senate confirmation hearings in June to continue to seek ways to improve
productivity.

''It's always a matter of time and money,'' Mr. Roser said recently, but ''we're
doing the job more efficiently than we've ever done it'' before.

Despite a heart attack and bypass surgery that has forced him off a
two-pack-a-day cigarette habit in favor of a pipe, Mr. Roser maintains a
punishing schedule that includes heavy travel to his farflung empire.

''My style of managment calls for me to get out and kick the tires,'' he said.
Friends say that while Mr. Roser, a widower who remarried last year, is probably
''a good bit more wound up and coiled than he appears,'' as one put it, there is
little sign that he worries much about what his arsenal might be called upon to
do.

He regards himself primarily as manager of an enterprise ''very much like an
industrial organization - with perhaps higher standards,'' he said, one filled
with professionals in whom he has gained confidence over many years.

''We'd all like to see the day when you don't need weapons,'' he declared just
before the arms negotiations resumed recently in Geneva. ''But I don't see
anything on the world horizon that indicates we'll be going out of the nuclear
weapons business anytime soon.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Herman E. Roser

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM INVITES 4 U.S. VETERANS TO VISIT HANOI

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 12


The Government of Vietnam has unexpectedly invited a group of American veterans
of the Vietnam War to visit the Southeast Asian country next week to discuss
such issues as the herbicide Agent Orange and the fate of American servicemen
still missing in Indochina.

Robert O. Muller, executive director of the Vietnam Veterans of America, one of
the four men scheduled to leave New York next Wednesday for Hanoi, said he was
''somewhat stunned'' at the decision by the Vietnamese to grant visas to the
veterans. After stops in London and Bangkok, Thailand, the four are to arrive in
Hanoi Friday for a six-day visit.

State Department Backs Move

James Menard, a State Department Asian Affairs aide, concurred with the planned
mission, saying, ''We support efforts by private citizens to join Government
efforts in achieving a full accounting for those missing in action.''

Mr. Menard said that the department did ''not want to characterize the motives
of the Vietnamese Government'' in granting visas for the first time to a
delegation of former combat veterans who had fought against the North Vietnamese
and Vietcong. The United States and Vietnam do not have formal diplomatic
relations.

Mr. Muller, 35 years old, of Huntington, L.I., is a former Marine Corps
lieutenant who was paralyzed from the waist down in 1969 in a battle near Con
Thien, when an enemy bullet severed his spinal cord.

''What we expect to do is to make contact with the Vietnamese, to be as
persuasive as we can in expressing concern about certain issues like Agent
Orange and people missing in action,'' he said in an interview. ''We are hopeful
we can initiate a dialogue between our people, Americans and Vietnamese, after
years of bloodshed and strain.''

Hope to Start 'Healing Process'

He added: ''We'll be there as Christmas approaches, when so many people pause to
reflect on peace and share a feeling of good will.  Hopefully, the mood of the
season will help start a process of healing between our two countries.''

Among the issues to be discussed, Mr. Muller said, was the fate of the estimated
2,500 American servicemen unaccounted for in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos after
the war ended in 1975. The Vietnamese have maintained that there are no American
prisoners alive in Vietnam, and that all bodies that have been found have been
handed over to the American authorities.

State Department officials say that the Administration is ''still seeking a full
accounting of M.I.A.'s,'' or those missing in action.  Mr. Muller and the other
veterans also plan to bring up the issue of Agent Orange, the military name for
a defoliant that was used by Americans in ''enemy'' areas of the former North
and South Vietnam.  According to some medical data, many of those exposed to the
toxic chemical have been stricken by cancer and other severe physical and mental
problems, and their children have suffered birth defects.

''We're hopeful we can create some mechanism where American scientists will be
allowed access to areas sprayed,'' Mr. Muller said. ''For years we've been
frustrated by a lack of full scientific information and now, hopefully, we can
get it.''

For several years, Vietnam veterans' groups, including Mr.  Muller's, have been
pressing for Government recognition of and aid to servicemen with ailments they
contend are related to exposure to Agent Orange.

Accompanying Mr. Muller to Hanoi will be Michael Harbert of New York, a former
Air Force sergeant who flew in bombing missions over North Vietnam; Tom Bird of
New York, a former infantryman with the First Air Cavalry Division, and John
Terzano of Detroit, a former Navy seaman who served on the destroyer Robison,
which took part in the blockade of Haiphong harbor in 1972. All are members of
Vietnam Veterans of America and were invited by Mr. Muller.

Mr. Muller said he flew to London in October to meet the Vietnamese Ambassador
there, Tran Hoan.

No Desire to 'Play Politician'

''We expressed our desire to be the first delegation of former American troops
to return to Vietnam for the specific reasons of the M.I.A. issue and the
consequences of Agent Orange,'' Mr. Muller said. ''We made it clear that we
didn't expect to be statesmen or play politician but to be simply who we were -
veterans who have concerns about veterans' issues.''

Mr. Muller said he later met with Vu Dung, a Vietnamese official at the United
Nations. ''He said to me, 'Where were you in the war?' and I said, 'Around Dong
Ha and Quang Tri,' and I asked him where he was, and he said with enthusiasm, 'I
was VC in northwest Tay Ninh province.' ''

''We talked on a soldier-to-soldier basis,'' said Mr. Muller. ''We talked about
how we fought and how we handled our dead and it was clear to us, as we sat
there and had a drink, that we had gone through battles against one another, yet
we could talk without animosity.''

Mr. Muller said Mr. Hoan called him Dec. 7 to say the visas had been granted.

Several days ago, the veterans were briefed at the State Department by Desaix
Anderson, chief of the section on Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Tom Bird, Michael Harbert and John Terzano

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
SUNDAY, DECEMBER 13, 1981

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 605 words


International
Poland invoked emergency powers to declare a 'state of war' and impose what
appeared to be a military Government. Gen. Wojciech Jarulzelski, the Prime
Minister and Communist Party Leader, said in a speech over the Warsaw radio that
the Government would be under the direction of an Army Council of National
Salvation. He spoke just after troops had taken up positions and sealed off
sections of the capital.(page 1, Column 6.)
The Pope will send peace missions this week to Washington, Moscow, Paris, London
and the United Nations to outline the ''terrifying prospects'' of the use of
nuclear arms. The Vatican announcement said that the delegations, mainly
composed of scientists from the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, would examine at
a scientific level the possibilities of halting the nuclear arms race. (1:4.)
Nigeria's oil output was discussed in Brussels by Secretary of State Alexander
M. Haig Jr. and Nigeria's Minister of External Affairs, who held an unannounced
meeting at which other matters were also reportedly discussed. American oil
imports from Nigeria could make up the difference in the United States supplies
if Washington decides to embargo Libyan oil. Diplomatic sources said that the
primary subject of the meeting was Nigeria's efforts to obtain several million
dollars in American aid for its 2,000-man contingent in the African peacekeeping
force due to be sent to Chad to replace Libyan troops there. (1:2-3.)
East Germany's relations with Bonn will be linked in the future to West
Germany's position on its planned deployment of new United States nuclear
weapons, Erich Honecker, the East German leader told Chancellor Helmut Schmidt.
His views were made known at the first full-scale meeting of German leaders in
more than 11 years, and were clearly aimed at influencing West German opinion.
(1:6.)
National
Hanoi invited Vietnam War veterans to visit Vietnam this week to discuss such as
issues as the herbicide Agent Orange and the fate of American servicemen still
missing in Indochina. Four members of the Vietnam Veterans of America are
scheduled to leave New York Wednesday for Hanoi. The State Department approves
of the visit, an official said. (1:5.)
Sweeping Texas prison reforms ordered by a Federal court last April are disputed
by the Texas Department of Corrections, which will argue in a Federal appeals
court Friday that the state penal system is performing satisfactorily and that
the reforms are not necessary.  The system, the largest in the nation, is
holding 32,000 prisoners, at about 230 percent of capacity, and incidents of
violence are rapidly increasing. (1:1.)
Metropolitan
Leaders of 17 unions pledged to aid efforts to keep Madison Square Garden ''open
and viable'' during city and state negotiations to ease the Garden's financial
problems, and to insure that the Rangers hockey team and the Knickerbockers
basketball team remain there.  (47:1-6.)
Dr. George A. Wootan's license was restored, pending an expected state appeal.
Dr. Wootan's practice of delivering babies at home in the Kingston, N.Y., area
led to the recent suspension of his license by the State Commissioner of Health,
who had accused him of 11 ''deficiencies'' in his medical practice. State
Supreme Court Justice Con G. Cholakis annulled the suspension, saying that ''to
suspend Dr. Wootan from medical practice rather than to merely limit certain of
his activities was so unreasonable as to be arbitrary.'' (56:1-4.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. VOTE PROPELS UGANDAN AND CHINA TO CENTER STAGE

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 816 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 12


Javier Perez de Cuellar won the job, but many diplomats here think the big
winners in the battle for Secretary General were China and Olara A. Otunnu of
Uganda.

China suceeded in defeating the United States and the Soviet Union, who wanted
to keep Kurt Waldheim in the top United Nations post.  Peking insisted that an
organization with three fourths of its members from Asia, Africa and Latin
America must have a secretary general from the third world. China got its way.

Mr. Otunnu, 31 years old, a diplomat educated at Oxford University and Harvard
Law School, leads Uganda's mission here. Western diplomats had generally
regarded him as a rigid, doctrinaire militant, and feared his assumption of the
Security Council's presidency for December.

To their surprise, Mr. Otunno persuaded his own candidate, Salim A. Salim of
Tanzania, to step to the sidelines, opened the way for others to get into the
race and brought a speedy end to the deadlock.

China's Higher Profile

Diplomats here believe that China is now showing a new and higher profile at the
United Nations. In its early years there, Peking quietly watched and waited,
avoiding the lead role that its potential power justified. But last summer,
there was a change.

At a conference on Cambodia, China was almost isolated. It fought against
resolutions that would inhibit the return to power of the ousted Pol Pot forces.
It battled against any specific promise of foreign aid for Vietnam, whose troops
had driven Pol Pot from Phnom Penh. China got its way on both points, although,
as Asian diplomats observed, the United States was covertly helping Peking,
largely to promote stronger ties between the two nations.

Since then, Washington has offended Peking with its proposal to sell jet
fighters to Taiwan. China was in no mood to return the Cambodian favor by
softening its opposition to Mr. Waldheim. Peking persisted through 16 rounds of
balloting, vetoing Mr. Waldheim despite, or perhaps because of, his powerful
support.

In the end, the Council's other members took seriously China's determination to
elect a third world figure. So Mr. Perez de Cuellar of Peru won the race.

'He Has Been Astonishing'

But he might still be waiting to get in it if it had not been for Mr. Otunnu.
For many Western and moderate third world diplomats, he had been a reckless man.
He was the driving force behind a parade of resolutions last spring and summer
demanding the total isolation of South Africa. In American eyes, Mr. Otunnu
strengthened South Africa's claim that the United Nations was hopelessly biased,
and he was undermining plans to persuade Pretoria to give up South-West Africa,
or Namibia.

''I did not look forward to Otunnu as President of the Council,'' an American
diplomat, who asked not to be named, said. ''But he has been astonishing. Fair,
even-handed, imaginative and lucid, explaining complex choices with rare
skill.''

It was Mr. Otunnu who determined that neither Mr. Waldheim nor his own favorite,
Mr. Salim, could break the Chinese and American vetoes. The Ugandan persuaded
both to drop out of the voting. Confronted with nine new names, he designed a
straw poll that enabled the Council members to see which candidates had any hope
of success. It took only one formal ballot after that, and Mr. Perez de Cuellar
was elected.

When he arrives here from Lima on Sunday, Mr. Perez de Cuellar faces formidable
tasks, according to some United Nations officials.  Morale in the staff of
15,000 is low, largely because jobs and promotions are believed to depend less
on merit than on patronage.

Aware of African Sensibilities

Mr. Perez de Cuellar is said by aides to respect the talents of James O.C. Jonah
of Sierra Leone, the Assistant Secretary General for Personnel.

The new Secretary General, moreover, having outlasted Mr. Salim of Tanzania,
will not want to offend African sensibilities. But the expectation is that Mr.
Jonah will be moved to another post so that the harsh problem of who gets what
can be treated by a fresh face.

Economics is another area that may figure in the ''reshuffle'' that Mr. Perez de
Cuellar has already promised. United Nations statisics are highly regarded by
many economists, but the organization's analyses and prose lack rigor,
professionals complain.

Some officials here would welcome placing the United Nations economic services
under a figure like Wassily Leontief, a winner of the Nobel Memorial Prize in
Economic Science. An American born in Russia, his input-output tables are used
by planners in both free market and controlled economies. He has also worked on
disarmament studies for the United Nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW THE FEDERAL BUDGET WAS SHAVED BY $4 BILLION

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 40, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1440 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 12


President Reagan faced down a reluctant Congress this week to win a new round of
$4 billion in budget cuts that marked the successful conclusion of his yearlong
effort to slow the growth of domestic social programs.

The President's firmness, his powers of persuasion and his willingness to take
Government to the brink of insolvency were widely credited with the victory.
Democratic leaders acknowledged the futility of further opposition, saw no
reason for more acrimonious evening and weekend sessions, and wanted to go home
next week for the Christmas holidays.

But although the President maintained his momentum, it had been slowed by a
deepening recession, his dip in the public opinion polls, growing protests over
the effects of the $35 billion in budget cuts enacted last summer and growing
fear in Congress of voter retribution next fall.

House Democrats, who last spring expressed fears that they could lose control of
the chamber next year, appear to be ending the year with the expectation that
their narrow majority will be widened.

Estimates on Deficit

In addition, the drive for a balanced budget that fueled the initial cuts was
undermined by Administration estimates that the deficit for the fiscal year 1982
could reach $109 billion. Many Republicans as well as Democrats questioned the
impact of a $4 billion reduction in social programs in reducing so large a debt.
After the initial round of budget cuts, moreover, Congress was running out of
places to cut.

''I think all members will agree that we have reached the bone on discretionary
programs so there is nothing more to cut,'' Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican
of Oregon, chairman of the Appropriations Committee, told the Senate Friday.

That was the background against which Congress debated the need for more
belt-tightening in domestic programs. Although the President emerged victorious,
he wound up with less than half the $13 billion in new cuts and none of the $3
billion in new taxes he requested in September.

Exuberance in August

The President and Republican Congressional leaders left Washington in an
exuberant mood last August. They had won a series of budget and tax victories
that were intended to reverse the expansion of domestic social programs over the
last half century.

They had wrested control of the House from the Democratic leadership by
organizing a coalition of Republicans and conservative Democrats. In the
Republican-controlled Senate as in the Democraticcontrolled House, Republicans
had seldom been as united.

But when the Republicans returned to Washington in September, they faced
worsening economic conditions that had increased the deficit for the fiscal year
1982 from $37.6 billion to a projected $42.5 billion.

To stem this hemorrhage, the President proposed a new round of budget cuts
totaling $13 billion, as well as $3 billion in new taxes. Of the proposed budget
cuts, $8.4 billion would be cut from discretionary programs, $2.6 billion from
benefit programs such as Medicare and $2 billion from military spending.

Omnibus Measure Recommended

To obtain these cuts, the Administration sought a package similar to the budget
and tax cuts it won last spring. The Office of Management and Budget recommended
using an omnibus spending measure, called a ''continuing resolution,'' to
provide an up-or-down vote on the entire package, rather than seeking the
reductions one by one, and thereby allowing opponents to pick off individual
bills.

Congressional Republican leaders, who thought they had seen the last of the
budget cuts, were not pleased. If a new round of budget cuts proved necessary,
they said, the brunt should be borne by the military.

Nor were the Congressional leaders pleased with the prospect of making the cuts
in a continuing resolution, which was needed because most of the bills that
finance the Federal Government in the fiscal year 1982 had not been enacted. The
Republican leaders felt that such a circumvention of the appropriations process
would undermine the power of Congress.

Some Capitol Hill observers noted that institutional prerogatives are usually
asserted only when they represent a power shift created by changing public
opinion. For example, Congress did not reclaim its war-making power until the
Vietnam War became unpopular.

'Great Consternation'

''There's great consternation that the President's mix won't work,'' said
Senator Pete V. Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, chairman of the Budget
Committee.

While Republicans sought to negotiate their differences, they put the individual
appropriation bills on hold. This virtually assured the necessity of a
continuing resolution to finance the Government in the absence of individual
appropriation bills.

In late October, White House officials bowed to the Congressional pressure. In a
tentative agreement with Senate Republican leaders, they agreed to trim the $13
billion package of new cuts by more than half, but in so doing they agreed to
make up the difference by seeking $7 billion to $8 billion in new taxes.

House Republicans Angered

House Republican leaders were incensed. They had not been involved in the White
House negotiations and said they could not accept a new tax increase.

''You don't raise taxes during a recession,'' said Representative Jack F. Kemp,
Republican of upstate New York.  White House officials and the Republican
Congressional leaders went back to the drawing board, as David A. Stockman,
director of the Office of Management and Budget, acknowledged that under a
''worst case scenario'' the deficit for the fiscal year 1982 could reach $80
billion.

In early November, Republican Congressional leaders gave the White House what
they called a ''do-able'' package consisting of $5 billion to $6 billion in
spending reductions, a slight increase in taxes and only a slight reduction in
the benefit programs.

4 Percent Cut in All Programs

The President responded by declaring his willingness to meet Congress
''halfway.'' In the Senate, Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the majority
leader, proposed reductions in social programs totaling $4 billion by making a 4
percent cut in all programs except military spending and construction, foreign
aid and aid for the District of Columbia.

The Republican-dominated Senate adopted the plan, but the House, controlled by
Democrats, refused to make further cuts. Republican moderates, who had sought
increased cuts in military spending, voted with the Democrats against the
Republican plan. The Democratic leadership appeared to have reasserted its
control over the chamber.

Congress missed its Nov. 20 deadline for enactment of a stopgap spending bill,
but since that was a Friday, a Government ''shutdown'' would be delayed until
the following Monday, giving a House-Senate conference 48 hours to compromise.

The conference reached a compromise that the conferees said would achieve $4
billion in savings through a 2 percent reduction in all Government spending. But
the White House insisted that this reduction would save only $2 billion.

Charge of 'Budget-Busting'

President Reagan vetoed the measure as ''budget-busting.'' Faced with the
''difficult choice'' of either signing the bill or disrupting Government
services, the President said, ''I have chosen the latter.''

In a ''crisis'' that the Democrats said had been ''manufactured,'' the President
sent home 400,000 ''nonessential workers.'' They returned to work the following
day, after Congress hastily approved a stopgap funding measure that will expire
Tuesday.

It was to meet the Tuesday deadline that Congress finally approved this week's
omnibus spending bill, which will expire March 31. But the President said he
regards that bill as setting the spending ceilings for the entire year, except
in foreign aid. Thus, although the continuing resolution will be superseded by
enactment of individual appropriation bills, it will remain the benchmark.

The key to this week's victory was winning back the support of Republican
moderates in the House, who finally voted for the bill after being promised
increased funds for some health and education programs and fuel assistance for
the poor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of David Stockman with Rep. Robert H. Michel

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vermont Names Road For Vietnam Veterans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 76, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 168 words

DATELINE: MONTPELIER, Vt., Dec. 12


An interstate highway that runs half the length of Vermont has been named in
honor of Vietnam veterans.  The Vermont Board of Libraries on Tuesday
unanimously approved the naming of 130 miles of Interstate 89 as the Vietnam
Veterans' Memorial Highway. The highway runs from White River Junction, a former
rail center on the Connecticut River in east-central Vermont, to Highgate on
Lake Champlain at the Vermont-Quebec line.

The State Transportation Secretary, Tom Evslin, who made the official request to
rename the road, said that he was ''quite happy'' with the action, and added,
''It's a long road and that's appropriate, because of the long road back the
veterans have had.''

In addition to the memorial highway, several veterans' groups plan to build a
marker at a rest area near White River Junction that would list the names of the
100 Vermonters who were killed or are missing in the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Alice H. Hall Plans February Wedding

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 108, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 196 words


Mr. and Mrs. Henry I. Hall of Convent Station, N.J., have announced the
engagement of their daughter, Alice Hudson Hall, to Robert Julian Koenig, son of
Mr. and Mrs. Robert P. Koenig of Oyster Bay, L.I.

A wedding is planned in February at St. Paul's Chapel of Trinity Church in New
York.  Miss Hall, who was graduated from Smith College, is with the special
services unit of Merrill Lynch Commodities Inc. in New York, Her father is a
systems engineering specialist with the Bell Telephone Laboratories in New
Brunswick, N.J. She is a granddaughter of Mrs. Waldo W. Pennels of Greenwich,
Conn., and the late William B. Moore, and of Mr. and Mrs. Louis Phillips Hall of
Morristown.

Mr. Koenig, a partner in the commodity trading consulting firm of Koenig
Brothers of New York, London and Chicago, was graduated from Lake Forest College
and the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration. He served as a
lieutenant with the Army Corps of Engineers in Vietnam. His father, a retired
mining engineer, was president of the Cerro Corporation in New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JOSEPH PAPP'S BIG NEW PROJECT IS FINDING HIMSELF

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2446 words


Joseph Papp is pacing around his office - a huge vaulted room painted yellow,
with trophies and awards and photographs marching up the walls and a
three-foot-tall pink satin flamingo stationed in one corner. Over and over
again, the producer is saying that the most important thing in the world to him
is not the play, not the reviews, not the acclaim, not the power, certainly not
the money, but the ''relationships'' with writers and directors.

''I have no other means of reward but that association,'' he says.  ''There is
no money involved in any of these relationships. The work process has nothing to
do with success except the success of the relationship. The work may succeed and
the relationship may be lousy and I'll feel bad about it. That's my weakness.''

There are a thousand things in his diverse world that Mr. Papp could talk about
as his season at the Public Theater unfolds. An $800,000 renovation is under way
at the theater on Lafayette Street, and, last week, two new plays - ''Twelve
Dreams'' by James Lapine and ''Specimen Days'' by Meredith Monk - began
performances.

There are new directions - such as cable television and a joint venture with
London's Royal Court Theater -to absorb Mr. Papp's seemingly endless energy. And
most important, the transformation of his latest theatrical success, a spirited
updating of the Gilbert and Sullivan operetta ''The Pirates of Penzance'' into a
movie with Angela Lansbury and Linda Ronstadt has just begun in London. The
movie means money - Mr. Papp sold the movie rights for $1.5 million and he will
receive a continuing income of 5 per cent of the gross from the film as well as
10 per cent of its profits.

In bald terms, Mr. Papp and his Public Theater have never had it so good. The
organization is sitting on a virtual gold mine. The producer has established an
endowment for the Public Theater, which, he says, currently stands at over $12
million ''conservatively invested.'' About 95 per cent of the endowment so far
comes from revenues from ''A Chorus Line,'' which originated at the Public, and
the remainder from ''The Pirates of Penzance.''

''I hope if we can get $35 million to $40 million that a good part of the
institution can live off the interest,'' Mr. Papp said. ''This is the first time
that I can plan for the next two or three years.'' A symbol of this new wealth
sits in his office: architectural plans for the construction of a 500-seat
theater at the Public at a cost of $3.5 million. But now that he is committed to
a one-hour weekly show beginning in February with the ABC cable network, ARTS,
the new theater idea has been supplanted by a scheme to combine a theater and a
television studio.

For all this activity, Mr. Papp's biggest project these days seems to be himself
- and his relationships. This emphasis is reflected, in part, in his recent trip
to Israel. ''I was always afraid to go,'' he said, before his departure. ''I
felt I couldn't take it emotionally.'' Indeed, one of the changes that those
around Mr. Papp have witnessed over the last 10 years, is his increasing public
acknowledgement of his Jewish heritage.

In 1978, he performed a cabaret act at the Ballroom restaurant in SoHo and
regaled his audience with Yiddish dialogue and reminiscences of his
poverty-ridden, street-tough childhood in Williamsburg, as the eldest son of
Samuel and Yetta Papirofsky. In the past month he has been publicly celebrating
his Jewishness in radio advertisements for the Public Theater. Mr. Papp sings,
in a slightly higher key than he perhaps should, the opening lines of ''Hava
Nagila'' and then says: ''I'm Joe Papp. I'm off to Israel for a few weeks. Don't
cry. I'll be back soon.''

''When I first met him, no one knew what his background was,'' David Rabe, the
playwright, recalls. ''The summer of 1971 there was a big birthday party for
him. I remember there was conjecture about what his full name was. Someone
suggested that he was Greek.'' Bernard Gersten, a friend for 30 years and his
associate producer for 18 years, remembers: ''He concealed his Jewishness for
the first 18 years of our friendship. Joe repudiated his Jewish background for
so many years, his embracing of it at a certain arbitrary point was
astonishing.''

For the last three years, Mr. Papp has conducted his own Passover: ''In Hebrew -
the whole service. I read it. I can get lost in the mumbling - it's a hangover
of my childhood and reminds me of my family. I have deep emotional feelings
about Judaism and I am interested in keeping Judaism alive. My father was a
Polish Jew. I'm an American Jew, or I'm Jewish American, whichever way you put
it.  Sometimes I am just a Jew. But I'm never just an American. It's impossible
because there's always a sense that you're an alien.''

Reached in Cairo, after his trip to Israel where he addressed a convention of
international theater critics, Mr. Papp said that he was still gathering his
thoughts but that initially, he had found ''the political implications so
powerful that I was less moved by my own background.'' He described his visit to
the Western Wall. ''We came around this gate - I was with my wife, Gail - and we
were told we would have to part, that the men go separately from the women. I
could not get myself to split off from Gail. It was the struggle between my
historical background and my present relationship with my wife. I felt a
tremendous surge. We both wept. It was an enormous emotional moment. I just saw
the Wall from the distance.''

It is no secret that Mr. Papp, who is 60 but looks 15 years younger, has had
tempestuous dealings with writers, directors, politicians, wives, friends,
institutions. He said he once told Mr.  Rabe that ''if he wasn't a writer, he
would be a murderer.'' According to Mr. Rabe, the two didn't speak for four
years after that. In 1978, he dismissed Mr. Gersten with two words: ''You're
fired,'' Mr. Gersten recalled.

Outraged that CBS should cancel his production of ''Sticks and Bones,'' a bitter
drama about a Vietnam veteran, Mr. Papp denounced the network as perpetuating a
''cowardly cop-out'' and refused to produce 11 more plays that CBS had
contracted for. On the spur of the moment in 1977, he moved his company out of
the Vivian Beaumont Theater, leaving Lincoln Center to pay the rent of ''a
couple of hundred thousand dollars for three years'' according to John Mazzola,
president of Lincoln Center.

While he now keeps more of a distance from critics, he was once so furious with
Walter Kerr for having dealt with a Broadway show before turning to review a
show at the Public that he told Mr. Kerr he was no longer welcome at his
theater. When Mr. Kerr arrived unannounced at the Public and was seated, Mr.
Papp sought him out, and, in a loud voice so others could hear, demanded that he
leave. Mr. Kerr stayed.

Mr. Papp is the first to concede that he is demanding of colleagues, of their
time, their affection and their talents. He is like this, he says, because ''if
people don't respond in kind, I feel hurt. The reason is I give that much. When
I give that much, I expect that much in return.'' And given, he has. One person
who has always respected Mr. Papp, although at times agreeing to disagree, is
Bernard R. Jacobs, the president of the Shubert Organization, in whose flagship
theater ''A Chorus Line'' has been playing for the last six years. Mr. Jacobs
sums up: ''You look at the creativity of the Public Theater, the creativity
germinated there, and take it away from the American theater in the last 20
years and see what you've got left. Not a hell of a lot.''

It is in that process of giving, as Mr. Papp himself points out, that
relationships blossom or flounder. With Elizabeth Swados, the composer and
playwright, it has been a happily creative partnership.  Of all the writers who
have worked at the Public Theater, Miss Swados is perhaps the closest to Mr.
Papp. She finds him almost indispensable during the formative stages of her
work. The two have worked step by step on the character developments in her new
jazz opera ''Lullabye and Goodnight,'' about a pimp and a whore, which will open
early next year. ''We spent a long afternoon discussing what kind of woman she
would be,'' said Miss Swados. ''It's very Talmudic how he works with someone. He
asks me questions and then I go off and write stuff.''

On the other hand another playwright, Sam Shepard, who had long been embraced by
the producer, stormed out of the Public and escaped to the West Coast after what
he perceived to be Mr. Papp's unreasonable and high-handed meddling in the
production of last season's ''True West.'' ''He'll never see another play of
mine,'' announced Mr. Shepard from San Francisco.

The relationship with Mr. Gersten has now been restored, but not to the point
where Mr. Gersten is back in New York. Mr. Gersten, now executive vice president
of Zoetrope Studios in Los Angeles and is playing the number two role to Francis
Ford Coppola, the president - the role he used to play to Mr. Papp.

The success of ''A Chorus Line'' and of its author, Michael Bennett, sowed the
seeds for the departure of Mr. Gersten from the Papp organization. The blowup in
1978 astounded theater insiders because it had always been felt the two men were
inseparable, not only as friends (''They were like brothers,'' says one who knew
them) but as collaborators who brought a special chemistry to the Public
Theater. Mr. Gersten's even-handedness offset Mr. Papp's predictable
unpredictability.

''I felt we had an obligation to produce Michael's next show,'' Mr. Gersten
explained. ''Joe had often said, 'We not only produce a writer's first show but
also his second show.' Joe did not want to produce ''Ballroom'' because Michael
Bennett did not come to Joe Papp under the circumstances Joe wanted.'' (Mr.
Bennett had been nurturing ''Ballroom'' in a workshop away from the Public
Theater).  ''Ultimately, Joe said no to producing 'Ballroom' anywhere under any
circumstances. I said, 'I can't accept that.' He said, 'Then you'll have to
quit.' I said I wouldn't. He then said, 'You're fired.' It was brutal. For a
year there was a stony silence.''

Several months before the final storm, Mr. Gersten had produced a surprise show
to celebrate Mr. Papp on the occasion of the producer's 57th birthday. Among the
selections was a piece by the playwright John Guare, which satirized the staff
at the Public Theater and which, some in the audience felt, made several unkind
references to Gail Papp. Mrs. Papp, who heads the play development department at
the Public Theater, is Mr. Papp's fourth wife and was once his secretary, broke
down in tears, Mr. Gersten said. Mrs. Papp remembers the occasion differently,
saying she certainly can't remember any tears. ''The hardest thing of the whole
evening was persuading Joe to come in from the country and keeping the reason a
secret. The sketch was witty.'' In any case, it was not long after the
celebration that Mr. Gersten and Mr. Papp parted company.

The relationship between Mr. Rabe and Mr. Papp is perhaps the most interesting.
Mr. Papp produced Mr. Rabe's first plays - to huge acclaim. Then the rapport
fell apart, then it exploded. After quite a while it was repaired - at Mr.
Papp's behest. ''I went out of my way,'' says Mr. Papp. Now Mr. Rabe's new play
''Goose and Tom-Tom'' will open at the Public in March.

But Mr. Rabe will never forget the night he and Mr. Papp yelled at each other on
the sidewalk outside a theater in Philadelphia. The Papps had just walked out on
a production of Mr. Rabe's ''The Orphan,'' a play that had received bad reviews
in New York and which Mr. Rabe had taken on the road to refine. The Papps had
come to see the new version, which Mr. Rabe felt was more coherent, and a
significant improvement. ''I saw Joe walking out the door with Gail,'' Mr. Rabe
said. ''I went out and said, 'You can't walk out.' Then we started to insult
each other standing in the street. He felt then I was on the verge of physical
violence. I knew I wasn't.  (Recalling the incident himself, Mr. Papp remarked:
''He almost killed me.'')

Mr. Rabe said the screaming match was the natural climax of a relationship that
had been put under immense strain: ''We had gotten hooked up on a very powerful
father and son artistic relationship, where he felt he'd done a great deal for
me and I owed him and where I felt I had paid my dues.'

I had to take a leave,'' Mr. Rabe went on. ''I had to cut him out completely,
and he had to do that, too, I think. Then one and a half years ago he was having
a meeting with my wife (Jill Clayburgh) and he was asking how I was, saying he'd
really like to get together. I found him to be different and to have much more
insight. Something had happened where he saw some validity to what I'd said
-that he was too dominating, too possessive.

''I'm not the only person who went through this - although perhaps I'm the most
extreme example. Ultimately, I'm glad to be back, and I hope I can handle it.''

One thing is clear about Joseph Papp: There is little about him or his
organization that is coherently and clearly plotted. Everywhere there are
inconsistencies. Now he is even tossing around the idea of a possible return to
Lincoln Center, the place that was once the scourge of his life. ''I wouldn't
mind going back there from time to time, if someone would pay for it,'' he said.
''I'd do something in repertory. I'd do the Henry's.''

Wallace Shawn, a playwright with whom Mr. Papp has had no falling out and to
whom he has given large doses of encouragement, has perhaps the best impression
of the complexities that make up Joseph Papp. ''He has a bizarre response to
whatever you show him,'' Mr.  Shawn said recently. ''And it is because he speaks
from the heart. He has quite an amazing access to his own irrational side. So
you don't get an academic response from him. You always get an unexpected
response which makes you feel that the encouragement is based on something he
feels.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The World;
China and India Open Talks

BYLINE: By Barbar Slavin and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 276 words


China under Deng Xiaoping has patched up ties with the faraway West while
remaining at odds with many of its neighbors. Last week, it addressed one of
those quarrels, welcoming negotiators from India to discuss a Himalayan border
dispute that has festered for almost a century and led to a brief, fierce border
war in 1962.

There was no expectation of early agreement. India accuses China of seizing
nearly 14,500 square miles of its territory; Peking says India illegally holds
about 56,000 square miles that rightly belong to China. However, the talks alone
represent a comedown from China's previous position that the border dispute was
so formidable that the two countries should talk about other aspects of their
edgy relationship first.

Diplomatic ties were virtually frozen after the 1962 war until five years ago,
when the two countries re-exchanged ambassadors. Since then, there has been a
slow thaw, interrupted by China's 1979 attack on Vietnam, which India supports,
and India's recognition of the Vietnamese-installed Government in Cambodia,
which China opposes.

The Peking Government first suggested border talks last year. To warm up the
atmosphere for negotiations, China has allowed small groups of Indian pilgrims
to visit Buddhist holy sites in Tibet.  Peking has also imported more and more
Indian goods, so that trade between the two countries, almost nothing two years
ago, amounts to $100 million this year.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Barbara Slavin and Milt Freudenheim

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PREMATURE VERDICT ON BIOLOGICAL WAR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 28, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 319 words


To the Editor:

As evidence of Soviet complicity in chemical warfare in Southeast Asia, Richard
Burt of the State Department states, ''We know of no facility in Southeast Asia
capable of producing these toxins in the quantities being employed, and have
identified such facilities in the Soviet Union, which are under military control
and heavy guard'' (letter Nov. 29). Typical of State Department ''extensive and
compelling'' evidence, this statement is inaccurate and misleading. §ubstantial
quantities of trichothecene mycotoxins can be easily produced without
technologically sophisticated equipment or personnel. These processes have been
published in various journals and are widely available to any literate,
moderately educated person.

Mr. Burt further states, ''None of these lethal trichothecene mycotoxins in
Southeast Asia are known to occur naturally at the levels and in the combination
found in Southeast Asia'' and T-2 toxin ''is not known to occur in Southeast
Asia at all.'' In fact, systematic surveys for trichothecene mycotoxins in
Southeast Asia are nonexistent. This ''compelling'' evidence is more precisely
defined as negative inference.

The military use of toxic chemical agents is deplorable. But preliminary
analytical evidence, admittedly suggestive of aerial trichothecene dispersal, is
equivocal and does not warrant, at this time, accusations of violations of the
1972 Biological Weapons Convention.  DANIEL CULLEN Research Associate Department
of Plant Pathology University of Wisconsin Madison, Wis., Nov. 30, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Sports of The Times;
Back to Hockey After 14 Years

BYLINE: IRA BERKOW

SECTION: Section 5; Page 9, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 912 words


FOR the first time in 13 years, I attended a hockey game, the Rangers' most
recent home game last Wednesday against the Bruins.  Thirteen years before, the
attraction was Gordie Howe. Then 40 years old, a graying, 23-year National
Hockey League veteran, Howe was making what was believed to be his farewell
appearance at Madison Square Garden. Little did one know that Howe, who had set
many records, would break the one by Sarah Bernhardt for farewell tours.

After the game, Howe sat in the snug, steamy dressing room of the Detroit Red
Wings. He was out of his red uniform, and wore the baggy, buttoned long johns
traditional with hockey players; his was stained red, not from blood, as one
might expect since hockey is such a rough game, but from the sweaty uniform.

As usual, he was affable. It was recalled that he had once said, after all the
years, that he still got tense before every game.  ''And do you still get
butterflies?'' he was asked.  ''Not anymore,'' he replied. ''Now I drink
insecticide.'' He smiled. He had fewer teeth than the Wicked Witch.

It should be made clear that it was not Howe's quip that kept me away from
hockey the next 13 years - well, not completely.  No, it had to do with the
sport's emphasis on mauling and mayhem.  ''I went to a fight and a hockey game
broke out,'' is an old line, but too often an accurate one.

Ching Johnson, the old Ranger, always shaved before a game because, he
contended, it made stitching up his face afterward easier for the doctors. Ted
Lindsay was re-upholstered so often that he was known as Scarface.

Clarence Campbell, former president of the N.H.L., once said: ''I'm afraid
violence is one of the entertainments of the mob today. If people could have
bought tickets for the Vietnam War, they probably would have.''

It has recently been circulated that hockey has become much less precarious to
lip and limb since the Philadelphia Flyers' Bully Boy mentality of the 1970's
became less chic. With an influx of European and college players entering the
sport, it was being cleaned up. And the Rangers had adopted a more skillful
approach. Their new coach was Herb Brooks, who led the Olympic team to its
sensational gold-medal triumph over the Russians in 1980. He disdained the
traditional hard, stay-in-your lane hockey, using a looser one called
''circling.'' That sounded like something the pioneers did in wagon trains as
protection against hostile Indians.

Anyway, I went to the game. Perhaps it was having been away so long, but I saw
it with a relatively fresh eye; everything seemed in very sharp relief.

The setting of the rink is appealing. Shining brightly under the lights, the
long, white oblong is striped with one red center line, two flanking blue lines
and two red end lines. It is as clean as modern art.

The players, so heavily padded they could have passed for floats in Macy's
Thanksgiving Day parade, skated with surprising dexterity.  There is not much
scoring in hockey, and for the most part the players chase the puck furiously
back and forth and across the rink.  The goalies stand at either end and guard
their nets jealously, wearing full plastic face masks.

Most players wear helmets - a good idea, considering the cleavage some sticks
have made in heads. One who doesn't wear a helmet is Barry Beck of the Rangers.
His hair is curly but combed back stiffly. After he had lost the puck on one
play, a critic in the second balcony bellowed, ''No wonder you're so dumb,
you're hair's too tight!''

Several such spectators became particularly excitable when they smelled an
altercation brewing. There was one melee around the Bruin goal, and several
players wallowed around, punching and scratching for a brief time. There were a
few other minor skirmishes, as the linesmen circled around with a kind of
curiosity, until they finally interceded.

There were several penalties administered, and the fans grew quiet to hear the
public-address speaker announce the minutes assessed for the infractions. The
fans made more noise during the playing of the national anthem.

The Bruins won, 4-3, on a goal in the last 36 seconds. It was a good game, as
hockey goes. It was well played, though dull in long patches. But for the most
part, I had gone to a hockey game, and a hockey game, not a street fight, had
materialized.

The two linesmen and the referee seemed to keep the game in check.  ''Violence
in hockey is declining,'' said Bryan Lewis, the referee, afterward. ''I think
people were getting sick of those mass brawls.  And in amateur hockey and in the
kids' hockey, there are more rules that really penalize teams and coaches for
fighting. That's true on a pro level, too. Now we throw guys out if they jump
into a fight.  Three of those game misconducts and they get suspended.''

But why, he was asked, do officials not jump in immediately when a fight breaks
out between two players.  ''If there is not an unfair advantage, and no one else
jumps in, we will let guys let off steam,'' he said. ''And unless one falls to
the ice, we won't rush in. A fair one-on-one fight is an accepted part of the
game.''

Many fans and team owners seem to agree. It seems that unless the Marquess of
Queensberry rules are invoked in hockey, fighting ought not to be condoned.

I left the Garden and went to a nearby bar to quench a thirst. In honor of an
old, favorite hockey player of mine, I ordered insecticide. The bartender looked
at me. ''Tap or bottle?'' he asked.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW STRATEGY FOR NATO

SECTION: Section 6; Page 42, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3641 words


Admiral Stansfield Turner, U.S.N., retired, is a former Director of Central
Intelligence. Capt. George Thibault, U.S.N., head of the military strategy
department of the National War College, helped him prepare this article.
By Stansfield Turner

There are times in the history of military alliances when some long-latent
problem reaches a point where a decision, no matter how painful, must be made.
Such a time has arrived for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the compact
of free nations that for 32 years has been the framework of security for Western
Europe and the United States.

The Soviet Union and its Eastern European satellites, banded together under the
Warsaw Pact, have been growing stronger in military terms. Yet the Atlantic
alliance cannot seem to agree on how best to respond. The Europeans have lost
much of their old confidence in American leadership; they tend more and more to
be preoccupied with narrow national concerns and to take independent positions
on issues that demand a common allied strategy. This restiveness has even seeped
down to the level of public opinion. In recent weeks, the political atmosphere
in Western Europe has been roiled by mass demonstrations against allied plans
for deploying new American missiles on European soil.

These bickerings and differences are symptomatic of a deeper problem. The
military threat to Western Europe has changed - the result of new conditions
inside the Soviet bloc that have changed Soviet perspectives. The Western
alliance is organized around a strategy for yesterday's dangers. All these
trans-Atlantic disagreements over force levels and weapons missions stem largely
from inner doubts and plain confusion about their relevance to present needs.

The most likely threat to the Western alliance today is pointed not directly at
Western Europe but, obliquely, across third-world areas like the Persian Gulf.
What we need is a new strategy providing those regions with a defensive shield.
This would best be done by the United States and Western Europe acting in
concert. But if, as seems probable, the Europeans are unwilling or unable to
increase their military potential for this purpose, the United States must act
alone.

This will mean a smaller American contribution to the military defense of
Western Europe, as we divert forces to the third world.  The Europeans will be
shocked, but the alliance will survive and emerge all the stronger for
recognizing the realities of the 1980's.  In fact, fear of facing up to reality
will vitiate the partnership more surely than anything else.

It must be admitted, to start with, that, by and large, Western Europe and the
United States bring differing viewpoints to the question of whether the times
call for more detente or more defense.

Detente for Europe has meant new markets for trade with Eastern Europe and the
Soviet Union, increased dialogue with the East and a chance to influence
East-West relations independently of the United States. The Europeans have put
emphasis on perpetuating detente despite the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and
Moscow's blatant pressures on Poland. The very fact that the Polish workers
dared to rebel and the Kremlin has been holding back from military intervention
is seen by Europeans as deriving partly from the attitudes of detente acquired
in the 1970's.

Most Americans, on the other hand, see detente more as a desirable principle
than a working basis of foreign policy. We have supported detente publicly but
we question it privately, tending to see it as having led to Soviet gains in
Angola, Ethiopia, Southern Yemen, Nicaragua and Cambodia. We look on East-West
trade with much less enthusiasm than the Europeans, reasoning that, from the
Western standpoint, the impetus for such trade is political rather than
economic. (Western Europe's trade with Communist countries accounted for only
4.9 percent of its total foreign trade in 1980; alternative markets could easily
have been found elsewhere.) The European view that the Soviet leaders are
sincerely committed to detente, if only because of their concern with the Soviet
bloc's internal political and economic difficulties, gets a skeptical hearing in
the United States.

There is, nonetheless, something to be said for the European analysis. The
Kremlin's current difficulties could well be having some inhibiting effect. The
Soviet leaders must be increasingly worried about the satellites' political
reliability. Poland is only the most dramatic expression of this endemic
problem; there are longterm forces undermining the foundations of socialism
across a much wider spectrum within the Warsaw Pact. Each Eastern European
leader must feel that his fate hinges to some degree on the outcome of the
Polish drama. Tension within the Communist alliance is bound to increase. And
whatever makes the satellites even less reliable will tend to limit Moscow's
freedom of action toward the West.

The economic malaise spreading across the Soviet empire is just as serious in
its implications. The problems of the Soviet-style planned economy, with its
lack of individual incentive, have assumed formidable proportions. Growth rates
are declining both in output and productivity. The Soviet leaders are caught
between three competing needs - continued spending on the military, investment
in plant and equipment, and a better break for the consumer - and there are no
easy choices to be made.

But a different analysis of Moscow's difficulties could lead to a conclusion far
different from the one espoused by most Europeans. As economic requirements push
up against military spending, and as political tensions within the Warsaw Pact
grow more serious, the Soviet leaders could be tempted to establish footholds
around the world before their military advantages ebb and before our renewed
defense program takes effect. The objective, according to this ''lashout''
theory, would be not only to win all they can while they can but to divert
domestic attention from increased austerity at home.

The Russians could take military action in remote regions alone, but this would
hardly achieve their objective. They could, as a second alternative, lash out on
the central front in Europe, but that would be risky indeed. A third option, an
attack on Europe's flanks, or on Iran or Pakistan, would also involve serious
hazards. Thus, while the possibility of some desperate move of this nature
cannot be ruled out entirely, it seems unlikely - at least during the next few
years, when the Russians will almost certainly be faced with the unsettling
difficulties of a succession to the aging leadership of Leonid I. Brezhnev and
his men.

A fourth alternative seems more probable - a Soviet foreign policy not unlike
the one we have seen for some years, combining aggressive opportunism in the
third world with military intimidation and political-economic inducements in
Europe.

There is now a question, however, about the European aspects of this policy.
Except for the realm of strategic forces, the Russians' potential for
intimidating Western Europe will lessen as their military buildup reaches the
limits of their capacity and as the reliability of their East European allies
becomes increasingly suspect. At the same time, Soviet inducements to Western
Europe will look less appealing as the harshness of the Communist societies
comes more to the surface in response to the buildup of internal pressures.

In the third world, on the other hand, the outlook for Moscow is more promising.
In the wake of the Vietnam War, the United States offered no real opposition as
the Soviet Union extended its influence over one third-world country after
another. Our stiffer reaction to the invasion of Afghanistan took the Russians
by surprise but is not likely to deter them in the future. They have seen little
consistency in our foreign policy over recent years, and one grain embargo is
hardly likely to persuade them that we will be as firm next time, especially
since the embargo was lifted by President Reagan in response to pressure from
the domestic farm bloc.

The Russians are likely to continue to seize opportunities to support and
manipulate leftist factions in the third world. In some cases, these will be
revolutionary elements seeking to take control, as in Angola in 1975. In others,
they will be socialists in power who come under challenge from domestic
opponents, as in Ethiopia in 1978. There will be blatant moves to install power
from outside the country, as the Vietnamese and Russians did in Cambodia in
1978.

There are, it is true, some inherent limitations to this Soviet technique.
Moscow's aid to its political proteges is almost entirely military in character.
Lacking sufficient reserves of materials, money and know-how for the kind of
economic programs that could meet the recipient countries' needs for economic
growth, the Russians have rarely been able to establish close, long-term
relations with their new-found friends. In the past 20 years, they have been
ejected from China, Indonesia, Egypt, Sudan and Somalia, losing out in most
cases to strong forces of nationalism.

Yet the Russians have always been willing to make a stab at controlling selected
parts of the third world and cutting their losses, if necessary. And today there
are two new factors at work.  In Angola, Ethiopia and Cambodia, the Russians
have left behind sizable surrogate forces, Cuban or Vietnamese. It would be much
more difficult for these nations to escape from the Soviet camp than it was for
the Egyptians and others. And in Nicaragua, we may have recently witnessed a new
Soviet technique - meddling based on Libyan financing. If the Russians can
induce Libya to fill the economic void in selected underdeveloped countries,
their capability for intervention could be significantly enlarged.

Look, for instance, at what they might attempt from their position in Southern
Yemen. By destabilizing Oman, on one side of Saudi Arabia, and Yemen, on the
other side, they could outflank the Saudi regime and generate considerable
pressure on that Government to amend its pro-Western posture. Soviet prospects
in Iran after the death or exit of the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini are even
brighter. If the Communist Tudeh Party emerged even temporarily as the dominant
Iranian political force, and if the Tudeh ''invited'' a Soviet military
detachment into the country, Iran could be brought under Soviet hegemony. A
subsequent march to the northern shores of the Persian Gulf would intimidate
Saudi Arabia and place the flow of oil to the West in jeopardy.

Look, also, at the exposed position of several other nations to which we have
formal or implied commitments. Pakistan has Soviet troops just across its border
with Afghanistan and is frequently accused by the Russians of aiding the Afghan
resistance. Thailand's territory has been violated by spillovers from the
fighting in Cambodia. South Korea must worry constantly about Moscow encouraging
the North Korean leader, Kim Il Sung, into another act of aggression.

If the Russians continue to discern few risks in such third-world adventurism,
they surely will continue to make use of their opportunities. It is for these
areas, therefore, that a new policy must be forged by the Western alliance, and
primarily by the United States.

It must be our common purpose to create unacceptable risks for the Russians - to
make the costs of aggression unacceptably high wherever our vital interests are
involved. This is not to advocate universal intervention in troubled areas or a
return to total containment of the Soviet Union. It suggests selective and
determined resistance in areas of overriding concern.

Clearly, we have vital interests in the major oil-producing countries. There are
many other suppliers of raw materials on whom we and our allies depend, and many
of these countries are key markets for our exports. The Russians seek to drive a
wedge between these countries and the West, to cut off our mineral supplies and
to create strains within the Atlantic alliance by forcing each member to
scramble to protect its own interests.

The Russians need not take direct military action to cut our supplies. They may
influence a leftist-leaning government to do that; they may foment internal
disorders or regional wars that will interrupt production and shipment. In
anticipation of this kind of Soviet meddling, we must make sure they know that
we are ready and capable of resisting their overtures and interventions.

Our resistance can take a number of forms - diplomatic, economic or military. In
most instances in the third world, the tools of diplomacy and economic aid will
be more applicable than military presence or combat. But diplomatic and economic
leverage will be insufficent unless the Western alliance can present a united
front and display a readiness to protect its interests with adequate military
power.

In the Persian Gulf, clearly a nexus of the vital interests of the United States
and its allies, it has become highly probable that we will need the capacity to
at least threaten the use of force -and enough power in the region to make the
threat credible. The Russians must be left with no doubts about our readiness to
resist any attempt to alter the balance of power in this critical area. Only
when they become convinced of our resolution and capacity will they see the
costs and risks of overseas adventurism as being higher than in the past.

Our chances of drawing a line and holding it are good. In measuring risks
against opportunities, the Russians will have to take their own lessening
economic and political strength into account. The Russians are bogged down in
Afghanistan; they are subsidizing Cuba, underwriting Vietnam's occupation of
Cambodia and standing poised with 30 to 40 divisions on Poland's perimeter;
surely they must think carefully before extending themselves further. A full
range of responses to Soviet meddling in the third world has a better chance of
success today than ever before.

We should encourage our European allies to participate in the development of new
Western defenses in the third world. It will always be helpful politically to
have a multinational force rather than one that is strictly American. French and
British naval forces, and the 4,000-man French Army contingent posted in
Djibouti, are the best candidates. But the Europeans have only limited potential
for projecting sizable military power over long distances. The transport and
support of any allied forces carried into action would have to come from the
United States.

The rub is that this is bound to affect our military posture in Western Europe.
The United States cannot maintain two armies and two air forces, one for the
plains of Europe and one for deployment around the world; neither the American
public nor the Congress would support that expense. Difficult as the decision
would be, a reduction of our forces in Western Europe is an unavoidable
component of a new strategy that in the end would enhance the security of both
Europe and the United States.

The change would, of course, pose a variety of problems. Some of them are
technical. The military equipment we need for remote regions is quite different
from what we now have in Europe. If we are to transport tanks, artillery,
armored personnel carriers and other such hardware to remote areas, they must be
light and compact. Since we can't have two armies and two air forces, our troops
in Europe must adapt their tactics to lighter and more mobile equipment. This
means less dependence on massive firepower and stoutly defended positions and
more reliance on mobility and maneuver. Instead of holding fixed front-line
positions by firepower and armored defense, American ground units in Europe
would be trained to move rapidly to where Warsaw Pact forces have been
positioned for a breakthrough.

There are those who believe that such tactics of maneuver are more suited, in
any case, to tomorrow's technology and battlefield environment. In any event,
the alliance's military tactics would have to change appreciably if the United
States retooled its ground forces to acquire a dual capability for Europe and
for the third world. The forces of our European allies would have to be
similarly reshaped - or they would have to think through a new role for
themselves, complementing a lighter, more flexible American force.

Similarly, land-based American air power must be easily transportable around the
world. The problem is not with the aircraft themselves but with the cumbersome
support elements of spare parts, computerized testing equipment, technicians,
and so on, that must follow along to keep the sophisticated aircraft flying.
Switching to less sophisticated aircraft with more sophisticated weapons could
make a big difference.

It would take years to develop and deploy these lighter forces and apply these
new tactics. In the meantime, we could improve on our ability to move quickly to
unexpected trouble spots by drawing upon equipment and personnel in Europe
whenever they are closer to the scene.

In the best of all worlds, our European allies would accept the argument that
the United States must take these steps even at the cost of doing less in
Europe, and that they should compensate by taking on a larger role themselves.
If they did not, in view of their disinclination to increase their defense
spending, our best course would be to proceed independently, though after full
explanation and consultation. To ignore the problem of continued Soviet
interventionism in the third world would be shortsighted. To take on this new
responsibility without making the necessary adjustments in Europe would be
unrealistic.

Some feel that our military capabilities can be extended to the third world
without having any great impact on our commitments in Europe; perhaps a small
Rapid Deployment Force, as initiated by President Carter, would do the trick. It
could - where the Soviet Union is not directly involved. But it would be
patently inadequate in cases of Soviet or Soviet-sponsored military adventurism.
The Cuban presence in Ethiopia and Angola is sizable and well equipped; a Soviet
thrust into Iran would be massive. A commando force big enough only for putting
out ''brush fires'' in the third world does not constitute a serious enough
commitment to have a deterrent effect on Moscow.

There are others who argue that if the Washington reduced its military effort in
the defense of Europe, the Europeans could drift into neutralism and
accommodation with the Soviet Union. Indeed, as we have noted, there are
increasingly vocal leftist factions in Europe that may be willing to sell out
their heritage of freedom in just this way, but it would be surprising if this
minority view prevailed. There is also the argument that this is no time to
raise such a difficult new issue - we have enough problems within the alliance
as it is. That is a reasonable principle, but the problem is that the threat of
Soviet subversion in vital areas like the Persian Gulf will not go away. The
alliance cannot remain strong if it chooses to ignore a critical threat to its
survival.

The basic fault with our present alliance strategy is that it confuses
preparedness for the most serious possible threat with preparedness for the most
likely threat. Our focus for all of these past 32 years has been on the danger
of Soviet conquest of Western Europe. Naturally, adequate defense against this
possibility must remain among our top priorities. But the most likely danger
today is the indirect one of Soviet attempts to extend control over the West's
supplies of oil and other minerals and over its political and economic
relationships with the third world. The old saying that the road to Berlin is
through Baghdad is worth renewed consideration.

The Soviet Union, as we have seen, is facing a set of conditions, internally and
externally, that will make it tempting for the Soviet leaders to improve their
world position while they still can. The perilous uncertainties of an attack on
Western Europe would make that a very difficult choice, to put it mildly, for
any Soviet leadership. Yet the impulse to do something may be very strong. An
effort to undermine the alliance by way of the third world will be a compelling
alternative.

Facing up to this new challenge will test the Atlantic alliance, but the process
of testing can also be one of reinvigoration. It can establish new criteria for
the sharing of effort, new ability to adjust to change and a renewed sense of
commitment to our basic objectives. Yes, there are risks that the alliance will
not measure up, but avoidance of necessary risk has never been a sensible policy
in the defense of freedom.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Soviet troops in Afghanistan photo of Americans
and Egyptians at military exercise in Egypt photo of American troops on manuvers
in West Germany

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A TALK WITH SAUL BELLOW: ON HIS WORK AND HIMSELF

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI; Michiko Kakutani reports on cultural subjects for
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3309 words


''I SOMETIMES enjoy saying that anybody's life can be encompassed in about 10
wonderful jokes. One of my favorites is about an American singer who makes his
debut at La Scala. He sings his first aria to great applause. And the crowd
calls 'Ancora, vita, vita.' He sings it a second time, and again they call for
an encore. Then a third time and a fourth ... Finally, panting and exhausted, he
asks, 'How many times must I sing this aria?' Then someone tells him, 'Until you
get it right.' That's how it is with me - I always feel I haven't gotten it
quite right, and so I go on singing.''

Saul Bellow tells this story with great relish. Sitting down in a black leather
easy chair, he gazes out through the window of his high-rise apartment to the
dark waters of Lake Michigan beyond, and throws his head back and laughs. His
conversation, like his books, is at once colloquial and lofty, intellectual and
passionate, filled with jokes heard on the Chicago streets and the high
seriousness of Academe. The author himself bears a certain resemblance to his
own heroes: earnest, elegantly dressed and deeply thoughtful, he too is ''a
hungry observer'' of everything around him.

At 66, Mr. Bellow has written nine novels - the latest, ''The Dean's December,''
will be published in January by Harper and Row - and created in his work a
distinctive fictional world. It is a world animated by an acutely moral
imagination and populated by assorted cranks, con men and fast-talking salesmen
of reality who goad and challenge Mr. Bellow's now familiar heroes. Whether it
is poor, putupon Moses Herzog or Eugene Henderson, that absurd seeker of higher
qualities, or wise old Artur Sammler or Albert Corde in ''The Dean's December,''
they are men caught in the middle of a spiritual crisis, overwhelmed by the
sheer ''muchness'' of the world and frightened by the stubborn fact of death.
Rejecting both easy optimism and easy despair, they tend, like Corde, to wonder
if their own problems are simply their share of ''the bigscale insanities of the
20th century.''

Like these characters who are continually searching for a way to apprehend
reality, Mr. Bellow tends to regard fiction as a kind of tool for investigating
the society around him; he sees the novelist as ''an imaginative historian, who
is able to get closer to contemporary facts than social scientists possibly
can.'' But while the madness of the modern world, manifested in everything from
sexual profligacy to random violence, has always reverberated in his characters'
lives - a phenomenon that became more pronounced in ''Mr. Sammler's Planet''
-specific public issues have remained largely in the background. With ''The
Dean's December,'' such matters as oppression in Eastern Europe, the plight of
the American ''underclass,'' student militancy and the deterioration of life in
American cities are more directly addressed.

What brought about this heightened focus on political and social issues? For one
thing, Mr. Bellow says he realized after writing ''To Jerusalem and Back,'' an
account of his 1975 trip to Israel, that ''it was as easy to write about great
public matters as about private ones - all it required was more confidence and
daring.'' The winning of the Nobel Prize in 1976 no doubt provided some of that
necessary confidence, and he made plans to write a nonfiction book about
Chicago. After making hundreds of pages of notes, however, he decided to abandon
that approach and write a novel.

''I found a more congenial way to do it, my own way, developed over many
decades,'' he says. ''But I think I've begun to write differently - I had never
really attempted anything of this sort before, though I've been all my life an
amateur student of history and politics. It became clear to me that no
imagination whatsoever had been applied to the problems of demoralized cities.
All the approaches have been technical, financial and bureaucratic, and no one
has been able to take into account the sense of these lives.''

''I thought I had to cut loose with this book,'' he goes on. ''It seems many of
my contemporaries don't take many personal risks - they shoot fish in a barrel.
They write about wounded adolescents - there's no problem there. Sexual
adventures -there's no problem there. Wounded ethnicity. They appear
occasionally to be bold, to challenge the powers that be, but they're generally
pretty safe. I think I'm speaking out quite frankly about the deterioration of
life in American cities (in this book), and I wouldn't be surprised if I drew
some flack. But if you've told yourself all your life that you're a friend of
the truth, there comes a time when you must put up or shut up. They're not going
to be able to shrug this one off, though there are some very powerful shruggers
around.''

By now, Mr. Bellow points out, he is somewhat accustomed to drawing flack - at
least from certain quarters of the literary establishment. For all the honors he
has received - a Pulitzer and three National Book Awards as well as the Nobel
-he sees himself as going against the mainstream of contemporary literature. He
has long rejected the fashionable nihilism of what he calls the
''wastelanders,'' those who believe - as he once put it in a 1966 speech -that
it is ''enlightened to expose, to disenchant, to hate and to experience
disgust.'' He is equally skeptical of willful estheticism.

As far as Mr. Bellow is concerned, those writers who substitute analysis for
imagination have estranged literature from the common world and removed one of
its original and most important purposes: the raising of moral questions.
Contemporary writers, he adds, are also easily tempted by the sensational, for
they are faced with ''the Ancient Mariner problem'' - like Coleridge's seaman,
''they need something to buttonhole the wedding guests with, as they go from
wedding to wedding or orgy to orgy; they need something that has the power to
penetrate distraction.''

Such views, coupled with his attitudes toward more general social matters - most
notably his skepticism about the 60's counterculture - have been delineated by
Mr. Bellow in both his essays and his novels, and they have occasionally made
for controversy. Touring universities in the 60's, Mr. Bellow was occasionally
denounced by students during his lectures, and the critic Richard Poirier
contended, in an essay written for Partisan Review, that ''Herzog'' and ''Mr.
Sammler's Planet'' were ''efforts to test out, to substantiate, to vitalize, and
ultimately to propagate a kind of cultural conservatism.'' It is an observation
Mr. Bellow rejects.

''People who stick labels on you are in the gumming business,'' he says by way
of reply. ''What good are these categories? They mean very little, especially
when the people who apply them haven't had a new thought since they were
undergraduates and now preside over a literary establishment that lectures to
dentists and accountants who want to be filled in on the thrills. I think these
are the reptiles of the literary establishment who are grazing on the last
Mesozoic grasses of Romanticism. Americans in this respect are quite
old-fashioned: they're quite willing to embrace stale European ideas - they
should be on 10th Avenue where the rest of the old importers used to be.

''They think they know what writers should be and what writers should write, but
who are these representatives who practice what Poirier preaches? They're, for
the most part, spiritless, etiolated, and the liveliest of them are third-rate
vaudevillians. Is this literary life? I'd rather inspect gas mains in Chicago.''

With their old-fashioned characters, their passion for big ideas and problems of
the spirit, Mr. Bellow's own books clearly belong to a different tradition. The
Old Testament, Shakespeare and the great 19th-century Russian novels - these
were the books Bellow read as a boy, and these were the books which, in large
measure, gave him a sense of what great literature ought to do. Indeed, his
choice of vocation, he says, was animated by the traditional challenge ''to
account for the mysterious circumstance of being.''

''I don't think I was a very sophisticated person,'' he says, recalling his
youth in Chicago as the son of an onion importer who had immigrated from Russia.
''Chicago is not a city that produces sophisticated people, but it was in
Chicago where this child of Jewish immigrants got the idee fixe of becoming an
American author, and he had to find a way to prove he wasn't hallucinated, that
he could write English sentences and that he could hold the attention of a
reader or two. In those days, the WASP establishment wouldn't listen till you
established your credentials - there are people even now who don't.''

To establish his credentials, Mr. Bellow wrote two books that filled what he
calls ''formal requirements'': ''Dangling Man,'' the story of a young Chicagoan
awaiting induction into the war, was his B.A.; ''The Victim,'' a portrait of a
journalist and his importunate, anti-Semitic alter ego, his Ph.D. Both these
somber books won modest critical acclaim, but their author, who was living in
Paris on a Guggenheim at the time, says he was already sinking ''into a
depression by trying to do the wrong things.'' In a kind of manic reaction, he
began another book, a book that he would write ''in a purple fever'' over the
next three years. The book, of course, was the exuberantly picaresque ''Augie
March.''

''Augie March'' marked Mr. Bellow's discovery of his own voice. It was a supple
voice, infused with the rhythms and idioms of Yiddish, a voice that was capable
of articulating a moral vision and lofty philosophical speculation in the most
colloquial of terms. ''I loosened up,'' Mr. Bellow recalls, ''and found I could
flail my arms and express my impulses. I was unruly at first and didn't have
things under control, but it was at least a kind of spontaneous event. It was my
liberation.''

''Augie March,'' Mr. Bellow said at the time, came easily -all he had to do
''was to be there with buckets to catch it'' - and it won the National Book
Award in 1953. But, in retrospect, the experience was somewhat disconcerting as
well, for it revealed to Mr. Bellow certain prejudices within the literary
community that would last for many years.

''I began to discover,'' he says, ''that while I thought I was simply laying an
offering on the altar like a faithful petitioner, other people thought I was
trying to take over the church. It came at a strange point when I think the WASP
establishment was losing confidence in itself, and it felt it was being
challenged by Jews, blacks and ethnics, and some people were saying there was a
Jewish mafia, and other people, who should have had more sense, spoke of - well,
they didn't use the word conspiracy, but they saw it as an unwelcome eruption. I
began to talk of Malamud, Roth and me as Hart, Shaffner & Marx, and there was a
pathetic absurdity under it all - all we wanted was to add ourselves to the
thriving enterprise we loved; no one wanted to take over. That's a motive worthy
of the Mafia, and I don't think Hart, Shaffner & Marx were Mafiosi.'

''I think of myself as an American of Jewish heritage,'' he goes on. ''When most
people call someone a 'Jewish writer,' it's a way of setting you aside. They
don't talk about the powers of the 'Jewish writers' who wrote the Old Testament;
they say to write novels you need to know something about manners, which is
something you have to be raised in the South to know. I felt many writers
(during the 50's and early 60's) treated their Jewish colleagues with
unpardonable shabbiness, and anti-Semitism after the Holocaust is absolutely
unforgivable.''

With the breakthrough in style achieved in ''Augie March,'' there also came a
shift in tone. Whereas the first two books shared a certain depressive quality -
underlined by the fact that their heroes did little to resolve the condition of
their alienation - ''Augie March'' was a wildly extroverted work, ending with
its hero looking forward to his next adventure. Later books such as ''Henderson,
the Rain King'' and ''Herzog'' would go somewhat further: each ended with its
protagonist taking the first step toward an affirmation of his life, and these
books would also play, with greater facility, between what Mr. Bellow refers to
as ''the two sides of my psyche'' -the brooding side and the exuberant.

''For many years,'' he explains, ''Mozart was a kind of idol to me - this
rapturous singing for me that's always on the edge of sadness and melancholy and
disappointment and heartbreak, but always ready for an outburst of the most
delicious music. I found Mozart temperamentally so congenial. I'm not claiming
the same range of talent, but I often feel an affinity with him.''

Certainly many of Mr. Bellow's characters have shared temperamental affinities
with their author - a fact that Mr. Bellow acknowledges by quoting Alberto
Moravia, who once told him, ''Every novel is some kind of higher
autobiography.'' In ''The Dean's December,'' for instance, Albert Corde takes a
trip to Bucharest to help his wife attend her dying mother - as Mr. Bellow
himself did several years ago - and Corde shares, more or less, his creator's
age, occupation and place of residence. Like many of Mr. Bellow's heroes, Corde
is also something of a lapsed intellectual, who takes pride and pleasure in
exercising his mind, but also worries about the inadequacy of all his theories.
As Mr. Sammler puts it, ''Intellectual man had become an explaining creature.
Fathers to children, wives to husbands, lecturers to listeners, colleagues to
colleagues, doctors to patients, man to his own soul explained. ... For the most
part, in one ear and out the other. The soul wanted what it wanted.''

Of course, Mr. Bellow himself has curiously ambivalent attitudes towards
academia. He believes, on one hand, that ''it's in the university and only in
the university that Americans can have a higher life,'' and yet he also contends
that professors ''are so eager to live the life of society like everybody else
that they're not always intellectually or spiritually as rigorous as they should
be.'' By institutionalizing the avant-garde magazines and giving writers the
security of tenure, he argues, universities effectively destroyed the
independent literary culture that once existed in this country.

Still, Mr. Bellow finds that an academic community provides him with people ''to
talk to about the things that concern me most,'' and he has served, since 1964,
on the prestigious Committee on Social Thought at the University of Chicago. His
decision to leave New York and return to Chicago in the early 60's, he says, was
motivated, in part, by what he saw as the increased politicization of writers in
New York.

When he first arrived in New York during the 40's, a ''young hick'' bent on
''going to the big town and taking it,'' a sense of community existed among
writers associated with the Partisan Review. Mr.  Bellow became friends with
such writers and critics as Meyer Schapiro, Dwight Macdonald, Delmore Schwartz
and Clement Greenberg - ''they were not always friendly friends, but they were
always stimulating friends'' -and he enjoyed the ''open spirit of easy
fraternization'' that animated their discussions. Politics, generally in the
form of Marxism, tended to be mostly theoretical.

''Then,'' Mr. Bellow recalls, ''a new generation turned up -a lot of people out
of Columbia University, a lot of students of Lionel Trilling, who got into
enterprises like Commentary -and suddenly the whole atmosphere in New York
became far more political than it had been before. With the Vietnam War and
other issues, people became organized in camps, and while I was opposed to the
war, I just refused to line up with the new groups. I didn't like it, and it
seemed to me a good time to leave New York, because I'd been drawn there in the
first place by my literary interests, and there seemed to be no room for an
independent writer in New York anymore. It became harder to find people to talk
to, and it was harder to stay out of the draft - you were always being solicited
for this cause or that, always being drafted for one thing or another.

''People have said in their memoirs that I was guarded, cautious,
career-oriented, but I don't think that's so - after all, there was nothing
easier in New York during those days than the life of the extremist, and that's
continued to be so. I was not comfortable with the extremist life, and so I
thought I might as well go back to the undiluted U.S.A., go back to Chicago.
It's vulgar but it's vital and it's more American, more representative.''

Indeed, Mr. Bellow finds that in Chicago he is able to keep up with his old high
school friends, as well as a cross-section of society including contractors,
lawyers, doctors, physicists, historians, policemen and retired social workers -
some of whom surface in his fiction. ''You meet people,'' he says, ''They reveal
or conceal themselves, and you read them or try. They struggle with their souls
or don't. They either generate interest or not. It forms a picture for you. The
people who interest me the most do concern themselves with the formation of a
soul. The others are what Hollywood used to call the cast of thousands.''

When he is working on a book, Mr. Bellow spends his mornings at an electric
typewriter, set up by a window overlooking Lake Michigan.  After nine novels,
the craft has been mastered, but the magical aspect of the art remains. Mr.
Bellow, in fact, has spoken in the past of ''a primitive prompter or commentator
within, who from earliest years has been advising us, telling us what the real
world is'' - a commentator not unlike Henderson's little voice that constantly
cries, ''I want, I want'' - and he attributes his best writing to this
unconscious source.

''I think a writer is on track when the door of his native and deeper intuitions
is open,'' he says. ''You write a sentence that doesn't come from that source
and you can't build around it - it makes the page seem somehow false. You have a
gyroscope within that tells you whether what you're doing is right or wrong.
I've always felt a writer is something of a medium, and when something is really
working, he has a certain clairvoyant power; he has a sense of what's going on.
Whenever I've published a book that's received wide attention, I've heard from
thousands of people around the world who have been thinking the same thing - as
though I'd anticipated things. I didn't mean to, but I've learned one does.''

Since he won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1976, of course, those letters
from readers have increased, as have the demands on Mr. Bellow's time. He is
asked to deliver speeches (he recently gave the celebrated Tanner lectures at
Oxford) serve on committees and sign all mannner of petitions. As far as he is
concerned, these responsibilities act as distractions from his true vocation.

''I could spend the rest of my life now functioning on committees,'' he says,
''standing up for all the right things and denouncing all the bad ones. What
good this does your art, I leave to the expert guessers to guess at. I have yet
to feel I've intimidated Brezhnev by signing protests.''

''The Nobel changes things in different ways,'' he continues. ''For one thing,
you feel that you have more authority, and if the Academy was mistaken in giving
you the prize, you try to make the best of it, and recover your balance and your
normal poise and not feel oppressed by the weight of this honor. I don't intend
to let this laurel wreath of heavy metal sink me. I'm treading water very
successfully, thank you. I know people like John Steinbeck thought it was the
kiss of death, but I've decided to choose my own death kiss. No one's going to
lay it on me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Saul Bellow

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

R.O.T.C. MAKING A COMEBACK ON L.I.

BYLINE: By JOHN T. McQUISTON

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 1, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1147 words


AFTER a decade of intermittent debate, the Reserve Officers Training Corps is
undergoing a resurgence on college and university campuses on the Island, as
well as across the country.

Student enrollment in R.O.T.C. training programs, which dropped off sharply
during the Vietnam War, is rising as the Reagan Administration emphasizes anew
military preparedness and defense spending.

Nationally, Army and Air Force statistics show that more than 92,000 students
were enrolled in the corps programs on American campuses last year, up 73
percent from a 1973 enrollment of 53,000.

On the Island, enrollment has more than doubled in the last year, from under 250
in 1980 to 548.  Meanwhile, the debate over participation continues. For
example, at the C.W. Post Center of Long Island University in Brookville, the
student newspaper, The Pioneer, has opposed a projected R.O.T.C.  program.

And while C.W. Post administrators struggle to find ways to provide an R.O.T.C.
curriculum, the discussion continues among students and faculty over the value
and propriety of military instruction at an academic institution.

Supporters of the program note that the atmosphere on campus, as well as across
the nation, has changed since the Vietnam War era.  They say there is more of a
spirit of patriotism and the desire by some students to seek a leadership role
in the nation's armed forces.

Those opposed to the program argue that a university is a humanistic environment
devoted to scholastic pursuits, not military training.

The Post faculty, by mail ballot, recently adopted a resolution in support of
the R.O.T.C., but only on the condition that students are ''permitted the option
to participate or not to participate, as they wish, individually.'' With 55
percent of the faculty responding, the resolution was adopted by a vote of 119
to 90.

The R.O.T.C., which pursues a curriculum designed to prepare students for
eventual military service, was first proposed at Post in 1970, but failed to win
the support of the faculty, which reaffirmed its original opposition last year.

The program is again thriving at Kent State University, in Kent, Ohio, where 11
years ago antiwar demonstrators burned the corps building, setting off a chain
of events that ended with the killing of four students by the Ohio National
Guard.

Lieut. Col. J. F. Griffith Jr., commander of Kent State's Air Force R.O.T.C.,
recently attributed the change to ''an increased national spirit and an
increased respect for the military.''

R.O.T.C. students were also said to be motivated to join because of scholarships
and benefits in the military, particularly during a period of national economic
recession and high unemployment.

There is also the enticement of money in the form of $100 a month, for a total
of $1,000 a year, tax free, during the junior and senior year of a student's
participation in the R.O.T.C. At the start of the junior year, a student who
decides to continue in the program signs an agreement to serve at least three
years as an officer after graduation.

Most Air Force programs require a commitment of at least four years, depending
upon the additional education and training required. For example, pilots and
navigators undergo at least one year of extra training and then go on active
duty for six years.

Congress recently authorized an increase in available R.O.T.C.  scholarships
from 6,500 a year to 7,500 this year, and 8,500 in the 1982-83 school year. The
scholarships cover tuition, board and textbooks.

Congress also recently approved a 14.3 percent increase in the pay of all
military officers. For example, an Air Force R.O.T.C. graduate would now enter
the Air Force as a second lieutenant with flight status, earning about $15,000 a
year.

Lieut. Col. Edward Lansdale, of the Air Force office of public affairs in New
York City, said that current enrollment in the Air Force R.O.T.C. in the country
was 25,000, up 10 percent over a year ago.

Students at the Post campus will apparently have a choice between the Air Force
or Army R.O.T.C. programs, according to Wesley Williams, a spokesman for the
office of the deputy chief of staff for the Army's R.O.T.C. headquarters in Fort
Monroe, Va.

Post students will be able to take part in Army R.O.T.C. courses offered through
Hofstra University in Hempstead and in Air Force R.O.T.C. courses offered
through the New York Institute of Technology, in Old Westbury, next door to the
Post campus in Brookville.

Hofstra has an agreement with the Secretary of the Army to act as host for an
R.O.T.C. program on the Hofstra campus. In time, should Post participation grow
large enough, it could create an extension center on its own campus, Mr.
Williams said.

The Air Force program at the New York Insitute of Technology is by itself an
extension of an R.O.T.C. program based at Manhattan College in New York City.

Colonel Lansdale said that New York Tech serves students from the Long Island
Regional Academic Conference on Higher Education, a consortium from which
students can enrole for credit in any Army and Air Force R.O.T.C. course and
receive credit at their own school.

He said Post would be a member of the consortium, along with Adelphi University,
Molloy College, the State University colleges at Old Westbury, Farmingdale and
Stony Brook; Dowling College, Nassau and Suffolk County Community Colleges,
Southampton College and St.  Joseph's College.

The Polytechnic Institute of New York has an Army R.O.T.C.  instruction group on
its Brooklyn campus, which also serves students from its Farmingdale campus.

St. John's University, in Jamaica, Queens, has an Army R.O.T.C program that also
serves students from other schools on the Island, as well as in Manhattan and on
Staten Island.

Mr. Williams said there were currently 301 R.O.T.C. colleges and universities
across the country, with more than 100 extension centers serving an addtional
700 schools. ''We decided that with shrinking college enrollments, we would have
to reach out to more schools,'' he said.

The R.O.T.C., he added, remains the Army's biggest source of officers.  He also
said that the ''old days of falling-in at a campus arsenal or drill field and
marching back and forth are a thing of the past.'' Military drill is done during
one four-week summer camp session, usually between the junior and senior years.

''Our approach has been modernized,'' Mr. Williams said. ''We teach a lot of
things a college student wouldn't get anywhere else.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SEASONAL EPISODE EVOKES REFLECTION

BYLINE: By GERALDINE VAN DUSEN

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 28, Column 3; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words


AUTUMN. If you are like me, you feel a welcome sense of ending and beginning and
moving inward toward the hearth and the inside of your coat. Everything pulls
together before the winter huddle. It is uplifting. I find that I drive more
quickly now.

I turn onto McDonald Road, a country lane passing through an undisturbed cow
pasture off a highway. How simple it is to turn off a road, slowly switching
gears into second. And then the mind follows, seduced by this easy pace away
from highway thoughts speeding rationally to conclusions to ambling reflections,
comtemplation. That is why the deer startles me so. I don't expect it there by
the edge of the road, with its open brown eyes, the small teeth and the leg.
The leg, though the deer is lying on its side, is straight and pointing at the
sky with an odd sort of defiance. So I stop and get out to look.

This is not a highway deer, a statistic at this time of year, like a striped car
tilting off the shoulder. This is a dead buck surrounded by blue asters and
matted weeds on a country lane. It is bloated yet still soft to the touch. I
watch as flies buzz and find the wound, flies being so indifferently curious and
quick to reach stray carcasses on back roads and reap bounty. Looking at those
still limbs, so stiff, it seems to me the deer must have died with legs rigidly
spread in that hold of terror as the car hit the upper thigh. No surrender is
evident in this posture: a death stance whose tension is enormous and grim.

I get into the car, feeling an awful sadness creeping over me as I change gears
to navigate a sharp turn to the left before the road meets the next numbered
highway. This is my first deer stop, ever. I return three times that day.

On my second stop, I am bringing my 4-year-old daughter home from school and her
teacher's words are ringing in my ears: ''A dead deer on McDonald? It's too bad
about dead deer, of course. Everyone gets soppy over dead animals. Then look
what we do to people, right? Let's not talk about Vietnam, El Salvador, or any
of that. I've seen so many people gathered around dead deer on roads that there
could have been six car accidents in that spot as a result.''

My daughter refuses to touch the deer but she points to the head where, since
this morning, the antlers have been ripped or sawed off so that the mouth is now
forced open, looking disturbingly gray. A car stops and a rush of guilt and
defensiveness, as if suddenly accused of the crime, makes me shout, ''It's been
here since this morning!'' The woman, in a large Chevrolet, rolls down her
window and gives me an odd look.

''I can't stand it. I can't look'' she says. ''How can they do it?  It makes me
sick. The poor deer. What does it know?'' And she jams her foot down on the gas
peddle.

Late that afternoon, with my older child now in the car, too, I stop by the deer
again. It is beginning to smell and the flies are fierce. Another car pulls up.
This time a man in a blue garage suit with an oval emblem inscribed simply
''Fred'' gets out. He approaches the animal with a certain authority, flips its
legs over to search for the wound and, like a rector called upon to give last
rites pronounces it dead several days.

''This is car damage,'' he declares. ''But when I see a bullet wound, that
really burns me up. An arrow's O.K., you know. That's legal. If I see a hunter
with a gun, I call the officers right away.  Pity,'' he adds. ''This one's a
beaut. Wish I had him.''

Not knowing anything about hunting techniques and the necessity, as I learn
later, of slaughtering immediately if you want to eat the meat, I drive back
onto the highway thinking, with a new sense of dispassion, that I should call
Ralph, my butcher, to tell him that there's venison available on McDonald Road
if he brings his truck around. In fact, I'm beginning to feel pleased with my
quick generosity and worried that maybe the deer will be gone.

Just then, I glance through my rear-view mirror to see a highwheeled black jeep
bearing down on me. Its two unlit headlights look alarmingly like gray eyes -
fierce, focused, large. They fill the space of my mirror and get bigger. I
realize in a flash that this jeep isn't going to slow down. I'm a target. It is
going 70 or 80 so furiously that my little car hasn't got a chance. Suddenly
we're thrust off the road into a ditch, one wheel in the air. As it happens, we
are safe. But my little daughter starts crying frantically as if terror for the
first time has stepped on her throttle. I undo my seat belt and climb into the
back seat to hold her. Or does she hold me? Certainly no cars slow down to see
which way it is.

Driving home, I keep glancing nervously in my rear-view mirror, and almost run
over a squirrel as we turn onto our road. I stop the car, appalled. My older
child, unaware of all my ponderings that day about violence, dead animals and
human sentimentality -my own especially - running amok, asks, ''Was the squirrel
wearing clothes, Mommy?'' She hits me dead center with her question. Is she,
with that mysterious intuition childen have, being silly to break the tension or
is she, more profoundly, somehow divining my day's thoughts?  Suddenly I see
those satin-paged children's books before me, the ones she loves, where
squirrels parade around in aprons or vested waistcoats singing lullabies. I have
an urge to toss the books out.

Instead, I call our local conservationist as soon as we get through our door to
have the deer corpse carted away. I'm informed, satisfactorily, not only that
deer are breeding and going beserk at this time of year, but that ''deer
cleanup'' is now handled by the sanitation department. The next day the deer is
gone.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Geraldine Van Dusen, a freelance book editor, lives in Ossining.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of man seeing deer through car window

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'MY SON'S GOING TO SIT IN WITH US TONIGHT, FELLOWS'

BYLINE: By KEITH N. RICHARDS

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 34, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 830 words


THEY played pinochle every Sunday night. One was a carpenter, one a truck
driver. The fellow down the block owned the neighborhood bar.  You could always
find him there, except on Sunday evenings when he would close up promptly at 6
o'clock, then head straightaway for the game.

Although they needed only three people, a fourth player would show up, and each
one took turns at dealing and sitting the hand out.  That fourth person was Dad.
He looked forward to the game as much as anybody, and although the site of the
game rotated around the neighborhood, it seemed that they played at our house
more than any other. Dad was nicknamed The Pencil, because he always kept score
and didn't make many mistakes.

They didn't play to make money. A hot winner on a given night would waltz home
with maybe $4 in winnings. (Another neighbor was once invited to play. He didn't
discuss the game much, just sat there and counted his money. ''He didn't share
our enthusiasm for the game,'' The Pencil told the men later. The neighbor was
not invited back. He had won a whopping $11.)

One night, The Pencil made an announcement. ''My son's going to sit in with us
tonight, fellows,'' he said proudly. With those words, I was initiated into this
close-knit circle.

I was honored. I'd watched through 11-year-old eyes as these masters counted up
points at the speed of light, slammed cards to the table to emphasize the tricks
they took, and criticized each other in a language as foreign to me as Swahili.
Now, suddenly, I was one of them. After years of addressing them as ''Mr.,'' we
were now on a first-name basis. We laughed, joked, cursed and argued as equals.
But when it came to playing, I was anything but their equal.

I was, in fact, their protege, and each felt he had a duty to teach me the
''proper'' way to play. They talked about the people who had taught them to
play, their greatest hand ever, what it had cost them to make the same mistake
40 years ago overseas. I heard tales told when my mother was still admonishing
me to do my homework quietly lest I disturb them.

So I smiled, listened and tried to learn. I made a clever play or two, and more
than my share of blunders. But I learned a great deal about playing pinochle
and, in the process, a lot about human nature, too.

But the toughest lesson came one evening, when I realized we were one short.
Jimmy, the truck driver, had suffered a massive coronary.  We four played that
night, but the conversation never strayed very far from our fallen comrade.

''Too bad about Jimmy, eh?'' asked Augie. ''His family really needs him.'' The
look on his and the other men's faces confirmed that everyone realized how much
we needed him, too. I saw fear in those faces, fear that the group would be
diminished. After all, I'd been the only addition in 12 years.

Two days later, Jimmy was dead.  Although we continued to meet every week,
Jimmy's passing reminded us that the game couldn't go on forever. There were
other things in life besides what to bid or what suit to make trumps.

Six months later, we were reminded again, not by the grim reaper, but by the
grim economy. Billy's bar had steadily lost money, so he was selling it and
moving to Florida.

''I'll call you the first Sunday I'm settled down there,'' he joked, ''and we'll
play over the phone.'' A month later, he was gone, too.

And then we were three.  For two more years, Augie, The Pencil and I met,
commenting how it was shame about Jimmy and wondering about his family. We'd ask
if anybody had heard from Billy in Florida. Disappointingly, no one ever did.

One recent Sunday was the coup de grace. The Pencil's health was deteriorating,
and he and Mom had been planning a move to Arizona.  Now it was to become a
reality, and the weekly card game would be no more.

I knew an important phase of my life had come full circle. John Kennedy's
assassination, Vietnam, the first moon walks, Watergate and Camp David had all
come and gone, but the card game had survived. I had graduated from college,
bought a house, taken a wife, begotten a child. Yet the game had always been
there. And now, even that was finally succumbing to changing interests, a more
mobile society, time itself.

What kept us coming back week after week was not only the enjoyment of the game,
but the enjoyment of one another, too. In spite of sophisticated advances in
television, electronic amusements and home-video technology, there still is much
to be said for an oldfashioned form of entertainment - simple human company.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Keith N. Richards lives in Holbrook.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Cezanne's painting of card players

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAN YOU AFFORD NOT TO VOTE?

BYLINE: By ANNE S. ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 50, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 702 words


ON NOV. 3, I went to the polls for the first time in my 20 years as a resident
of the United States. With immense satisfaction, I made known my opinion on
every issue and candidate on the ballot, and I wondered why anyone eligible to
vote would ever deny himself that privilege.

Twenty years ago, I came to this country from Britain on a visit and stayed to
marry an American and raise three children. Although my practical allegiance
over the years turned more and more to the United States, I still considered
myself a Scot, and the thought of changing my citizenship seemed disloyal to my
homeland. As a result, I remained a resident alien.

However, it is impossible to live in a country without being made aware of its
politics and its effect on the individual. I take a cynical view of the
politicians of any country, and there have been times when I did not envy
Americans their meager choice of doubtful candidates. Also, I understood their
sense of futility when their votes failed to change government policy.

But I have never understood those Americans who do not go to the polls, who give
up their freedom of choice. The longer I lived here as an alien, the more
frustrated I became at not being able to vote.

I listened to my husband and our friends debate local and national issues, and
felt embarrassed and a little ashamed that I could not go to the polls to help
support a cause or a candidate in which we all believed.

I was a freeloader in one of the few societies that invites and desperately
needs the participation of every citizen to make it work for the most good.

When reports came in of only a 40 percent voter turnout, I had to count myself
among the silent majority. If my candidates and causes were defeated, I wondered
what the outcome would have been if all abstainers had made their choices known.

My children, in their growing awareness of the world and of the unique freedoms
in their own country, helped me toward my decision to seek United States
citizenship and the right to vote. Their uncluttered young minds dismissed the
notion of anyone's heart still being in the Highlands.

I lived and paid taxes in America, not in Scotland, didn't I? Was I willing to
accept taxation without representation? And why, they asked, if I didn't like
what the government was doing, didn't I do something to try and change it?

They knew that their Aunt May didn't go to the polls anymore. Her candidates in
the last two elections had been defeated, so she had decided that her vote
didn't count anymore. Did I believe that?

I looked at my three sons and thought of Vietnam. If 100 percent of the eligible
voters had made their choices known in the 60's, I wondered, would so many men -
some not much older than my boys - have been sent into that hellish debacle?

And what about government decisions to come, decisions that could possibly
involve all the peoples of the world, including ours, in war? Would I submit
without a vote of protest? You're darn right I wouldn't!

So last spring I pledged allegiance to the United States of America at the Essex
County Courthouse in Newark and finally planted my stubborn Scottish roots in
American soil.

My earnest efforts to know the candidates and issues in the recent New Jersey
election did nothing to lessen my cynicism about politics. However, with each
push of the levers on the voting machine, 20 years of silent guilt and
frustration were buried.

I was finally free to make my opinions known to the people who govern the
country. And is that not what it's all about, this beautiful troubled land of
ours - freedom? And doesn't last month's gubernatorial election in New Jersey,
the closest race in 20 years, prove that every vote can count?

It has taken this former freeloader 20 years, but today I am no longer dependent
on others to vote for what I want. The freedom of choice is mine now and, by
God, I'll make it!
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Anne S. Anderson lives - and votes - in Ridgewood.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY'S RULE: TWO TARGETS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 13


Poland's soldier-leader, Wojciech Jaruzelski, has struck at what he perceives as
the two main roots of his country's current troubles: the radical
''confrontationists'' of the Solidarity labor movement and the still influential
members of the Communist Party's old guard.

His martial law decree, accompanied by the detention of Solidarity leaders and
former party leaders and an internal communications blackout, has eliminated the
cadres and the instruments that might have been used to rally supporters against
his rule.

A 56,000-Member Force

The state of emergency was long in the making, in the estimate of Administration
specialists on Polish affairs, and was foreshadowed not only by large-scale
maneuvers of Soviet troops on Poland's borders earlier in the year, but also by
the brief mobilization of the Polish Internal Defense Forces last September.

The Internal Defense Forces are heavily equipped paramilitary security troops
with 56,000 members. They are trained for riot control, and are deployed in
three contingents, one in Warsaw, one in the north of Poland, and one in the
south.

As viewed by the Reagan Administration, the success of General Jaruzelski's
moves - both the administration of government through armed forces political
commissars and his appeal ''as a soldier'' to the patriotism of Poles - will be
decided shortly.

''The next 24 hours are crucial,'' a senior American official said. ''If the
workers strike, and the students refuse to go to school, then the crunch will
come.''

It is notable that Poland's internal security forces are stretched thin for a
country of 36 million. A Pole who is familiar with the sitation remarked here
today, ''With three contingents they could handle three major outbreaks, but
what if there are 50 uprisings?''

General Jaruzelski apparently postponed taking the drastic step of imposing
martial law again and again in the vain hope that a political solution could be
achieved in negotiations between the leaders of the party and the union.

His patience ended Saturday, when the union leaders, meeting in Gdansk, proposed
holding a national referendum on establishing a non-Communist government.

A Year of Uncertainty

It is a year and two weeks since the Soviet leadership under Leonid I. Brezhnev
first seriously weighed armed intervention in Poland to put down what it saw as
the makings of ''counterrevolution.''

As reported subsequently by high-ranking East European officials, the Russians
drew back in favor of attempts at a political solution after consultations with
leaders from Warsaw and the governments of the other Soviet bloc allies.

But in that time the Polish Communist Party has worn itself to a frazzle and,
obviously in General Jaruzelski's judgment, was incapable of mastering the
crisis.

After the toppling of Edward Gierek as party chief last year, the party limped
along under Stanislaw Kania, who was described even by sympathizers as
''unimaginative.''

Then, last October, General Jaruzelski was given the job of party leader and
Prime Minister. And last night, Mr. Gierek and five of his closest party
associates were placed under arrest by the new military regime.

The latest indication of the party's weakness was the disclosure late last month
by a senior Warsaw official that the ruling party of 2.9 million had lost 16
percent of its membership in the previous 18 months, nearly half a million
members, through resignations and expulsions.

Poland's attempt to overcome its political and economic problems by means of a
military government, however short its duration, is unique in the history of
Communist parties. But the development of a free union movement such as
Solidarity, within a Communist country, is also unique.

To be sure, the parties of Yugoslavia, China and Vietnam grew out of armed
struggles against foreign invaders and occupiers. Yet, once in power, Communist
parties, following the teachings of Lenin, have kept the armed forces under
strict party control. Now, Communist Poland not only has an army general in
charge of the party, but an army in charge of the country.

A Purge of the Party

Evidently, General Jaruzelski intends to use his military government to purge
the party, as well as to purge Solidarity - as he put it, ''to cleanse Polish
life of evil, no matter where it arises.''

Assuming he can carry out his aims, Poland will return to civilian rule under
the aegis of a greatly altered Communist Party, even though General Jaruzelski
acknowledged that, ''despite all the failures and mistakes we made, the party is
still the leading and creative force.''

The welcoming sounds from Moscow and other Warsaw Pact capitals indicate that he
has received a go-ahead from Poland's allies, who presumably intend not to
intervene, but to watch as vigilantly as they have during the last year over
Poland's internal security, which touches closely on their own security.

In his radio broadcast, General Jaruzelski said that ''the hour of hard trial
has come.'' But Poles remember their country has come through other hard trials
rather well when a military man was head of the government. Only last month
Solidarity workers in Gdansk proposed renaming a ship repair yard for one of
them - Marshal Josef Pilsudski, who assumed power during an economic crisis in
the Polish Republic in 1926. The marshal, however, is also known for leading
Poles in defeating the Russians in 1920.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
CBS Said to Have Hired Mercenaries in Cambodia

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 156 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. 13


A former war correspondent has testified that CBS News recovered the bodies of
four reporters in Cambodia by hiring a private army after the authorities
refused to make the recovery operation.

The testimony came last week in Federal court in a suit brought by Tim Page, 37
years old, a former war photographer who is seeking $5 million from Time-Life
Inc. for serious injuries he suffered in Vietnam.

Jack Laurence, now a correspondent for ABC News in London, testified that CBS
hired the soldiers after Communist troops ambushed a jeep carrying a free-lance
journalist and three staff members.

Dave Miller, the CBS News bureau manager in Saigon, told The San Francisco
Chronicle that after a week of getting ''a runaround'' from the Cambodian
authorities, CBS hired 20 to 30 Cambodians at $20 to $100.

Ed Fouhy, vice president of CBS News, confirmed the account.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 15, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

COMBAT PHOTOGRAPHER WINS $125,000 IN A SUIT AGAINST TIME

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 432 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. l4


A Federal jury cast aside a signed release negotiated by Time Inc. with a
freelance photographer badly injured while on assignment for Time-Life in the
Vietnam War and held that the publisher had an implicit responsibility to ''take
care of'' the injured man.

The jury awarded $125,000 to the photographer, Tim Page, who had part of his
brain blown away when a soldier ahead of him stepped on a land mine.

At a news conference after the verdict in the 51-day trial in Federal court
here, Mr. Page expressed disappointment at the amount of the award, but said,
''We proved the point; freelancers are right.''

In finding for Mr. Page, the jury had to establish several legal points. First,
they determined that he was legally insane when he signed a letter absolving his
employer of any responsiblity for his injury in 1971. Mr. Page signed the
agreement in exchange for $15,000.

The finding of legal insanity, essentially that he was incapable of
understanding and making a transaction, swept aside Time's contention that it
was released from responsibility for Mr. Page's injuries. The finding also
denied, in effect, the contention that a two-year statute of limitations on an
oral contract had run out.

The jury also rejected Time's contention that it did not have a contract with
Mr. Page and therefore did not have any legal obligation to him. The company had
argued that its bureau chiefs did not have the authority to obligate the company
in cases such as Mr.  Page's in which a freelance photographer was injured while
on assignment.

The company also argued that, even if its bureau cheifs did have such authority,
the absence of a contract had rid them of any responsiblity.

Exhibits in the trial included scores of Mr. Page's graphic photographs of the
dead and wounded that appeared in Time magazine in the late 1960's, some blown
up to two full pages.

However, since his injury, testimony showed that Mr. Page, who remains partially
paralyzed in addition to having mental difficulties, had earned less than $4,000
since 1970 from his photographs.

Jurors declined to discuss the case and their reasons for determining the amount
of the award to Mr. Page. The jury rejected the plaintiff's contention that the
company acted fraudulently in obtaining the release from Mr. Page in 1970.

A lawyer for Time said no decision had been reached on whether to appeal the
judgment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 15, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
A NEW POLITICAL REALITY

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 881 words


Poland under martial law is a tragic reminder of the Soviet system's inability
to provide its people with sufficient freedom or sufficient goods, and its
consequent dependence upon force.

That may be a vindication of Western values and achievements. But it's
frightening, too, because this sad repression - no doubt necessitated by Soviet
pressures - also is a reminder of the nuclear abyss at whose edge the
superpowers stand poised.

If the Polish people resist and Soviet forces have to be called in to suppress
them ... or if Poland remains a nagging, insoluble problem for the Russians ...
or if the Polish ''disease'' breaks out elsewhere in Eastern Europe or in the
Soviet Union itself ... or if domestic instability leads Moscow into either
adventurism abroad or hard-shell defiance against the world ...

Any of those developments would pose real dangers of East-West conflict. With
the huge nuclear arsenals available on both sides, avoiding their use in such a
conflict would be miraculous.

In the Middle East, in Southeast Asia, in southern Africa, as well as in Europe,
the possibility of a flashpoint cannot be ignored. And the next flashpoint
-whether in Poland or elsewhere - may not be limited, or limitable, to a Korea
or a Vietnam, a Hungary or an Afghanistan; the next may be the last.

It's that stark realization of the danger of an unintended slide into nuclear
holocaust that's at the root of the anti-nuclear movement abroad and its growing
counterpart in the United States. A major new political movement may be
gathering worldwide.

Even as the Polish Army prepared its takeover, the Vatican announced that Pope
John Paul II would send aides to Washington, Moscow, Paris, London and the
United Nations to urge an end to the nuclear arms race. Last month Archbishop
John Roach, president of Roman Catholic bishops in the United States, declared
that ''the Church needs to say 'no' clearly and decisively to the use of nuclear
weapons.''

On what used to be called Armistice Day, thousands gathered on university
campuses across the nation for anti-nuclear weapons ''teach-ins'' sponsored by
the Union of Concerned Scientists, reminiscent of those that once inspired the
anti-Vietnam peace movement.

The Journal of the American Medi-cal Association - one of the most conservative
of organizations - recently printed under the heading ''Commentary'' a powerful
article in which Dr. Bernard Lown of the Harvard School of Public Health wrote
that ''only an aroused public opinion can compel political leaders to stop the
spiraling nuclear arms race.'' His article cited two organizations of physicians
now working toward that end.

A group called Californians for a Bilateral Nuclear Weapons Freeze plans a
ballot referendum in California next year. If approved, it would urge the United
States to propose to the Soviet Union that both ''immediately halt the testing,
production and further deployment of all nuclear weapons, missiles and delivery
systems in a way that can be checked and verified by both sides.''

The wording of the planned initiative suggests that the antinuclear movement is
not an effort for ''unilateral disarmament.'' Instead, here as well as in
Europe, an expanded consciousness about the threat of nuclear war and world
destruction is often combined with support for a conventional military buildup
and a traditional anti-Soviet stance. This is a new political reality, not a
''peacenik'' exercise.

Walter Pincus of The Washington Post said at an Arms Control Association meeting
recently that someone just returned from Europe had described the anti-nuclear
movement there as similar to ''the people of Nevada and Utah being led by Paul
Laxalt'' against deployment of the MX in their backyards. The fear of being
targeted for destruction is real, here as well as there.

At the same discussion, Gerard W. Smith, President Nixon's arms control director
and the man who negotiated SALT I with Moscow, made a strong argument that,
considering American and NATO deterrent power already deployed, the United
States might be making too big an issue of Soviet missiles in Europe and the
supposed need to match them.

Thomas J. Watson Jr., the former ambassador to Moscow, pointed out to the same
group that President Reagan's strategic weapons program does not violate the
limits of the unratified SALT II, and that Mr.  Reagan has said that ''we can
benefit from work done over the past decade'' in strategic arms negotiations.

If that's his belief, Mr. Watson suggested, the President should immediately
appoint a group of former Secretaries of State and Defense, former chairmen of
the Joint Chiefs, and others equally qualified, to review SALT II. If such
persons concluded that the treaty was ''in the best interest of U.S. security,''
their support could help him if he decided to resubmit it for ratification,
despite his own past opposition.

Mr. Reagan isn't likely to do that; but he is too good a politician not to sense
these powerful and growing pressures.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 15, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SUPREME COURT ROUNDUP;
AGENT ORANGE PLEA IS DENIED IN BLOW TO VIETNAM VETERANS

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 14


The chances that thousands of Vietnam veterans will ever be able to collect
damages for injuries caused by exposure to the chemical known as Agent Orange
remained clouded today as the Supreme Court refused to hear an appeal from a
lower court ruling that may keep many of the veterans out of Federal court.

Lawsuits by veterans against the manufacturers of Agent Orange are months or
years away from trial, and the legal issue before the Justices today was both
technical and preliminary. But that issue - whether there is a Federal ''common
law'' that governs the lawsuits and gives the veterans access to Federal court -
has a direct bearing on the outcome of more than 100 suits involving more than
two million veterans and dozens of corporate defendants.

Agent Orange, a defoliant that contains a toxic ingredient called dioxin, has
been linked to genetic damage and serious medical problems among those who were
exposed to it in Southeast Asia. The suits are essentially products-liability
suits, alleging the manufacture of a dangerous product, and products liability
is usually a matter of state rather than Federal law. But some 600,000 veterans
live in the 19 states whose courts would bar the suits because restrictive
statutes of limitations have already expired. These statutes typically require a
suit to be filed within a few years of exposure and, while the chemical's
dangerous properties became widely known only recently, the veterans were
exposed as long as 15 years ago.

Reversal in Appeals Court

As a result, the veterans have sought access to Federal court. The case before
the Justices today, Chapman v. Dow Chemical, No.  80-1882, one of the principal
lawsuits, was filed in the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of
New York. The judge, George C. Pratt, ruled that the ''substantial Federal
interests'' at stake entitled the veterans to Federal court access as a matter
of law.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed. It ruled
that, while some veterans would still be able to use the Federal courts because
of the interstate nature of their suits state law, including state statutes of
limitations, would have to apply.  The Justice Department, asked by the Supreme
Court for its views, urged the Justices last month not to take the veterans'
appeal.

Associate Justices Harry A. Blackmun and Sandra Day O'Connor voted to hear the
appeal. The votes of four Justices are needed for the Court to take a case.

The veterans' case, which involves 800 individual plaintiffs, is still pending
before Judge Pratt. But future developments are now uncertain. Victor John
Yannacone Jr., a lawyer for the veterans, said today that the main hope for many
would be to persuade state legislatures to relax the statutes of limitations, a
step that New York took last June. Veterans in New Jersey and Connecticut, which
have liberal statutes of limitations, would presumably still be able to bring
their suits in state court.

Other action at the Court today included the following:

Prayer Before School

Without comment, the Court refused to hear an appeal by a group of high school
students from the upstate New York town of Guilderland who were denied
permission to hold voluntary prayer meetings on school property before the
official start of the school day. The United States Court of Appeals for the
Second Circuit upheld the school board's policy that to allow the prayers would
be to violate the constitutionally mandated separation between church and state.
(Brandon v. Board of Education, No. 80-1396.)

Public Defenders

The Court ruled, 8 to 1, that a public defender is not acting under ''color of
state law'' when serving as a lawyer for a criminal defendant. The effect of
that ruling is to prevent the defendant from suing the lawyer under the Civil
Rights Act of 1871, which allows suits for damages against persons who, while
acting under color of state law, violate an individuals constitutional rights.

The decision, Polk County v. Dodson, No. 80-824, reversed a ruling by the United
States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, which held that the public
defender employed by an Iowa county acted under color of state law while making
decisions about how to represent defendants. Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun
was the dissenter.

Moon Seminary

The Court refused to hear an appeal by the Unification Church from a ruling by
the New York Board of Regents denying the organization a charter to operate a
degree-granting seminary in Tarrytown, N.Y. The church is headed by the Rev. Sun
Myung Moon. (Warder v. Board of Regents, No. 81-777).

New York Welfare

The Court agreed to hear an appeal by New York State from a ruling that struck
down a state law limiting emergency cash assistance to welfare recipients. Under
the 1977 law, persons receiving welfare under the Aid to Families with Dependent
Children program could not also receive the emergency assistance. The emergency
cash assistance program, partly financed by the Federal Government, was designed
to replace personal belongings lost in fires or evictions and to take care of
other special needs. The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
agreed with a group of welfare recipients that the state limitation was
discriminatory. (Blum v. Bacon, No. 81-770).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 16, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PEACE CORP'S SAFE DISTANCE FROM C.I.A., ET AL.

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 430 words


To the Editor:

As the principal Senate sponsor of legislation to separate the Peace Corps from
the Action agency, I was astonished by the letter (Nov. 27) from Donald Thorson,
Action's assistant director for legislative affairs, accusing The Times of
inaccurate reporting. It is Mr. Thorson who is inaccurate.

Mr. Thorson states that it is ''not true'' that the Peace Corps has a strict
prohibition against former intelligence agents within its ranks. The truth is
that ever since its inception in 1961 the Peace Corps has had a policy designed
to preclude even the appearance of a connection with intelligence activities.

This policy bars any former agent or employee of the C.I.A. from ever serving as
a Peace Corps volunteer or employee. And it strictly prohibits anyone else from
serving if he or she has engaged in intelligence activities in the preceding 10
years.

Thomas Pauken, director of Action; Loret Ruppe, director of the Peace Corps, and
William Casey, director of the C.I.A., have said that they intend to continue
this policy.

Mr. Thorson states that Thomas Houser served in Army counterintelligence 13
years before he became deputy director of the Peace Corps in 1969. However, no
information to that effect was brought to the attention of the Senate at the
time of Mr. Houser's confirmation.

Mr. Thorson also claims that separating the Peace Corps from Action would ''cost
the taxpayers more money.'' The evidence points in exactly the opposite
direction. Internal Peace Corps budget documents estimate that, while separation
will cost about $900,000 in firstyear administrative expenses, it will save $1
million annually thereafter.

Finally, the controversy over Mr. Pauken's nomination arose not because he is a
Vietnam veteran, as Mr. Thorson falsely suggests, but over the question whether
the extent and nature of his service in military intelligence violated - or
appeared to violate - a policy indispensable to the effectiveness of the Peace
Corps, if not to its very survival. The Foreign Relations Committee narrowly
voted for his confirmation, 10 to 7.

Making the Peace Corps an independent agency will reaffirm its fundamental
policy of keeping free of all taint of an ''intelligence connection.'' It is a
sorry state of affairs that a high official of Action, in his determination to
keep the Peace Corps within that agency at any cost, is willing to jeopardize a
policy intended to protect the integrity of the Peace Corps and the safety of
its volunteers and staff.
ALAN CRANSTON, U. S. Senator from California, Washington, Dec. 9, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 16, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LAWYER ASKING CONGRESS TO MAKE HIM A PRIVATEER

BYLINE: By GREGORY JAYNES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: KEY WEST, Fla.


A middle-aged local lawyer with a restless spirit, a man who quit the State
Department for life outside the pressure cooker, got a whimsical notion last
summer to petition Congress for letters of marque and reprisal. He realized,
after holding the idea to the light, that he would in effect be asking to be
made a licensed pirate, free to rove and legally bound to plunder drug
smugglers.

Walking to work through conspiratorial circles of marijuana smokers, a common
street-corner sight in this town, the lawyer, Randy Ludacer, one day allowed his
whim to seize into resolve, and he petitioned. He pointed out that Article I,
Section 8, of the United States Constitution allows Congress to ''declare War,
grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal and make Rules concerning Captures on Land
and Water.''

Employing the word ''privateer'' rather the potentially offensive word
''pirate,'' Mr. Ludacer recalled that in the War of 1812 Congress awarded such
letters to such privateers as Jean Lafitte, who had no objection to calling
himself a pirate but became a privateer nonetheless. He sacked British merchant
ships with the Government's blessing.

That was the last time Congress issued the letters, though it still has the
authority. The Confederacy issued such letters with abandon, but the Confederacy
no longer has the authority. Congress thus far has issued Mr. Ludacer one
letter. It came over the weekend. It was a letter of rejection.

Letter From His Senator

Now the lawyer blows hot and cold on what to do next. The letter, from Senator
Paula Hawkins, the Florida Republican, says that legal scholars on the Senate
Judiciary Committee staff had ''informed me that the interdiction of drug
traders by private citizens would constitute a violation of international law.''

''The Geneva Convention on the High Seas,'' she wrote, ''declares that only
'naval forces' may conduct such interdictions.  Unfortunately it seems apparent
that your group would not meet the requirements of this definition, even with
proper authorization from Congress in the form of a letter of marque and
reprisal.''

''An international law is what the sovereign says it is,'' said Mr. Ludacer.
''Also, what I'm proposing certainly is not unconstitutional. I'm saying to
Congress if you don't like privateers, you've had a couple of hundred
opportunities to amend the Constitution. It has been there since the
beginning.''

One moment Mr. Ludacer considers his project dead in the water. The next he is
drafting a letter to Senator Hawkins saying: ''Congress has the power to issue
the letter of marque. I sent my letter to you as a courtesy. I didn't anticipate
your judgment was going to act as a prefilter for the judgment of Congress. So I
am sending my petition to the Speaker and the President Pro Tempore
respectively.''

He Has 100 Volunteers

The only thing the 52-year-old lawyer is now sure of is that he has 100 men,
most of them graybeard former ship captains, retired lawenforcement officers,
former agents for the Central Intelligence Agency and a few mercenaries down on
their luck ready to go after the $7 billion in drugs that is estimated to be
smuggled each year into the south Florida pipeline. ''I am Capt. Jack von
Kripe,'' begins a letter from a Hialeah volunteer to Mr. Ludacer. ''I have
sailed the Caribbean for many years. I lived most of time in a place, really a
hideout, called Black Cesar's Lagoon.''

''But I sail sailing vessels,'' the letter goes on. ''And I am a gunnery
officer. I need another sailing vessel. With guns. 20 mms and 30 cal. machines.
I don't need Congress.''

Mr. Ludacer said angrily: ''I spent a reasonable number of years in the United
States Navy and it strikes me that for this kind of problem the thing to do is
just go tell law-enforcement agencies ...  and just go do it.'' Mr. Ludacer was
born in the South Bronx, son of a police officer attached to the 44th Precinct.
He was in the Navy from 1948 until 1953, the last three years in Korea. He
practiced law for 12 years in Sarasota, Fla., serving there as president of the
American Civil Liberties Union. From 1970 until 1972, he was legal counsel for
the Agency for International Development in Vietnam. From 1972 until 1977 he
served as assistant general counsel for enforcement at the State Department.

'About Had It With Bureaucracy'

''I guess I'd about had it with the Federal bureaucracy,'' he said. ''They're
more interested with their pensions than with anything else. They won't stick
their necks out for anything. I'm afraid the situation is the same with law
enforcement.''

He moved to Key West, a town of 32,000 people, and tacked up a shingle. This
summer he got the idea of becoming a privateer. He is ''not against the drugs
themselves, but the effects they have on subculture.''

''There is a spoor that surrounds drugs,'' he said. ''I'm trying not to sound
like a right-wing crackpot.'' Once word of his intentions got out, ''it reached
the point where I thought I've got enough volunteers.'' ''I don't have to bother
with boats,'' he said. ''I can go down to Colombia and burn the crops as I march
into Bogota.'' This weekend, Mr. Ludacer was ''checking my intellectual pulse to
see if I'm serious,'' and determined that he was.

When last seen, Mr. Ludacer was saying of his preoccupation: ''This is not a Zen
thing to do. It may be my last hurrah in the service of individuality. Then I
might as well rejoin mankind.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Randy Ludacer

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 17, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GOTBAUM QUITS RACE FOR PRESIDENCY OF UNION

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 698 words


Victor Gotbaum of New York withdrew from consideration for president of the
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees yesterday, leaving
two men campaigning to succeed the late Jerry Wurf as head of the nation's
largest public workers' union.

The union's executive board will choose today between Gerald W.  McEntee, a vice
president from Pennsylvania, and William Lucy, the union secretary-treasurer.
Both men, union officials agree, represent a relatively new kind of labor
leader, highly sophisticated and college-educated.

Mr. Gotbaum, executive director of the union's District Council 37 in New York,
had won the endorsement of leaders of the Civil Service Employees Association, a
200,000-member New York State affiliate of the union. But Joseph E. McDermott,
an association leader who represents about 108,000 members, refused to endorse
Mr. Gotbaum, according to union officers, and without his support, Mr. Gotbaum
had no chance for election.

Richard Morton, executive director of District Council 1707 of New York, also
reportedly refused to support Mr. Gotbaum.

Term Expires in Mid-1984

The election is to fill the remainder of Mr. Wurf's term, which expires in the
summer of 1984. The labor leader died last week at the age of 62.

Mr. McEntee is regarded among the union leadership as the frontrunner for the
job, with Mr. Lucy a second choice. If Mr. Lucy wins, he would be the only black
president of a major international union.

The one black union president active in major labor affairs is Frederick O'Neal,
head of the 78,000-member Actors and Artistes of America. Black workers
constitute 10.2 percent of the nation's 107 million-member work force, according
to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and 29 percent of them belong to unions. The
municipal workers' union is about 40 percent black.

Mr. Gotbaum had fought vigorously in 1979 to oust Mr. Wurf but was pushed aside
in fierce union politics. This time he had been accorded some chance of winning,
particularly if a struggle developed between Mr. McEntee and Mr. Lucy, who are
both younger.

Major Task for President

Whoever is named president will face major tasks.  The labor movement in the
last two decades made major gains in organizing public workers, but today
municipal and state governments face major financial problems and are cutting
back on employment. And Federal budget cutbacks are making it doubly difficult
for unions to wrest gains for public employees from states and municipalities.

Next year the union must negotiate contracts, including agreements in New York
City and New York State, for about 500,000 of its members.

Moreover, Mr. Wurf, who had headed the union since 1964, will be difficult to
replace.  He was a demanding, often irascible man who, more than anyone else,
was credited with building public employee unionism in the United States.

Liberal Attitudes

He often stood alone in the labor movement's high circles in his opposition to
the Vietnam War and his outspoken criticism of George Meany, then president of
the A.F.L.-C.I.O, whom he regarded as too conservative on many domestic and
foreign issues.

Both Mr. McEntee and Mr. Lucy are highly trained, longtime union men seemingly
characterized by the same liberalism that marked Mr.  Wurf.

Mr. McEntee, 46, executive director of the 75,000-member District Council 13 in
Pennsylvania, has a bachelor's degree in economics from La Salle University and
has done graduate work at Harvard University. He was elected a union vice
president in 1974.

Mr. Lucy, 48, has a bachelor of arts degree from the University of California at
Berkeley and was a civil engineer before he came to the union movement. He is
president and founder of the Coalition of Black Trade Unionists and has been the
union's secretary-treasurer since 1972.

A memorial service for Mr. Wurf yesterday in Washington was attended by about
1,800 family members, friends and associates.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF CARTER'S SPEECH ATTACKING FOREIGN POLICY OF REAGAN ADMINISTRATION

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2433 words


Following is the prepared text of the speech by former President Jimmy Carter
yesterday to the Council on Foreign Relations in New York.

With the possible exception of my two predecessors, I know better than anyone
how complicated and intransigent are some of the foreign policy questions that
confront a President. I also know from firsthand experience about innate human
fallibility, even among those of us who have served in the Oval Office.

International problems often survive over long periods of time.  Harry Truman is
my favorite among the Presidents I remember, and I made a special study of the
challenges he faced and his reaction to them. It was surprising how many of the
same ones I inherited in some form or another, all the way from Israel to China,
and including nuclear weapons, energy, Iran and especially human rights.

American foreign policy has been most successful when it enjoyed bipartisan
support, as was the case with the formation of NATO and the United Nations, the
U.S.-Japanese agreements after World War II, the Panama Canal treaties, the Camp
David accords and normalization of relations with China. When such involvement
and support is absent, we suffer the consequences, as with the League of
Nations, Vietnam and our failure to implement all the terms of the SALT II
treaty.

Bipartisan Continuity Damaged

Apparently, this policy of bipartisan continuity has been abandoned.  Although
many problems are of concern to us, we realize that only the Soviet Union has
the capability to threaten our very existence, and for that reason alone the
superpower relationship must always be foremost in the development of wise and
consistent plans.

I am convinced that the Soviet leaders want to stay at peace with us. They
suffered 20 million deaths in the Second World War, and their aging leaders
remember vividly the agony of that conflict. At the same time, we know they will
probe for every chance to exert their influence, depending for their primary
strength on great military power, the use of Cuban and Vietnamese surrogates and
the delivery of weapons to almost any willing recipient.

I studied very closely the policies of Presidents Nixon and Ford in defining the
basis for detente. Our commitment to this process cannot be lightly abandoned if
the word means the easing of tension between our two nations. Both superpowers
must exercise restraint in troubled areas and in troubled times and must search
for better understanding of one another.

Eagerness to Cooperate

The importance and complexity of Soviet-American affairs require that our
national policy be thoroughly and frequently proclaimed to the public.
Repeatedly, in news conferences and in major speeches we made clear our
eagerness to cooperate with the Soviets whenever possible, but our willingness
to compete with them when necessary.

A one-sided attitude of belligerence toward the Soviet Union may be politically
attractive for a time, but it is not an adequate basis for American policy
because it precludes cooperation and generates fear among those who would avoid
a superpower confrontation.

SALT negotiations have been the most notable example of an extended bipartisan
effort, extending throughout the last three Presidential terms. Even major
differences were not permitted to interrupt this process. In May 1972, after
almost four years of talks, President Nixon was scheduled to go to Moscow to
complete SALT I. Two weeks before the summit, he ordered the mining of Haiphong
harbor and the bombing of rail lines to impede the flow of supplies from China
and the Soviet Union to North Vietnam. Nevertheless, Nixon and Brezhnev met and
signed the agreement.

7 Years of Talks Successful

The SALT II Treaty was negotiated for almost seven years under three Presidents,
also under most difficult conditions. Just during the final year we concluded
the Middle East peace treaty without Soviet participation, normalized diplomatic
relations with China contrary to Soviet desires, weathered the Iranian
revolution and condemned the Soviet Union for its involvement in military
operations in Ethiopia - but we still proceeded to Vienna to conclude the
agreement and lay the groundwork for much deeper nuclear arms reductions under
SALT III.

This SALT process had been pursued not just to reduce the nuclear threat and
alleviate tension between the pre-eminent leaders of the East and West, but also
to convince our allies and other nations that we seek peace and are committed to
the process of nuclear arms control.

Now we have seen a radical American departure from this longprevailing policy.
From my successors there have been mixed signals, at best, even involving the
acceptability of limited nuclear wars and demonstration nuclear warning shots.
These have aroused consternation here and in Europe and have dealt the unity of
NATO a most damaging blow.

When I visited England, Germany, France and Italy, we had reports about
smoldering embers of pacifism and the antinuclear movement, but we never saw
demonstrations or other evidence of this sentiment. Now these embers have been
fanned into flames. It may well be that an aroused public on both sides of the
Iron Curtain will serve to hasten the day of general nuclear arms reductions,
but it is troubling that most of the hundreds of thousands are demonstrating
against us and not against the much more culpable leader of the Warsaw Pact.

Step in Right Direction

The recent offer by the President not to deploy future mediumrange weapons in
Europe if the Soviets remove their existing ones was a step in the right
direction. Although I have never found the Soviet leaders willing to consider
either unilateral dismantling of their medium-range missiles or on-site
inspections, nor inclined to ignore French and British weapons when the
balancing tallies are made, maybe we will now see a new day. It is certain that
something must be done to reduce this immediate and growing threat to European,
American and Soviet citizens. I pray that the present talks might soon bring
this new day.

But after a year it is important to ask: What is our policy concerning strategic
nuclear arms limitations or reductions? Neither SALT I nor SALT II now have the
force of law, and there have been no clear public statements either from
Washington or Moscow about these possibly moribund agreements. What
modifications to the existing treaties would make them acceptable to this
Administration? What about SALT III or other subsequent negotiations? After more
than 25 years, have we abandoned this crucial effort? If so, this is a
development of the most serious consequence to our country and to the world.

There was one nuclear issue on which President Brezhnev and I found no
significant area of disagreement -nuclear nonproliferation. We both strongly
opposed the spreading of nuclear explosives to additional nations.

Nonproliferation Weakened

With full bipartisan support and in conformity with campaign commitments made by
me and President Ford, we moved aggressively to strengthen America's
nonproliferation policy. In 1977 I signed into law a far-reaching bill designed
to restrain the trade in atomic fuels and waste reprocessing plants without
strict international controls, and we implemented this policy even though it
sometimes aroused the displeasure of friends like Germany, France, Japan and
Switzerland.

Within the last year this nonproliferation policy has been almost wiped out
completely, through announcements and actions here and among others who are
eager to benefit financially from the lucrative trafficking in nuclear
materials. Nations like India, Brazil, Argentina, South Africa, Iraq, Pakistan
and Libya are watching with intense interest what the free world's leading
nation will do, knowing that without the United States in the forefront of this
effort there can be no substantial restraints. So far, we have smiled and nodded
or looked the other way. Unfortunately, the trade and the danger are growing.

Under Presidents Nixon and Ford the Middle East problems were addressed at the
highest levels of our Government. We all remember the ''shuttle diplomacy'' of
their Administrations as we injected a strong American voice into this troubled
region. As you know, I continued this policy, with top-level officials
specifically directed to speak for me in seeking peace. When necessary, I did
the negotiating myself.

Camp David Is Essential

The Middle East is still a tinderbox, and the only foundation in sight for a
comprehensive peace is the consummation of the Camp David accords. In April,
Egypt and Israel can prove to the world that negotiations in good faith will pay
rich dividends to both sides.  Israel will gain peace and normal relations with
her most powerful Arab neighbor, and Egypt will also have peace plus the return
of her occupied territories. The Camp David framework provides for the continued
security of Israel, the withdrawl of her armed forces to security posts, the
termination of military rule and full autonomy for the Palestinians. It is all
there in the agreement - promises waiting to be fulfilled. This is no time to be
slack or equivocal in our support for the existing accords. This would be a
tragic mistake for Egypt, Israel and for the United States.

I can certainly understand why any President does not personally join the
discussions, but it is almost inconceivable that neither the Secretary of State
nor any other high-level negotiator has been assigned to help implement the Camp
David agreement. The prospective alternatives as proposed by the Saudis, the
European community and the United Nations are ill-advised as long as there is an
ongoing peace process under American leadership - but we are bordering on
default.

I have been listening with great personal concern to the confusing statements
from Washington. We are a signatory of the Camp David accords. Have we abandoned
this commitment? If not, do we only have a casual interest in the ongoing peace
talks? Do we recognize the catastrophic consequences of a failure? Is this
another abrupt change from more than a decade of bipartisan commitment? These
questions cry out for answers.

Gains With China Threatened

Perhaps the most memorable accomplishment of the Nixon Administration was his
visit to China and the signing of the Shanghai communique. President Ford
endorsed this action and visited China to demonstrate his commitment to further
Sino-American relations. Our normalizing relations with China was another major
step toward a better life for both our peoples and a more stable and peaceful
Far East. Commercial trade, scientific and technological agreements, tourism and
the exchange of scholars have all burgeoned. In the process, the people of
Taiwan have reaped similar benefits.

Now again, through public statements and impending action there are clear
indications that our country might revert to a two-China policy. In September I
had extensive discussions with China's leaders, Premier Zhao Ziyang, Chairman Hu
Yaobang and Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping. I can tell you that American sales of
anything other than strictly defensive weapons to Taiwan will endanger the
progress we have made with China. Another bipartisan accomplishment of the
greatest value is being threatened.

Southern Africa is another area where long-standing policies are being reversed.
Shortly before I became President, our country proposed a substantial American
contribution toward resolving the Rhodesian question. I saw this as important,
and through our leaders in the State Department and the United Nations and with
my personal intervention at times, we greatly increased American involvement in
African affairs. Our clear policy was to condemn racism, to work for majority
rule and to extend a hand of friendship to black African people, with special
attention to influential nations like Zimbabwe and Nigeria. This was sometimes
very controversial policy invoking clashes with the more right-wing members of
Congress, but the results were highly gratifying. Combined with the Panama Canal
treaties and diplomatic recognition of China, this African policy gave us a
strong new status among the emerging nations of the world. This relationship is
now in danger.

Moral Values Our Strength

The strongest weapons in the American arsenal are our ethical and moral values
based upon the fair treatment of human beings, here and abroad. In Asia, Latin
American, Eastern Europe and in many other regions, our protection of human
rights has been a good foundation for democracy, freedom and the enhancement of
American influence. I raised this banner as high as possible, as had many of my
predecessors in the White House.

Some have said I was too enthusiastic with this policy, and these criticisms now
make me doubly proud. I can remember with a twinge of regret only the times when
we might have been a little bolder. Being a champion of human rights is a
natural and historic American trait and also a valuable tool for building our
own spirit and meeting the totalitarian challenge among millions of people in
other nations who hunger for liberty and justice.

What is our American policy on oppression? On racial equality? On democracy? On
freedom? There can really be only one answer to these questions, but the answer
needs to be loud and clear - not muted or wavering or off-key as during the past
11 months. Nowadays concerning freedom and human rights the American trumpet
gives an uncertain sound and, as the Bible says, ''Who shall prepare himself for
the battle?''

I am deeply concerned about these and other radical changes in foreign policy
and the apparent abandonment of efforts to build bipartisan cohesion and let the
world see a unified and consistent America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter at LaGuardia airport

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JURY WEIGHS A $1.8 MILLION DAMAGE CLAIM BY 7 ACTIVISTS IN CAPITAL

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 906 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 17


A suit for invasion of privacy that seeks $1.8 million in damages from 15
officials of the District of Columbia police and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation went to the jury today after an 18-day trial.

The defendants are officials or members of the ''anti-left squads'' that were
widely used in the late 1960's and early 1970's to infiltrate groups considered
radical. They are charged with infringing the rights and invading the privacy of
seven political activists.

The suit, before Federal District Judge Louis F. Oberdorfer, was filed in 1976.
Lawyers in the case called it the first political action damage claim for
invasion of privacy from the Vietnam era. to be tried before a jury. Other large
claims stemming from the mass demonstrations of that time were based on
complaints of false arrest and were tried before a judge alone. They often
resulted in large settlements for the plaintiffs.

Last August, for example, the District of Columbia paid a judgment of about $2.5
million to some 1,000 antiwar demonstrators who were illegally arrested on the
steps of the Capitol in the May Day protest of 1971.

Protesters Illegally Detained

Most of the 10,000 protesters who were arrested throughout the city in the May
Day demonstration were herded into the city's Robert F.  Kennedy Stadium, where
they were held overnight, also illegally, the court ruled.

Citing a need to anticipate the scope and timing of such protests, the F.B.I.
and many city police departments began buying information from informers,
assigning law-enforcement officers to serve as undercover ''volunteers'' and
tapping the telephones of protest leaders.

In 1968, it was learned later, the F.B.I. began two counterintelligence
operations, one against the New Left and the other against what the bureau
called ''black nationalist hate groups.''

After learning that they were the targets of a counterintelligence operation,
seven antiwar and black activists of that period and two peace organizations,
Women's Strike for Peace and the Washington Peace Center, sued the five F.B.I.
executives in charge of the program here and the nine city policemen they could
identify as having done undercover work in the program.

The plaintiffs are the Rev. David Eaton, pastor of All Soul's Unitarian Church;
Arthur Waskow of the Institute for Policy Studies; Sammie A. Abbott, a former
antifreeway activist who is now Mayor of Takoma Park, Md., a suburb of
Washington; Reginald Booker, a founder of the city's Black United Front; Tina
Hobson, widow of former Councilman Julius W. Hobson; Abraham Bloom, a suburban
electronics engineer long active in peace organizations, and Richard P. Pollock,
a free-lance writer.

Compensatory Damages Sought

Their complaint seeks compensatory and punitive damages of about $200,000 from
each of the individual defendants and a separate amount from the city.

In a closing statement Wednesday, Anne Pilsbury, one of the plaintiffs'
attorneys, told the six-member jury, ''The F.B.I.  probably knows more about
these peoples' lives at that time than they can remember.''

Testimony at the trial disclosed that undercover police officers had infiltrated
the Black United Front and Mr. Bloom's Washington Area Peace Action Coalition.

Defending the city government, Laura C. Bonn, a city attorney, told the jury
Wednesday that ''there were no recognizable damages'' to Mr. Bloom from a police
officer's ''volunteer work'' in the peace organization's office.

$1 Fee for Safe Conduct

Key testimony in the trial involved an attempt to exploit a black militant's
off-hand proposal at a meeting attended by F.B.I.  informers to charge white
antiwar demonstrators $1 each for safe conduct into the city. The proposal was
made shortly after the rioting that occurred in Washington and several other
cities following the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in
Memphis on April 4, 1968.

Bureau documents at the trial showed that the F.B.I. first sent a spurious
letter to Mr. Bloom's largely white peace group, demanding payment of a $25,000
fee and saying that ''the black community awaits your answer.'' The documents
showed that the desired effect was to isolate black militants from the antiwar
movement.

When this failed, other documents showed that the bureau circulated a spurious
leaflet, supposedly from the peace groups, that included a picture of a black
ape under the headline, ''Give Them Bananas - All They Can Eat.'' An F.B.I.
memorandum describing the spurious leaflet noted that ''this material is racial
in tone.''

A major question for the jury is the contention by Federal and city attorneys
that the plaintiffs allowed the three-year statute of limitations on such
offenses to expire before filing their suit in 1976.

In rejecting pretrial motions for dismissal on this ground, Judge Oberdorfer
ruled earlier that the jury must decide whether the belated discovery of the
facts, particularly in the Senate disclosures of 1975 and 1976 concerning the
F.B.I.'s counterintelligence operations, gave the plaintiffs an extended time in
which to file their suit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES;
New films pour in; so do promoters.

BYLINE: By Chris Chase

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words


HARK, HARK, the dogs do bark, the movies are coming to town. Gluts of them.
During the last 10 days, ''Taps,'' ''Four Friends,'' ''Buddy Buddy,''
''Rollover,'' ''Pennies From Heaven,'' ''Ghost Story,'' ''Tales From the Vienna
Woods,'' ''Neighbors'' and ''Heartbeeps'' have arrived in New York, closely
followed by junketeering media folk from all over the country.

For example, 20th Century-Fox ran a weekend junket to New York to introduce
Timothy Hutton, Academy Award winner for ''Ordinary People,'' to 200 out-of-town
journalists. He saw them one at a time, and by the end of the first day, Mr.
Hutton says, he had started wanting to invent elaborate stories ''because the
100th time somebody asks, 'How did you research the role?', you just wish you
could say something to make it sound new.''

In ''Taps,'' the 21-year-old Mr. Hutton plays a military school cadet who has
never questioned the authority of the general who runs the academy. In life, Mr.
Hutton believes in asking questions. ''I think it's healthy.'' But, as he points
out, ''I was a child of the 70's.'' His generation wasn't involved in
confrontations over the draft, or the war in Vietnam. So what do the children of
the 70's fight?

''Acne,'' says Mr. Hutton.

Bigger even than the ''Taps'' get-together was the one run by Columbia for
''Neighbors,'' a picture based on a Thomas Berger novel. (For a review, see page
C19.) On Day 1 of the Columbia bash, John Belushi did 17 television shots, and
Dan Aykroyd, his co-star, did 26; next morning, both actors showed up at the St.
Regis to watch print reporters (as distinguished from television reporters)
chomp down breakfast, and to answer the leftover, idle question.

Mr. Aykroyd and Mr. Belushi said they never read reviews, or watched rushes, or
took advice from strangers, and neither of them regretted having peeled away
from ''the grind'' of ''Saturday Night Live.'' ''We loved it,'' said Mr.
Belushi, ''but the fifth year just about killed us.''

Mr. Belushi also said he enjoyed an occasional guest shot on television -''I
liked doing 'The Steve Martin Show' '' - but he prefers making movies.

As it happens, Steve Martin prefers making movies, too. About ''Pennies From
Heaven,'' he says: ''I came back to life because of this project. I was working
Vegas before, and suddenly I had something that required all my energy. I
learned stuff for this movie that's not even in it. It broadened me.''

M-G-M's ''Pennies From Heaven'' was launched in New York not by a junket but by
a satellite press conference. Steve Martin, his leading lady, Bernadette Peters,
the producers Nora Kaye and Herbert Ross (Mr. Ross also directed) and the
scriptwriter Dennis Potter sat in one of WNEW-TV's studios and talked to
journalists from Atlanta to Vancouver, answering questions phoned in over a
15-city hookup.

The picture is based not on the old Bing Crosby movie of 1936, but on a recent
British miniseries. Dennis Potter wrote that, too.  English himself, he says the
television version is so different from the new movie that you really can't
compare them. ''I like the picture for its compression, its ironies. In essence,
it's a love letter to old movies, and the British can't do that very well. In
the BBC version, for instance, they carefully shot it so you couldn't see the
feet when people were dancing.''

The movie's protagonist, played by Mr. Martin, is a sheet-music salesman named
Arthur who's working his way through the Depression by fantasizing a life as
rosy as the lyrics of pop songs.

''Most human beings have a bit of Arthur in them,'' says Mr.  Potter. ''That bit
of you which says, 'There's something better,' 'I love,' 'I yearn,' 'I ache.'''

Though he's too close to the picture to be objective - ''While I'm watching it,
I'm thinking: 'Is this coming off? Is this working?' '' - Mr. Potter has found
his American adventure enjoyable. ''I'd been told frightful stories about what
happens to writers when they get to Hollywood. Obviously, thanks to Herbert
Ross, I was protected from all that.''

Mr. Ross says ''Pennies From Heaven'' isn't a movie that's ''immediately
accessible,'' or even a movie ''in which you can say, 'That's the good guy,
that's the bad guy.' It's more complicated, more like life.'' It is Mr. Ross's
view that several ''responsible artists'' - he names Warren Beatty, Milos
Forman, Arthur Penn - sensing that the United States is ''on the verge of some
change, have felt a need to put our age into historical perspective, to connect
our time back to earlier times. 'Ragtime,' 'Reds,' even 'Four Friends' are about
lives altered because of political and economic pressures. 'Pennies From Heaven'
is also political. And religious.''

''Four Friends,'' one of the pictures cited by Mr. Ross, stars Craig Wasson, the
27-year-old actor who can also be seen playing two brothers in ''Ghost Story.''

When Mr. Wasson learned that the two pictures would be opening at around the
same time, he grew nervous. ''I went to a buddy, and I said: 'What am I going to
do? I got two films coming out at the same time.' And he said: 'Craig, most of
the time, you got no films coming out. Be happy.' ''

Growing up in Idaho and Oregon, Mr. Wasson loved performing, but he had no
thought of a career in the theater, ''because I thought, why would anybody pay
me to have fun?'' He came east in 1972 to try to win a scholarship to college.
Instead, he won a job on Broadway in ''Godspell.'' ''And I thought, gee, this is
more fun than political science.''

And the fun kept coming. When George C. Scott revived ''Death of a Salesman,''
Mr. Wasson understudied the parts of the sons and wrote incidental music for the
show. He also became friendly with Martin Sheen, who played Happy. Mr. Sheen
wanted Mr. Wasson to teach him to play the guitar, and to compose some songs for
a movie he planned to make.

Great, decided Mr. Wasson, and headed west.  ''I had no intention of staying in
Los Angeles,'' he says, ''but after four or five months, I'd run out of the
money I'd saved on 'Godspell,' and when we found Martin's film just wasn't going
to happen, I didn't have a ticket back to New York. I lost my apartment on 15th
Street, and all my stuff, my best guitar - the one I didn't want to take on the
plane in case it might warp -because when you don't pay your rent, they come in
and take your things. If somebody had asked me at the time, I'd have said, 'My
life is ruined.' ''

It wasn't.  In California, Mr. Wasson met the girl he married in April. ''She
was a casting director. I was immediately attracted to her, but she told me, 'I
never date actors.' Next thing I knew, we couldn't stay away from each other.''

In California, too, Mr. Wasson got parts in a couple of television series
(''Phyllis,'' and ''Skag'') as well as in movies. Besides having excellent
natural equipment, he learned by doing. ''When people ask what acting classes
I've gone to,'' he says, ''I tell them: 'I worked with George C. Scott. There's
an acting class.' ''

''Ghost Story'' was fun for Mr. Wasson because he came to know some legendary
performers - Fred Astaire, Melvyn Douglas, John Houseman and Douglas Fairbanks
Jr. - but ''Four Friends'' is the movie that's given him his best role so far.
He plays a Yugoslav immigrant. ''I thought it was the greatest script I ever
read,'' he says. ''I said, 'Oh, please, I want to be in on this.' ''

He describes ''Four Friends'' as ''a celebration of America. I think it's
beautiful that it's about people who are trying to do the right thing. I think
America is ready for some people who want to be good, to be heroes. Enough of
the antihero. I'm tired of being asked to understand the guy who ripped off my
house.''

Next April, Mr. Wasson will become a father. ''My wife, Ann, is very talented,''
he says. ''But when I came back from location for 'Four Friends,' we'd been
apart so much she said, 'Would you hate me if I quit work and was just sort of
your wife, and had a baby?' I said no.

''And she said, 'Thank God, you've liberated me.' '' Mr. Wasson beams. ''For so
long, it was dumb to go out and work.  And now it's dumb not to go out and work.
And the way it should be really is people should do whatever they damn well
please.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Craig Wasson

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 19, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS TAKE AN EMOTIONAL JOURNEY TO HANOI

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 648 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 18


Four American veterans of the Indochina War, trembling with emotion, stepped off
a plane at a bleak Hanoi airport late this afternoon to an enthusiastic welcome
by Vietnamese officials.

One of the veterans, Tom Bird, a former infantryman with the 1st Cavalry
Division, started walking down the steps of the plane before noticing a group of

Vietnamese soldiers waiting to greet him.  Mr. Bird swiftly returned to the
plane, trembling.  ''My first instinct was to call the whole thing off,'' Mr.
Bird said several minutes later, returning outside. ''It's just too strange. I
feel a little out of control.''

Mr. Bird and three other veterans, led by Robert O. Muller, executive director
of the Vietnam Veterans of America, were taken in limousines to the sprawling,
Cuban-built Thang Loi (Victory) Hotel on the fringe of Hanoi. They are on a
six-day visit to talk to officials here and in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly
Saigon, about the issues of the estimated 2,500 American servicemen still
unaccounted for since the end of the Vietnam war in 1975, as well as the Agent
Orange question and the impact of the defoliant on the local populace.

Seeking Information on Defoliant

Mr. Muller, a 36-year old former marine, said the United States Government was
seeking scientific information about the defoliant, and his group wants to
persuade the Vietnamese to allow American scientists into ''heavy defoliated
areas'' to assess the impact.

Besides Mr. Muller and Mr. Bird, the other veterans who arrived today after
picking up visas in Bangkok were Michael Harbert, a former Air Force sergeant
who flew bombing missions over North and South Vietnam, and John Terzano, a
former Navy seaman. At the Vietnamese Embassy in Bangkok, an official wished the
group ''Merry Christmas.''

Three hours later, at the Hanoi airport, Foreign Ministry officials who deal
with defoliation as well as the question of G.I.'s missing in action welcomed
the group. Tonight, a Government spokesman, who asked to remain unidentified,
said: ''It was sensible to invite the veterans to come here. They were victims
of the war like many of our people were victims.''

During the flight from Bangkok aboard a packed Soviet-built Ilyushin 138, the
veterans were alternately exuberant and reflective.  ''It's strange,'' said Mr.
Muller. ''I can't figure out if I know the passengers on the plane, if I have
seen them before. If I know them or if they know me.''

'Nothing Has Changed'

Mr. Harbert, who is now a management consultant in New York, stared out the
window and recalled the missions he flew over the same lush, green mountains,
over the Ho Chi Minh trail and the Cambodian and Laotian border regions.

''Nothing has changed, but everything has changed,'' he said. ''I close my eyes
and I am right back calling in airstrikes over these places. It's so strange. I
can still see the scars on the ground.''

''I feel so good coming back,'' said Mr. Bird, ''but I can't look at these faces
up the aisle. I feel frozen.'' From the plane, approaching Hanoi through low
clouds, the land was flat green, still pocked with crater holes. At the
ramshackle airport, Mr. Harbert said with a shrug: ''It's amazing to fly into
Hanoi without people shooting away. People are so quiet, the airport so simple.
Like landing in a farm field. In Kansas or somewhere.''

Mr. Muller, who was crippled in the war, was carried down the plane's steps and
was promptly surrounded by Vietnamese officials and local photographers. In his
car, the Vietnam veteran said quietly: ''I can't even sort out my emotions now.
I can't believe it. I am in Hanoi.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 19, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Saturday News Quiz

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 677 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.  Answers appear on
page 49.  1. The Polish Government decreed martial law hours after leaders of
the Solidarity union, meeting in Gdansk, made a proposal. What was the proposal?

2. Mounting a constitutional plank, this graybeard, Randy Ludacer, is seeking
Congressional approval to become a pirate of sorts.  Explain.

3. The police stopped and searched hundreds of Plymouth Volare automobiles in
New York City, looking for stolen property. What property was it?

4. ''Morning'' will dawn differently in March, according to CBS.  Explain.  5.
The United States joined the other members of the United Nations Security
Council in approving a resolution concerning Israel's annexation of the Golan
Heights, but it voted against a Golan Heights resolution that passed the General
Assembly by a vote of 94 to 16. How did the two resolutions differ?

6. ''The Underground Railway'' has been of great help to North Carolina
basketball for years. Explain.  7. A balanced budget (is/is not) ''one of the
fundamentals'' of the Reagan economic program, according to Murray L.
Weidenbaum, the President's chief economic adviser.

8. The guerrilla resistance in Afghanistan, which has steadily intensified since
the Soviet intervention two years ago, is between Afghan tribesmen and Soviet
soldiers. True or false?

9. A New Yorker for whom the wearing of the green is an annual tradition may be
wearing a red face. Explain.  10. A proposal approved by President Reagan would
transfer the responsibility for production of nuclear weapons to the Department
of Commerce. What is the proposal and why was the Department of Commerce
selected, rather than the Defense Department?

11. An accident snarled New York City traffic for a full day. What accident was
it and how did it occur?

of a protracted contest. What is his prize and what country is he from?

13. In the confusion that surrounded the end of the current legislative session,
the House voted to double something, raising it to $18,200 from its present
$9,100. What is it?

14. If the Giants beat the Dallas Cowboys today, they will make the National
Football League playoffs for the first time since (1963/1969/1972).

15. ''A strategy of nuclear deterrence can be morally tolerated if a nation is
sincerely trying to come up with a rational alternative.'' This statement
appeared in a five-page letter. What letter is it and who wrote it?

16. There were bravos for a new production at the Metropolitan Opera. What is
the production and who designed and directed it?  17. The only member nation of
the Common Market that does not exchange ambassadors with Israel announced that
it had granted the Palestine Liberation Organization the status of a diplomatic
mission. What nation is it?

18. The fate of fish in the Hudson River is to be determined in Federal District
Court in Manhattan - and so, at the same time, is something else. Explain.

19. Robert O. Muller and three other veterans of the Vietnam War expect to be
home for Christmas. Where are they now and why is that newsworthy?

20. The Ford Motor Company will begin selling a limited number of cars not
powered by gasoline. What fuel will they use?  21. Signing his five-year, $4
million contract with the New York Yankees, Ron Guidry said he got his wish.
What was it?  22. The fast pace of growth and expansion in the nation's fastest
growing big city, like all of its predecessors, appears to be leveling off. The
city is (Dallas/Houston/Miami/Los Angeles/San Diego).  Linda Amster

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: two photos

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 19, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Pacific Overtures

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 429 words


No one can yet say what Hanoi has in mind by inviting four Vietnam veterans for
a visit - or what Washington has in mind by welcoming this first mission of its
kind. But simply as symbolism, it is splendid news. Who better to explore hopes
for genuine peace than Americans who fought there? And what better time of year?

At the least, the Americans can press for a fuller accounting of 2,500
servicemen still listed as missing six years after the war's end. Vietnam
insists it is withholding nothing about the M.I.A.'s; humanly, some of the
survivors believe otherwise. The firsthand judgment of four representative
veterans may finally bring them solace.

Reassuring cooperation should also be possible on a matter of passionate concern
in Vietnam and the United States: the persistent effects of wartime use of Agent
Orange. It would remove some of the poison from this malign herbicide if both
countries could collaborate on a scientific study that could make its future use
unimaginable.

Research is still inconclusive on Agent Orange's lasting harm to human health
and the environment. An independent finding by qualified investigators could
show what has happened to villagers and villages sprayed a decade ago. With that
information, it may finally be possible to reach a settlement of claims against
the U.S. Government by veterans who blame their cancer on exposure to Agent
Orange.

For all its castigation of Vietnam as a Soviet tool and regional bully, the
Reagan Administration has nevertheless encouraged this six-day visit. Wisely so.
However wide the diplomatic gulf, it can never be narrowed until the two
countries begin talking to each other. Both nations have a long-term interest in
Vietnam's becoming less wholly dependent on the Soviet Union.

It is fitting that combat veterans have a prime role in testing the ground for
wider contacts. The war continues to haunt those required to wage it. As leaders
of the middle-road Vietnam Veterans of America, those visiting Hanoi are neither
pacifists nor flag-wavers; they speak for a majority yearning to come to terms
with their, and their country's, ordeal.

Symbols matter. In Vermont, someone had the worthy notion of renaming 130 miles
of Interstate 89 the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial Highway - an idea that deserves
emulation. A long road is the right symbol, a state official explained; and at
the moment, Hanoi is the right destination.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 19, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1087 words


China trying to build an egalitarian school system 2
Four Vietnam veterans receive warm welcome in Hanoi 3
Bomb wrecks ruling party's headquarters in Zimbabwe, killing 6 3
Israeli expatriate withdraws from defense post 4
Israeli and Arab reaction to U.S.  suspension of pact with Israel 4
Around the World 5
West Germany states its concern about Poland 7
Italian Communist Party voices anger over Polish crackdown 7
Madrid talks adjourn with dissension on Poland 7
Excerpts from domestic radio and TV broadcasts in Poland 7
Austrian calls Polish crisis most serious since World War 7
On 6th day, patrols still roaming Warsaw's snow-covered streets 8

Government/Politics
U.S. and Texas seek settlement in prison reform case 10
Reagan cutting funds for state employment agencies 10
Administration's chief adviser on Social Security resigns 28
Albany Republicans reveal part of redistricting plan 31
Excerpts from Attorney General's speech on espionage 32

Washington Talk
Briefing 16
Everyone's throwing dirt on the Farm Act of 1981 16
Reading File 16

Industry/Labor
John E. Lawe re-elected as chief of Transport Workers local 30

News Analysis
John F. Burns examines Soviet view of crackdown 8
Philip Shabecoff on environmental cutbacks 15

General
Around the Nation 10
The M.T.A. agreed to more oversight of its actions 29
The News's troubles are laid to economic and social shifts 30
Cynthia Boston was released from Federal detention 31
Philanthropist and financier Jacob M. Kaplan approaches 90 31

Arts/Entertainment
Gift establishes Hammerstein Theater Center at Columbia 17
Musical, ''Head Over Heels,'' at Clurman Theater 17
Movie ''Heartbeeps'' features two robots in love 17
ANTA Theater to be renamed for owner 19
''The Architect,'' a novel about F.  L. Wright by Meyer Levin 20
Tom Brokaw and Tom Snyder leave their programs 51

Style
Consumer Saturday: State sues over home food sales 52
De Gustibus: latkes, food fit for a holiday 52
Bartering clubs prosper in computer age 52

Obituaries
Karl Struss, Academy Award-winning cinematographer 50
Theodore Lightner, contract bridge expert 50

Sports
Nets end Bucks' 9-game winning streak, 100-88 22
Jets and Giants face face final hurdles in playoff race 23
Reds trade Knight to the Astros for Cedeno 23
Tracy Austin and Pam Shriver gain semifinals 23
Knicks beat Bulls by 121-106 23
George Vecsey on Earnie Shavers and the punch 24
Brigham Young beats Princeton, 39-38, on last-second foul shot 25
Doherty is North Carolina's sub- tle star 25
50

Features/Notes
Going Out Guide 19
Saturday News Quiz 20
Sports People 25
About New York 31
Man in the News: Gerald McEn- tee, leader of employee union 32
Notes on People 49

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 26

Pacific overtures Happy endings A boost for day care Roger Starr: tennis Letters
26
Russell Baker: huddles and muddles 27
Sydney H. Schanberg: chestnuts roasting 27
Billy Graham: why I remain an optimist 27
Lester R. Brown: an enduring society 27
Martin Hochbaum: a Christmas story 27

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 19, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Answers to Quiz

SECTION: Section 2; Page 49, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 579 words


Questions appear on page 20.  1. They proposed a national referendum on forming
a non-Communist government.  2. Under Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution,
Congress can ''grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal and make Rules concerning
Captures on Land and Water.'' Mr. Ludacer wants such a letter so he and his band
of 100 other men can go after drug smugglers.

3. Seven Plymouth Volares, unmarked city and Federal police cars, that were
stolen in New York City this year.  4. The network announced that Bill Kurtis
would replace Charles Kuralt on its ''Morning'' program.  5. The Security
Council resolution declared the annexation illegal and threatened ''appropriate
measures'' if the action was not reversed, but did not directly condemn Israel.
The resolution in the General Assembly was stronger, condemning the annexation
and calling for an end to all forms of aid to Israel.

6. The term refers to the route taken by the large number of basketball players
that have been recruited from the New York area by the University of North
Carolina since 1952, when Frank McGuire started coaching there.

7. Is not.  8. False. The fighting is between Islamic guerrillas and Afghan
soldiers who are supported by Soviet air power.  9. James J. Comerford, the
chairman of the St. Patrick's Day parade, said this week that the event would be
held March 17, the traditional date, reversing his announcement six days earlier
that the parade would be held on the Sunday before St. Patrick's Day.

10. The proposal is for abolition of the Department of Energy, now responsible
for the production of nuclear weapons. Selection of the Department of Commerce
will continue a policy, dating to 1946, of civilian control of nuclear weapons
production.

11. Two IRT subway cars were derailed just south of the Times Square station and
nine tunnel support pillars were knocked down.  after a motor on an express
dropped, snagged on a track switch and snapped the train into two parts.

12. He is the new Secretary General of the United Nations. Peru.  13. The limit
on outside income that members of the House may earn annually.  14. 1963.  15.
It was an annual letter to military chaplains by Terence Cardinal Cooke.  16.
''La Boheme.'' Franco Zeffirelli.  17. Greece.  18. A Federal judge ruled that
the crucial issue in whether the $1.7 billion Westway should be built was the
effect on aquatic life of the projected landfill area on which much of the
roadway would be built.

19. Hanoi. The Vietnamese Government invited them to Vietnam to discuss such
issues as the herbicide Agent Orange and the fate of American servicemen still
missing in Indochina.

20. Propane.  21. To finish his career with the Yankees.  22. Houston.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 19, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GEN. MEHMET SHEHU DEAD AT 68; SERVED ALBANIA AS PRIME MINISTER

BYLINE: By Wolfgang Saxon, Reuters

SECTION: Section 2; Page 50, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 789 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, Dec. 18


Mehmet Shehu, the Prime Minister of Albania, committed suicide early today, the
Yugoslav press agency reported.

The agency quoted a radio bulletin from Tirana, Albania's capital, as saying
that the 68-year-old Communist, in office since 1954 and widely considered a
likely successor to Albania's aging party leader, Enver Hoxha, had taken his own
life ''at a moment of nervous distress.'' No other details were given.''

----

A Hardened Infighter

By WOLFGANG SAXON

Mehmet Shehu survived decades of often murderous ideological infighting, sending
many dissenters to their death, as he directed the day-to-day affairs of his
mountainous country through economic deprivation, diplomatic isolation and
political gyrations.

Mr. Shehu and Mr. Hoxha were allies of Yugoslavia's Marshal Tito in World War
II, but they sided with Moscow when it broke with Belgrade's ''revisionism''
after the war. Later the hard-line Albanian leadership broke with Moscow and
sided with Peking when Nikita S. Khrushchev's ''revisionists'' came to power.

After the death of Mao Zedong, Mr. Shehu, a lieutenant general often regarded as
Albania's real strongman, became disenchanted with the changes in China. Chinese
economic assistance dried up, and Albania, the poorest and most backward country
in Europe, ran out of friends abroad, except for equally distressed Vietnam.

With every political turn, Government officials and party functionaries who
failed to sense the changes in the wind early enough fell victim to the purges
enforced by General Shehu's police apparatus. Thousands went to jail; many died
along the way.

Sought Broadened Relations

In 1950, General Shehu was reported to have fatally shot a high official in full
view of the Communist Party Central Committee because the man had accused the
Soviet Union of getting ready to abandon Albania. The slaying was part of a
purge of party members and others suspected of being Tito sympathizers.

After Albania's break with China in the late 1970's, Albania came into severe
economic straits even as thousands were imprisoned for Chinese leanings. Tirana
reported a plot of senior army officers against the break, and they were later
executed.

Stagnation at home forced General Shehu to seek broadened relations with the
rest of the world. He disregarded ideological purity in sending out feelers in
recent years to Yugoslavia and other neighboring countries, and suggesting the
establishment of diplomatic ties with Western nations, notably Italy, Britain
and West Germany.

Mehmet Shehu was born Jan. 10, 1913, in the hills of south-central Albania, and
was the son of a Moslem clergyman. He attended an American vocational school
sponsored by the American Junior Red Cross, and learned English.

Joined the Partisans in 1942

He studied at a military school in Naples on a scholarship in 1935 but was sent
home because of his anti-Fascist views. He then trained for a military career in
Tirana and put his training to work as an acting battalion commander of the
Garibaldi International Brigade.

After the Republican defeat, he was interned in France.  He returned to
Italian-occupied Albania in 1942 to join the partisans and came to command a
brigade and a division.

His troops freed Tirana and put down an anti-Communist revolt in the Scutari
region. General Shehu then studied at the Voroshilov Military Academy in Moscow
and swiftly rose in Albania as chief of staff, Politburo member and Minister of
the Interior in charge of internal security.

An early advocate of the break with Tito, he was briefly stalled in the
Tito-Cominform dispute in 1949. He became Prime Minister in 1954.

Visited United Nations

General Shehu at was various times a warmly received visitor to Moscow and
Peking. He came to New York in 1960 to attend the United Nations General
Assembly session, arriving on the Queen Elizabeth along with his bitter foe,
Marshal Tito.

While in New York, his movement was restricted to Manhattan, and his presence
required tight security and brought about noisy clashes among Albanians of
various factions. But he managed to tour Harlem and the Empire State Building.

General Shehu was married to Fiqrete Sanxhaktari, a former school teacher whom
he met when she was a partisan.  Speculation about his health arose earlier this
year when he gave up the post of Defense Minister, but he was not known to have
had any real health problems in recent years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mehmet Shehu

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 339 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 20, 1981 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

COMING TO GRIPS WITH THE AMERICAN EXPERIENCE

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1745 words


For much of this year we've sat through megamovies based on minicomic strips,
through failed comedies at which only the charitable could laugh, and through
hideous horror movies about psychopaths who, unlike poor old Thomas Wolfe, go
home again and again to do their dirty work. It has sometimes seemed that
filmmakers either had lost all touch with the nervous, unpredictable, frequently
unfair world the rest of us inhabit or had simply accepted it at its sleazy face
value, without question or curiosity.

It's therefore refreshing to come upon a batch of movies - good and bad - that
are directly concerned with what might be called the American experience, with
what we are now and how we got this way. Because they tend to be critical, I
hope they don't get bum-rapped for the wrong reasons. I was genuinely astonished
the other day to hear someone suggesting that ''Reds'' could be considered
anti-American for the way it portrays the United States Senate committee that in
1919 so relentlessly grilled Louise Bryant on her political views. That's like
looking at ''A Streetcar Named Desire'' in terms of what it says about public
transport in New Orleans.

The latest film to consider the quality and meaning of life in this country is
''Four Friends,'' an ambitious, fable-like film that focuses on the 1960's. The
movie was written by Steve Tesich (''Breaking Away'') and directed by Arthur
Penn, whose ''Alice's Restaurant'' was, until ''Four Friends,'' the best
American film ever made about that decade of instant legends arising from
political assassinations, unconventional pop music stars, campus massacres, the
drug culture and Vietnam.

Though it's titled ''Four Friends,'' the film is actually the story of one young
man, Danilo Prozor (Craig Wasson), who, like Mr. Tesich, was born in Yugoslavia,
immigrated here as a boy and, in the film, spends a large part of his young
manhood attempting to reconcile his expectations of America with the realities.
The movie follows Danilo from his graduation from Roosevelt High School in East
Chicago (Ind.), where he was brought up and where his father continues to work
joylessly in the steel mills, through his studies at Northwestern, an aborted
marriage to a rich New York society girl, his wanderings in an almost dreamlike
American landscape of protest and violence, to the moment he can accept himself,
his friends and his country for what they are, including their failures.

Mr. Tesich's screenplay can be faulted for being a bit too wellrounded, and
Danilo's friends, including Georgia, the would-be free soul they each love in
turn, are less individuals than types. This, however, is the epic though risky
manner in which Mr. Penn and Mr. Tesich have chosen to dramatize Danilo's
journey toward understanding.

Throughout the film, Danilo is a sort of optimistic explorer, but he is no
Candide. He is commonsensical and resolute, especially in his relations with his
disapproving father, who is convinced that his son is reaching too high too
quickly. Until the film's final sequence, Danilo is a tourist in his adopted
country, seeing and hearing everything as if for the first time, observing race
riots, antiwar rallies and the peculiar rituals of the rich and the poor with
the detachment of the visitor, forever seeking the ideal but never being
permanently discouraged when it eludes him.

''Four Friends'' looks more benign than, I think, it actually is. Though it
concludes on a note of reconciliation, it also leaves open the possibility of
change, which, from what we see through Danilo's eyes, may not necessarily be
for the better.

''Four Friends'' is both haunting and haunted. The sequences of Danilo's
courtship and marriage to the sad, WASPy Long Island princess may leave you with
nightmares. The movie is filled with vivid images, such as one of the newly
arrived, not-yet-Englishspeaking Danilo as he stares through a neighbor's window
at Groucho Marx on ''You Bet Your Life.'' That the movie works as a series of
sometimes exotic discoveries can be attributed not only to Mr. Tesich's very
special feelings about this country, but also to the romantic photography of
Ghislain Cloquet, the French cameraman (''Tess'') who died after this film's
completion, and especially to the direction of Mr. Penn, who, though born and
bred here, seems never to have become bored by what he sees around him. It's a
continuing adventure.

Though ''Ragtime,'' the Milos Forman-Michael Weller adaptation of the E.L.
Doctorow novel, and ''Pennies From Heaven,'' Herbert Ross's reworking of Dennis
Potter's BBC miniseries, transposed from Depression Britain to Depression
America, leave a lot to be desired, they at least exhibit an awareness that life
in these United States didn't just happen. The 80's grew out of the 70's, the
70's out of the 60's and so on, back through the decades to the
turn-of-thecentury and beyond.

''Ragtime'' never makes good on its promise to evoke the many contradictory
social and political forces at work in pre-World War I America, but it's still a
fairly jolly sort of pseudohistorical sideshow. So too is ''Pennies From
Heaven,'' which takes place during the Great Depression, though the Depression
is used by the film as so much scenery. The movie is set in Chicago in 1934 and
is about an unsuccessful peddler of sheet music (Steve Martin), who seeks relief
from the drab realities of his life in the poetry of the banal Tin Pan Alley
lyrics he sells.

''Pennies From Heaven'' doesn't have much of a political consciousness and, I
suppose, doesn't pretend to. However, Mr. Ross's extravagantly staged musical
numbers - in which Mr. Martin, Bernadette Peters, Jessica Harper and other cast
members lip-sync the words of popular recordings of the period - do call up a
kind of movie fantasy that was as much a part of Depression America as
breadlines, closed banks, the National Recovery Act, Herbert Hoover's decline
and fall and ''Happy Days Are Here Again.''

The best things about ''Pennies From Heaven'' all have to do with show-biz: Mr.
Martin and Miss Peters in a reconstruction of the ''Let's Face the Music and
Dance'' number from ''Follow the Fleet,'' Miss Peters doing a Helen Kane takeoff
to ''I Want to Be Bad,'' Christopher Walken's wildly abandoned dance in a Skid
Row bar to ''Let's Misbehave'' and another, would-be show-stopping dance by
Vernal Bagneris to the title song. The rest of the movie, though, may be
original but it is virtually nonexistent.

Far more successful - and a stunning achievement in the context of all other
commercial films being made these days - is Warren Beatty's ''Reds.'' Though
''Reds'' is principally a love story about journalist John Reed and Louise
Bryant, who became Reed's wife and, with him, attended the Bolshevik Revolution
of 1917, and though it has been filmed on a spectacular physical scale, ''Reds''
is most interesting and moving as a recollection of America's growing
sophistication in politics, manners and the arts before, during and after World
War One. It recalls a time of youthful enthusiasm, naivete, commitment,
foolishness and national turmoil.

Through its extraordinary use of interviews with real-life survivors of that
era, ''Reds'' also makes us aware of the mortality of all passion, and of the
compromises and disillusionments worked by time. It is these qualities that make
the film remarkable and which, I assume, will not be dwelled upon at any great
length in the film version of ''Ten Days That Shook the World,'' Reed's classic
account of the Bolshevik takeover, which the Russians, reportedly, are now
making, with Franco Nero, the Italian actor, playing Reed.

Another matter entirely is ''Taps,'' directed by Harold Becker, written by
people who might prefer to remain anonymous, and not a film to be recommended to
anyone except possibly the families of the actors in it. ''Taps'' is a movie
that doesn't measure up to its metaphor, being a solemnly ludicrous story about
the bloody rebellion of the cadets, aged 8 to 18, at Bunker Hill Military
Academy when they learn their 141-year-old school is about to be closed and
turned into a condominium complex.

The action of the cadets, we are told, is the result of a lot of misguided
notions about Honor, Duty and Loyalty taught them by their pompous, lunatic old
commandant, a retired Army officer, played by George C. Scott. The American
military can probably be blamed for a number of wrongheaded things - and it's
nice to know that filmmakers are ever-alert to the dangers - but to attack them
in this manner is overkill. It's also oversilly.

Jonathan Kaplan's ''Over the Edge,'' made in 1979 but only now having its first
New York engagement at the Public Theater, is not a great film but it's more
expressive of some aspects of American life than most big-budget, supposedly
serious melodramas, including ''Taps.'' ''Over the Edge,'' produced on a
comparative shoestring is, in form, not much different from other movies about
misunderstood youth, including the way in which it romanticizes its youngsters,
but it is unusual in that the villains are not simply preoccupied parents but
architects and urban planners, the people responsible for New Granada, where the
story takes place.

New Granada is representative of those tacky suburban communities that were
conceived and built in the late 60's, more or less all at once, from the ground
up, to provide ideal environments for those who could afford condominiums or
less expensive flats in apartment blocks. According to Mr. Kaplan, the director,
and Charlie Haas and Tim Hunter, who wrote the original screenplay, the planners
built a community ideal only for land speculators, forgetting that onequarter of
New Granada's population would be 15-years-old or younger.

The New Granada tots and teen-agers, with no place to go and nothing to do, turn
to drugs to calm their nerves and vandalism to pick them up. When they are
threatened by a bullying policeman, who has accidentally shot one of them, they
explode in a riot of violence in which they come close to wasting all of the
community.

It's to Mr. Kaplan's credit that he makes New Granada look just as boring and
alienating to us as it does to the unfortunate children who live there. Not
since King Vidor's film version of Ayn Rand's ''The Fountainhead'' has any
American film taken architecture so seriously. I hope it isn't sacrilege to
suggest that ''Over the Edge,'' though often overwrought, is far more
entertaining and to the point.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CALIFORNIA DRIVE ASKING REAGAN TO END ARMS RACE

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 18


Along with shopping, trimming trees and preparing for their Christmas dinner,
thousands of Californians are circulating petitions this month asking that
President Reagan seek an end to the nuclear arms race.

The specter of nuclear war is being raised at 1,506 cocktail parties and
coffee-and-cookie meetings organized by a group of mostly middle-@ and
upper-income Californians.

Using California's initiative process, the organizers are trying to collect
enough signatures to require a statewide referendum on whether the state should
urge the President to propose to the Soviet Union a two-way freeze on further
development and deployment of nuclear weapons.

Likened to Taxpayer Revolt

The coordinator of the petition campaign, Harold Willens, a wellto-do Los
Angeles businessman who was active in efforts to halt American participation in
the Vietnam War, said:

''I don't tell anybody that this would put an end to the nuclear danger, but if
California would send a message, it might start something like the taxpayers'
revolt of a few years ago that would spread to other states.''

''Because we are the largest state in the nation,'' he went on, ''if we conduct
this campaign effectively, it can be a match to strike sparks all around the
country.''

While Mr. Willens acknowledged that the military policies of the Soviet Union
had helped create the arms race, he asserted that the United States had been
first to develop most new weapons while ''the people in Moscow followed us every
step along the way.''

The Reagan Administration has proposed a freeze in Europe on development of
medium-range nuclear missiles. The Russians have rejected the proposal, saying
that American figures misrepresented the balance of forces.

Archbishop John Quinn of the Archdiocese of San Francisco and Dr.  Jonas Salk,
the research seientist, are among the backers of the Californians'initiative.

The effort is part of a growing but still small movement around the country
aimed at reducing the risk of nuclear war that the proponents of the drive say
has increased since President Reagan was inaugurated.

Goal Is November Referendum

The organizers say they want the measure placed before the voters in November
1982. To qualify, they must collect the signatures of 346,119 registered voters
before April 23.

If they succeed in getting the measure on the ballot and a majority of voters
endorse it, the Governor of California would have to send a letter to the
President urging him to propose halting further development and deployment of
nuclear weapons.

Specifically, the President would be asked to propose to the Soviet Union that
''both countries agree to immediately halt the testing, production and further
deployment of all nuclear weapons, missiles and delivery systems in a way that
can be checked and verified by both sides.''

Mr. Willens, who said that he had feared the possibility of ''the ultimate
holocaust'' of a nuclear war since he visited Hiroshima and Nagasaki as a Marine
Corps intelligence officer in 1945, said that he and a handful of friends had
contributed $200,000 to start the petition drive.

As a starting point, the organizers enlisted supporters to hold 1,506 parties
this month to gather signatures and discuss the dangers of nuclear armament.
Participants in the initial parties are being asked to schedule their own
parties after Christmas to get more signatures.

Because the campaign began on Dec. 1, Mr. Willens said that no accounting was
available yet on how many people had signed the petitions. But he said he was
''very optimistic'' that enough people would sign to quality the measure for the
ballot. ''The response so fas as been extraordinary,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POACHING BY ASIAN REFUGEES FRUSTRATES UTAH AUTHORITIES

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 70, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 493 words

DATELINE: SALT LAKE CITY, Dec. 19


Utah officials say Indochinese refugees are poaching everything from porcupines
to woodpeckers, and exasperated game wardens are stumped on how to convince them
they are doing wrong.

James Ware, law-enforcement chief of the state's Division of Wildlife Resources,
said that the wardens had tried to help Vietnamese, Cambodian and Laotian
refugees understand hunting and fishing laws but that language had been a
barrier.

The problem persists, Mr. Ware said, even though wardens have had fishing
proclamations simplified and translated into the refugees' native tongues. Sign
language, interpreters and slide shows have also been ineffective, he said.

''These people have historically relied on wildlife for sustenance, primarily
fishing,'' Mr. Ware said. ''They rely on methods and techniques from their
native countries to gather food, methods illegal in Utah.''

'Just a Cultural Thing'

''It's just a cultural thing,'' he continued. ''They are used to living off the
land.'' About 6,500 Indochinese refugees were relocated in Utah, and many took
up hunting and fishing, said Paul Woodbury, chief of law enforcement in northern
Utah, where most of the problems have occurred.

The law allows fishermen to use only one pole with a maximum of two hooks, but
wardens have found immigrant fishermen using up to 15 poles each, Mr. Woodbury
said.

One Cambodian fisherman was caught stretching a line half a mile into Willard
Bay that had a baited hook every two feet, the officials said.

When the water level dropped in the Bear River last summer, a group of refugees
walked along the river bottom using nets to round up fish in shallow pools. Mr.
Woodbury said that the trapped fish were clubbed and that the operation had
wiped out almost all fish for a mile along the river.

Baby Birds Killed

The problem is not limited to fishing, he said. Last spring a group of refugee
families waded through the Harold Crane Waterfowl area near Ogden, killing baby
birds and collecting duck eggs.

''During the dove hunt, we found them shooting everything that flew,'' Mr.
Woodbury said. ''They were shooting woodpeckers and robins and calling them
doves.''

Several refugees were cited for poaching deer, and wardens found evidence that
porcupines and skunks were shot as well, Mr. Woodbury said.

''We have watched whole families move into an area and gather food,'' he said.
''The men fish while the women collect mushrooms and plants.''

The refugees' actions have brought a flood of complaints and some threats of
violence.  ''One Vietnam veteran called and told us if we didn't take care of
the problem, he and some of his friends would,'' Mr. Woodbury said, adding that
no violence had been reported.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Miss Dunlop, Dale Favreau Plan to Wed

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 78, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 235 words


Lucette Colvin Dunlop and Dale Frank Favreau plan to be married Jan. 23 at the
Second Congregational Church in Greenwich, Conn.  The future bride is a daughter
of Mrs. Whitney Trowbridge Kelsey of Madison, Conn., who has announced her
engagement, and the late Capt.  Robert H. Dunlop Jr., U.S.A. Her fiance is a son
of the late George L. Favreau and the late Mary Stafford Favreau of Charlton,
Mass.

Miss Dunlop, an alumna of the Greenwich Academy and Vassar College, is with the
Connecticut General Life Insurance Company in Hartford as manager and acting
director of security, property management.

She is a granddaughter of the late Col. William Mechling Colvin, U.S.A., a
former military attache to Sweden, Denmark and Norway, and of the late Brig.
Gen. Robert H. Dunlop, who was Adjutant General of the Army during World War II.
Her late stepfather was vice president and a senior loan officer of the National
Commercial Bank and Trust Company, Albany.

Mr. Favreau, who graduated from Central New England College in Worcester, Mass.,
is a senior experimental aircraft equipment engineer at the Wilgoos Laboratory
of the Pratt & Whitney division of the United Technologies Corporation in East
Hartford, Conn. He served as an Air Force sergeant during the Vietnam War. His
father was a chief engineer for Massachusetts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Lucette Dunlop

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEBATE: CAN 1940'S SHIPS PLAY A USEFUL PART IN THE 1980'S NAVY?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2398 words


CONGRESS voted an installment on President Reagan's program to ''rearm America''
last week. Like the program itself, it was hefty.  Even before the inevitable
supplemental bills that will provide for military pay raises and cost overruns
(provision for both was omitted in last week's legislation, mostly for cosmetic
reasons), the Pentagon's appropriation for 1982 weighs in at $199.7 billion, or
$28 billion more than the fiscal 1981 year's level. That is the largest
peacetime increase ever. And despite questions raised in the House and Senate
all fall about the appropriateness of such a rise in a time of domestic
stringency, it is less than a billion short of the President's revised request.
Senator Ted Stevens, the Alaska Republican who managed the bill, put it with
restraint when he called the vote - 334 to 84 in the House, 93 to 4 in the
Senate - a ''solid endorsement of the President's initiatives.''

Among the more heavily debated items have been development of the B-1 bomber, a
major element of the President's strategic weapons package, and the MX missile.
Funds for both were provided, though some legislators on the House side sent the
President a clear signal that they thought very little of the plan to house the
missiles in existing silos that would have to be reinforced at great cost.
Though it reversed itself a day later, the Senate at one point voted 90 to 4 to
divert $334 million from the silo system and earmark it for further research
into deceptive basing.

Also included in the defense appropriation bill was $237 million to refurbish
the battleship New Jersey and $88 million to begin work on taking the Iowa out
of mothballs and putting her back in the fleet armed with cruise missiles,
helicopters and electronic sensors. The Navy, which has been pushing hard on
what it views as the loss of superiority in the global naval balance with the
Soviet Union, hopes to obtain authority to restore two more of the 45,000-ton
battleships, Wisconsin and Missouri, later on. Work on New Jersey has already
begun; the refitting of Iowa is set to begin in 1982.

While the debate over restoration of the ships has been overshadowed by that on
the MX and the B-1 bomber, it has nonetheless been heated. Among the advocates
of the battleships has been Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia,
member of the Armed Services Committee and a former Secretary of the Navy. Among
the most outspoken opponents has been Senator Dale Bumpers, Democrat of Arkansas
and a member of the Appropriations Committee. They were interviewed separately
by Richard Halloran, the defense correspondent of The New York Times in
Washington.

DALE BUMPERS

Question. Why did you oppose bringing out these battleships from mothballs?

Answer. First of all, let's just consider the economics of it.  Right now the
estimated cost to redo the New Jersey is $326 million and $408 million for the
Iowa. And for that amount, the ships would carry only 32 Tomahawk and 16 Harpoon
missiles. Of course, they already have nine 16-inch guns on them. I can tell you
that refurbishing a ship is much more complicated than trying to refurbish an
old house in Georgetown. If we get the New Jersey retrofitted for $326 million,
I'll be the most surprised man in town.

And when they tell you that ship's capable of carrying 100 Tomahawks, that is
not included in this initial $326 million estimate. To go back and equip these
ships with anything like that many Tomahawks would require another overhaul. But
the real clinker is that you then have a ship which only has a life expectancy
of 15 years. In contrast, virtually every ship we build nowadays has a 35-year
life expectancy. So if you're talking about a billion dollars ultimately to
retrofit a battleship for a 15 year life expectancy, the total life cycle costs
are enormous.
Manpower Costs

Q. What you're saying is take the money and spend it in some other place?

A. Oh, absolutely. I am a strong proponent of increasing our Navy.  We're
shooting for a 540-ship Navy by 1987; I strongly support that.

The second reason I'm opposed to bringing these battleships out of mothballs is
that the costs of the manpower required to run them is much greater than any
benefit you get. For example, a CGN (a guided missile cruiser, the ship most
comparable) has a crew of a little over 500. A battleship, the Navy estimates,
will have a crew of over 1,500 men, or about three times as many as it would
take to run a CGN. In addition, it'll require two crews, so you're probably
talking about 3,000 men for each battleship. To man 540 ships, the Navy is going
to have to have 60,000 more men in 1987 than it has right now.  To bring ships
out which aren't economic and which really lap up scarce manpower just doesn't
make sense.

Finally, nobody has ever described what the role of this ship is going to be.
Q. Its advocates say it will make a marvelously good gun platform.

A. I don't agree. It may have some symbolic value but the symbol may be the very
opposite of what advocates are talking about. The Soviets might see it as an act
of desperation rather than sensible naval planning.

The enemy can do two things to counteract a battleship: Back off to get out of
range, as they apparently did in Vietnam; or bring up their own weapons, which
have an equal or greater force than those 16-inch guns, and fire back. Most
likely, they'd use surface-tosurface missiles.

The only time that ship really makes sense as a shore-bombarding vessel ship is
if you're going to fire at somebody who can't or won't fire back. Because I can
tell you, if you sit out there 20 miles you're going to be subjected to enemy
missiles or airplanes.

Q. Again, advocates say that this ship, because of its armor-plate, because of
its steel superstructure, because of the weapons that will be put on, will be
relatively invulnerable to most other attacks, even conventional missiles. How
say you?

A. The battleship is vulnerable to the torpedoes and mines we have now. For
example, those that blast the bottom of a ship - the bottom certainly doesn't
have that kind of armor-plating. And even if it did it's not likely to be
invulnerable to that kind of a mine or torpedo.

One of the real tragedies around here is that it is almost impossible to debate
these things objectively and sensibly, because the politics of these issues is
just overwhelming. Now, I think that's going to change as we go forward toward
spending that trillion and a half dollars for defense over the next five years.

And I think I see some awareness developing in this country right now of the
monumental expenditures this Administration is planning for defense. But the
tide has not turned enough yet to give Congress the spine to turn down something
like this. Congress isn't turning much of anything down these days that the
Defense Department asks for, because that's the best way to get a one-way ticket
home.

That's really tragic. At a time when we need cost effectiveness, a definitive
role for our Navy, and a clear consensus on the kind of ships we're going to
build to fulfill that role, we are going off using a scatter-gun approach. I
fear we're buying more of everything regardless of its past performance,
regardless of its cost effectiveness, regardless of the manpower requirements.
Nobody is trying to put this pie together.

The battleship falls right into that category. Just the economics and the
manpower factors alone are enough. But the third thing, the fact that the
proponents have absolutely no role in mind for that ship other than symbolism,
is the most disturbing of all. Now I suppose you could put that ship as part of
a carrier task force group and it would make much more sense.

Q. The Marines are among the biggest advocates of this. It's partly the idea of
having those 16-inch guns firing over their heads.

A. Let me tell you something. I'm a former Marine and I know how we operated in
World War II, and I know how those assaults were conducted. But another problem
we have around here is the mentality of preparing to fight the last war. In
World War II, we were still waiting for the cavalry until Hitler crossed into
France. People really still felt that we ought to have a horse cavalry. Today,
people feel we ought to have battleships because they were effective in World
War I and World War II.

World War II is an old, old outmoded method of fighting a war.  You'll never see
another war fought like that. To send assault troops in with the idea of
battleships standing offshore as they did at, say, Iwo Jima and Okinawa and
Tarawa, is highly unlikely. That's never going to happen again. You've got to
have air cover, and lots of it.

JOHN W. WARNER

Question. Were you for bringing back all four battleships?

Answer. Certainly bringing back the New Jersey and the Iowa.  The premise on
which they're being brought out, I think, is a sound one. Mainly, it's the
cheapest ship they can get in the quickest period of time. And it does provide a
wide range of mission capability - particularly capabilities not found with
other ships currently in the fleet.

I have, in my five-and-a-half years as Undersecretary and Secretary of the Navy,
been into a number of the areas where our Navy currently operates. And this ship
has a tremendous symbolic value that harkens back to the days of gunboat
diplomacy.
Symbolic Power

At one time I was a guest in a country that had a World War II cruiser with
eight-inch gun mounts and I was entertained aboard that ship. As I was
departing, in custom of naval tradition I asked the captain if I could inspect
the ship. He became somewhat nervous and my naval aide gently pulled me to the
side to ask me not to pursue it. So I didn't inspect the ship. That night I was
told that that particular ship, which was standing majestically in the harbor of
this nation, had a totally inoperative boiler room. In fact I think it'd been
gutted. At night the ship was towed around in the harbor at various spots. But
everybody in that country looked upon that ship as its guardian.

Q. Is New Jersey obsolete or unseaworthy? Can you really get her back into
fighting trim?

A. I inspected the New Jersey in the last year I was Secretary of the Navy - as
well as the Missouri. And I do know, from personal inspection, that the gun
turrets, the propulsion plant, are in excellent shape. The basic electronics,
wiring and a load of other things, have to be replaced and modernized.

Q. What about the charge that there is not enough ammunition for the 16-inch
guns or linings for the barrels?

A. I looked into all of those questions. I remember restarting, as Secretary of
the Navy, a special production line and there are in inventory some 22,000
rounds of 16-inch available. Only a total of 3,000 to 4,000 rounds were expended
in the entire Vietnam conflict. I think it's adequate storage of ammo. The rifle
linings - I'd have to check the number left in inventory. There's some still in
Subic Bay in the Philippines.

Undoubtedly, some of the spare parts would have to be hand-forged.  There's
certainly no production line. And I don't know what the inventory on that would
be.

Q. But this is a ship that was built in World War II. Now the Navy wants to put
it up against aircraft that are built in the 80's, submarines built in the 80's,
or against tactical nuclear weapons?

A. It has built-in structural features that make it stronger and less vulnerable
than any ship in the United States fleet today, in terms of the thickness of the
armature. It was not designed to withstand modern ordnance. Nor are our ships
invulnerable today, in that sense. We still operate on the theory we either
intercept the ordnance coming in or the platform (the ship) is in jeopardy.
Modern Missions

Q. What do you see as the missions of this vessel? Can we anticipate any longer
World War II, Midway-style naval battles?

A. No. Ship-to-ship, no. That old romantic period of the Battle of Jutland and -
what's that pass off Guadalcanal where they went down the slot? That's relegated
to the history books. I would not anticipate that these guns would be used much
in any exchanges with another naval vessel -even though the Soviets, as you
know, have quite a few guns in their fleet today.

The mission, in my judgment, would be a basic firepower platform for fleet
support missions, using the rifles for a Marine Corps or land engagement.

Q. Cruise missiles are sort of in between a 16-inch shell and an aerial weapon.
Where does that fit in?

A. I would still say it would be in the ground support role (conventional cruise
missiles). Your range is considerable. So there is developing a new mission, in
a sense.

Q. How about manning?

A. This is going to be the crown jewel in the fleet. You'll have enough persons
lined up with requests for orders to man it.

But that doesn't address the overall question, (which is) simply, you deduct the
certain number of persons from the rest of the fleet.  But then,
percentage-wise, against a half-a-million men and women in the United States
Navy, your manning figure on this ship is roughly 1,562, as compared to the
original manning level of over 2,000.  You've got a smaller manning level than
it originally had because you've got a lot more labor-saving devices on. Plus,
in World War II, they manned her to operate all their mounts, 24 hours a day in
a war zone. Whereas modern manning is one barrel out of each mount 24 hours a
day. The old gun crews - you had several of them for each mount.

Q. And Tomahawk missiles and cruise missiles - and Harpoons - just don't take
the manpower?

A. No. The Tomahawks and cruise missiles are all in launchers, you know. You
need a technician to maintain them and squeeze a button.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senator Dale Bumpers photo of Senator John
Warner photo of a battleship in 1952

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Ideas & Trends in Summary;
Agent Orange Is No Federal Case

BYLINE: By Richard Levine and Carlyle C. Douglas

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 252 words


Thousands of Vietnam veterans claiming injuries from exposure to the defoliant
Agent Orange may have lost their product liability lawsuits before they started.

The United States Supreme Court decided last week not to hear their appeal for
Federal jurisdiction in the matter. It was a crucial defeat. The veterans could
sue separately in state courts. But the statutes of limitation in 19 states run
three to six years from the date of exposure to Agent Orange, and since the
Vietnam veterans were exposed in the 1960's, seeking redress in those states
means not being able to sue at all. If, however, the veterans were permitted to
institute a consolidated Federal court case, a sympathetic Federal judge could
frame a statute of limitations that would permit most lawsuits.

In 1979, a Federal court held that ''substantial Federal interests'' in the case
gave the veterans access to Federal courts as a matter of law. An appeals court
reversed, noting that though the Government is interested in the ''welfare of
the parties (the veterans and the manufacturers) to the litigation,'' its
interest in ''how the parties' welfare should be balanced is as yet
undetermined.'' Only Congress, the court implied, can establish such priorities.
Until - or if -that happens, the route via the states may depend on persuading
legislatures to relax the statutes of limitations, much as New York did in June.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE LAND OF THE KHMER ROUGE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 70, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4973 words


Christopher Jones is a freelance writer who has been reporting on Southeast Asia
since 1978.
By Christopher Jones
The camouflage tent was pitched on a knob of dry ground hemmed in by trees
rooted in swamp. Inside the tent, Comrade Kanika of the Revolutionary Army of
Democratic Kampuchea (Cambodia) sat at a table, sipping fiery pineapple liquor.
As a monsoon rain swept across the Cambodian jungle, the army commissar, a wiry
man with short gray hair, talked of the fierce dreams of the Khmer Rouge
revolution and its legendary leader, Pol Pot.

''This is a very bitter place,'' he said in his fluent French.  ''Everything
that happened here, on this front, was of immense significance to the future of
the war. This was the keystone of a great new Khmer Rouge strategy.''

Met (Comrade) Kanika lighted a marijuana cigarette. ''The yuons,'' he said,
''constructed a wooden tank bridge across the O Cheng Meng River.'' ''Yuons'' is
Khmer for ''savages.'' That is what the Khmer Rouge guerrillas call the
Vietnamese invaders of Cambodia.

''They wanted to move their T-54 tanks into position for an assault against our
last major military base. We packed our explosives and rocket launchers on our
backs. Kamtech khmang!'' This is a Pol Pot banzai meaning, ''The enemy must be
crushed to bits.'' Met Kanika's voice acquired the high-strung eloquence of the
typical Khmer Rouge homily.

''From the moonless sky in front of us came the ragged flashes of enemy fire.
Sometimes, from much nearer, came the lighter, sharper snap as we replied. There
were 43 men in my unit, and we lost 14 of them.''

''Were you able to recover their bodies?'' I asked.  A broad smile came over his
face. ''Usually, in addition to our other equipment, our soldiers carry two or
three grenades. We always save one of them. You see, if the yuons take us alive,
they are not very gentle. So we use the last grenade on ourselves.''

He paused, and added with unconcealed pride, ''We give ourselves to the most
serious and just, the most farseeing, the most formidable leader of the
Communist Party of Kampuchea.''

In other words, to Pol Pot himself.

No nation on earth has seen more suffering in the past decade than once tranquil
and fertile Cambodia. In 1969 came the death from the sky, as the Americans
fighting in Vietnam launched their devastating bombing of North Vietnamese
sanctuaries in neutral - and helpless - Cambodia. In 1975, after the collapse of
the American-supported Government of General Lon Nol, came the Khmer Rouge.

In their black pajamalike uniforms, Mao caps and Ho Chi Minh sandals, the
victorious guerrillas padded into the capital, Phnom Penh, to inaugurate the
fanatical brand of Communism their leaders had dreamed up during their years in
the jungle and, before that, in school in France. Cities were declared
''irrelevant''; a ''pure agrarian society'' was proclaimed to be the goal. From
Phnom Penh alone, between two and three million destitute inhabitants, including
the old, the crippled, the sick and the dying, were driven out into the
countryside and herded into makeshift collective farms - slavelabor camps in all
but name.

Yet to Pol Pot, the leader of the Kampuchean Communist Party and the military
commander in chief, the air was still thick with demons. Kampuchea, as the
Cambodians call their country, was declared to be beset by ''inner
contradictions'' and ''imperialist threats,'' and the answer was to seal
Cambodia off and perform the social surgery required to make it totally
self-reliant and immune to capitalist ills.

Money and property, books and the postal service, were abolished.  So was
religion, and all education beyond the three R's. (Many of those already
educated were murdered.) The old and the weak were mere mouths to feed, so they,
too, were ''abolished,'' for the most part.  The punishment for all
transgressions - and this could include asking too many questions, or dancing or
petting or playing non-Communist music - was death. According to the most
conservative estimates, 1.2 million people were slaughtered or died of
starvation or disease.  Some estimates go as high as three million, or even
higher.

The Pol Pot regime lasted for almost four years. In January 1979, the Vietnamese
Communists, never having given up their dream of dominating all of Indochina,
invaded and kicked the Khmer Rouge out of Phnom Penh. An obscure Khmer Rouge
divisional commander named Heng Samrin was placed at the head of a client
government. Retreating into Cambodia's wild fastnesses, Pol Pot vowed that ''the
fighting will go on for eternity, if necessary, until the aggressors have been
completely defeated.''

Cambodia's agony continues. Systematic pillaging by Vietnamese troops has
compounded the country's plight. But partly because of the historic hostility
between the two peoples - the Vietnamese have long regarded the Cambodians as
barbarians who had the impudence to revolt against their domination in 1840 -
the invaders have not been able to pacify the country.

President Heng Samrin's Government in Phnom Penh remains a puppet regime, its
army a ragtag band of perhaps 15,000, many of them teenagers. In an odd twist,
the Khmer Rouge have come to be regarded by many Cambodians as the champions of
national independence; while the United States, which had once excoriated Pol
Pot as a butcher, joined with China in 1979 in rounding up enough votes at the
United Nations to recognize his regime as Cambodia's legal Government. The
reason, of course, was big-power strategy: Neither Washington nor Peking was in
a mood to countenance an act of Vietnamese aggression dependent on the support
of Hanoi's ally, the Soviet Union, and tending to promote the spread of Soviet
influence in Southeast Asia.

Today, in the rain forests and stagnant swamps of Cambodia's western provinces,
some 50,000 Vietnamese troops, out of an occupation force of 200,000, are still
engaged in combat with an estimated 40,000 Khmer Rouge guerrillas, who have been
generously resupplied with Chinese arms. The guerrillas have struck rail links,
cut vital highways, harassed outlying Vietnamese Army posts. Relying on
confusion and terror, even as the Vietcong did during the Vietnam War, the
guerrillas often seem to have at least the passive support of the poor
peasantry. Occasionally the Vietnamese embark on largescale counterinsurgency
operations, razing villages, poisoning crops and taking hostages. But after a
while the occupation forces withdraw, and the Khmer Rouge return.

Pol Pot's prospects of returning to power in Phnom Penh are questionable, but he
pursues the struggle on a political as well as military plane. With Chinese
support and American encouragement, the Khmer Rouge have been courting
Cambodia's two non-Communist insurgent groups, hoping to draw them into a united
front. These are a faction still loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the Cambodian
monarch who was overthrown in 1970 by General Lon Nol, and the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front, headed by Son Sann, who had been one of the Prince's
Prime Ministers. Both groups are relatively weak, but coalition with such
veteran leaders as Prince Sihanouk and Son Sann would bestow on the Khmer Rouge
the political respectability they so badly need to attract international - and
domestic - support for their cause.

It is this diplomatic offensive that provides the background for Pol Pot's
announcement over the Khmer Rouge radio two weeks ago that the Kampuchean
Communist Party is being dissolved as no longer useful. Whatever the outcome of
this move, it will seem less startling when considered against the political
history of the Pol Pot regime. For a long time, the Khmer Rouge leaders were
equivocal and secretive about the movement's Marxist antecedents, some of them
insisting that it was ''revolutionary'' but not ''Communist.'' Then, in
September 1977, Pol Pot announced that there was, indeed, a Kampuchean Communist
Party, that it had been founded 17 years earlier and that it had been providing
the movement with its leadership since the inception of its guerrilla struggle
in 1963. The present dissolution announcement only adds new doubt to the whole
shadowy record.

Pol Pot, appears to have made another tactical move, aimed, this time, at
disowning his ferocious past and attracting Cambodians to his banner. Whether he
and his corevolutionaries were always Communists in name only - a label they
adopted to secure Chinese support - or whether they remain convinced Marxists,
by their lights, and are indulging in short-term deception, no outsider can say
for sure. The best guess I could ever arrive at was that Pol Pot, at some time
in his life, had imbibed a heady mixture of ''Das Kapital'' and Hitler's ''Mein
Kampf.''

To add to the confusion, even his identity remains in question. In an interview
with Yugoslav television in 1977, Pol Pot said he had come from a poor peasant
family. But a Cambodian refugee in Paris, Laau Phuok, insists that Pol Pot's
real name is Saloth Sar, and that his father was a landowner distantly related
to the royal family. A third version is that Pol Pot is really Tol Sat, a
revolutionary who was elected to the Khmer Rouge ''People's Representative
Assembly'' in Phom Penh in 1976. To complete the mystery, photographs of Pol Pot
tend to change in appearance ever so slightly through the years.

My journey to the Khmer Rouge heartland, an area of more than 1,000 square miles
of jungle in the western part of the country, began in Bangkok, capital of
neighboring Thailand. The Thais proclaim strict neutrality in the struggle, but
frequent violations of their territory by Vietnamese troops in Cambodia have not
endeared Hanoi's cause to the Thai Government, and Bangkok is where contact with
Khmer Rouge represenatives can best be made. It was no trick to be allowed to
nip across the border to a Khmer Rouge camp just on the other side, but to
venture deeper into the bush was another question. For two years, I had been
trying to get permission to visit the region, where 60,000 to 80,000 dirt-poor
peasants compose Pol Pot's principal base of support, but permission was always
withheld.

''The whole area is forbidden to foreigners,'' I was told by a Thai Army
captain. ''A military secret!'' That hinted at weapons and other supplies coming
in from China.  Little is known of the transit route, but a Khmer Rouge soldier
I encountered in a field hospital during one of my earlier visits to Cambodia
told me of supplies trucked surreptitiously through Thailand. When I asked Thai
officials about this, they called it a lie. My guess is that the business is
handled privately, without the Bangkok Government being implicated.

Then, last August, I unexpectedly received the permission I had sought. The
Central Committee of the Communist Party of Kampuchea sent authorization for me
to travel all the way to the Cardamom mountain range, the Khmer Rouge power base
about 100 miles inside Cambodia. I was the first foreigner permitted by the
Angkar -the ''Organization,'' as the Khmer Rouge high command is called - to
take that route for a look at life under siege in Cambodia.

A discreet Khmer Rouge diplomat based in Bangkok was assigned to instruct me on
how to proceed. He told me to be ready at my hotel on a certain date, at 4:30 in
the morning. My escort, a tiny, whitesuited Cambodian, came for me on the dot.
He was the highly cultured Ambassador Pech Bun Ret, the Khmer Rouge
representative at the United Nations office in Bangkok.

''You are ready, Monsieur?'' he asked. ''We must hurry.'' We set off in an
air-conditioned Japanese minibus. A Thai intelligence officer sat beside us.
Once out of the city, the driver proceeded at breakneck speed, dodging farmers,
water buffalos, pigs and overloaded buses on the country road. Soon we were out
of the emerald-green paddy fields and into the forests of the border area.
Beyond Aranyaprathet, a dusty village of mud huts, the rain forest became
thicker. We were alone on the road now, and soon we hit a Thai border post,
where it took our Thai plainclothesman an hour to negotiate permission to
proceed. We passed the tent encampments of the Cambodian refugees, 200,000 of
whom have taken refuge in Thailand to get away from both the Vietnamese and the
Khmer Rouge. After another barricade, a narrow mud road drew us into the jungle,
and our driver produced a huge .45 automatic pistol.

Suddenly, our way was barred by three jeeps full of Thai border police, their
carbines at the ready. The driver stopped; on the other side of a dry paddy
field, some 30 heavily armed men in black pajamas moved out of the forest.

My Ambassador got out and walked toward them. He came back with a tall unarmed
man with a row of ball-point pens in his breast pocket.  ''You the newsman?'' he
asked me in French. ''Welcome to Democratic Kampuchea.''

The Khmer Rouge officer looked like an army commissar. ''You are English?'' he
asked.  ''American.'' ''It is the same.'' He motioned me to follow him. I said
goodbye to my escorts. The Thai border police gazed stolidly ahead.

The man sent out to meet me was more important than I had imagined. Chhorn Hay,
he introduced himself, as we walked along a jungle track; Secretary of State for
Telecommunications and Postal Services. The Khmer Rouge had restored the postal
system, now that it was in need of contacts abroad. We passed the tents of a
logistics unit, then some old Chinese trucks of Soviet design.

I noticed some movement in the foliage overhead.  ''Monkeys,'' said Chhorn.
''And not only monkeys. Smile when you speak to me. They like to see you nice
and clear.'' Then there was a smell of wood smoke, and abrubptly we were in a
Khmer Rouge redoubt - Phnom Malay, provisional capital of Democratic Kampuchea.

The camp was a bizarre mixture of primitive and modern. The doors of the
grass-roofed huts were crowded with guerrillas, smiling and gesticulating as
they puffed on their marijuana cigarettes. Wizened, toothless women sat
sharpening dried bamboo into punji sticks, to be smeared with poison made from
wild raisins and placed in the ground to impale the feet of enemy soldiers. Yet
all around me were the wares of the storefronts of Bangkok -nylon mosquito
netting, Benson & Hedges cigarettes, Rolex wristwatches, Coca-Cola; the
inventory seemed endless. And a remarkable variety of arms: AK-47's, the famous
Chinese assault weapon; Chinese rocket-launchers; American M-16 rifles, booty
from the former army of General Lon Nol; grenade launchers, signaling pistols,
sackfuls of bullets, and I don't know what else.

I was struck by how young the soldiers were. The oldest did not seem much over
20; the youngest were mere children. I knew something of the training of these
yotheas, as Pol Pot's troopers are called.  Separated from their families at age
12 and removed from their villages to the Khmer Rouge indoctrination camps, the
recruits are taught to hate the ''old society'' and to ''harden their hearts and
minds'' with cruel games. During the month I spent with the Khmer Rouge, I saw
the yotheas take pleasure in tormenting animals. A favorite game was torturing
monkeys - hacking off their tails or placing chains around their necks and
pulling them across the open ground. Screaming with pain, the monkeys were
strangled to death.

Chhorn led me to a long, thatch-roofed hut with a neat row of single beds.
Freshly laundered blue coverlets matched the curtains that shielded the room
from the blazing sun.

''Now, don't wander off,'' he said. ''There are devices scattered around the
camp that release six poison-tipped arrows at chest height. Otherwise, make
yourself at home.''

A middle-aged man in a dark-blue shirt worn over his trousers greeted me
cordially at the entrance to his tent. It was shortly past noon, and Khieu
Samphan, Prime Minister and President of Democratic Kampuchea, was my host at
lunch.

An expression of wide-eyed bonhomie on his face, he ushered me into a large
rectangular space hung with Chinese maps of the Phnom Malay area. I was seated
at a circular table next to a man who introduced himself as Thiounn Thoeun, a
doctor of aristocratic background who had once served Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
the monarch who had kept Cambodia out of the Vietnamese vortex until his
overthrow by General Lon Nol in 1970. Thiounn was Health Minister in Prince
Sihanouk's government-in-exile in Peking; when the Khmer Rouge took Phnom Penh
in

1975, he joined the new regime in the same capacity. Presently we were joined by
a man who needed no introduction -Ieng Sary, the welltraveled Deputy Prime
Minister in charge of foreign affairs and Pol Pot's brother-in-law.

''Please do not regard this as an interview,'' Khieu said urbanely. ''Let's just
chat, have lunch.'' The food was Cambodian and Chinese, skillfully prepared.
Ieng Sary reminisced about Paris in the 1950's and the little apartment on the
Rue St. Andre des Arts where he and his wife had lived.

If it were not for the young sentry outside the tent, an automatic Kalashnikov
slung across his shoulders, the scene could have been one of those social
gatherings I had known in Bangkok. In many world capitals, diminutive Khmer
Rouge diplomats are engaged today in a top-priority effort -in corridors and
lobbies, over lunches and drinks - to portray the leaders of Democratic
Kampuchea as wellmannered gentlemen, falsely accused of brutality, who are
infatuated with the United States, international trade, free-market economics,
supervised elections, French humanisme and, of course, human rights.

''The yuons have abandoned Route Nationale 6,'' said Ieng Sary, bringing the
conversation around to the Vietnamese. Route 6 is one of Cambodia's main
highways, running from Phnom Penh to the Thai border. Highway 10, Ieng Sary
added, had been cut. This road links the border with Battambang, the country's
second biggest city. In the northwest, he went on, the sacred Angkor temples
were under Khmer Rouge control.

A big man in a light green uniform, Ieng Sary was the most talkative of our
party, jumping from subject to subject with appropriate changes of tone. ''We
may have been too far left,'' he almost whispered, reflecting on the years of
Khmer Rouge government in Phnom Penh. But the ''Vietnamese agents,'' some of
whom had attained high positions in the capital, had to be rooted out; in any
case, ''less than 10,000'' executions had taken place. Once the agents were
taken care of, he said, the killing stopped.

''There were no mass murders,'' Khieu Samphan chimed in. Those tales of genocide
were all the product of Vietnamese propaganda.  ''What reason would we have to
kill off our own people? Perhaps the evacuation of Phnom Penh could have been
better organized, but if you are fair-minded, you will have to say that the
positive prevailed over the negative.''

It is the Vietnamese invaders, my hosts insisted, who are guilty of genocide,
bulldozing villages with their tanks and strafing them with their helicopter
gunships. All Cambodians must unite against them.

The lunch came to an end. I had not yet seen Pol Pot. The last non-Communist
visitors to see him were a group of Japanese journalists in December 1979. He
had dropped out of sight on earlier occasions, too, apparently as a political
maneuver, to re-emerge victorious over his Khmer Rouge rivals. Was his current
disappearance a sign of renewed internal struggle? To ask about his whereabouts,
to request an interview, would have been a breach of Khmer Rouge etiquette. I
would just have to wait.

I was awakened by gunfire. It was 3:45 A.M. I had been in the camp for two days.
From very close, a prolonged burst of pom-poms lighted up the night, and I could
see yotheas scurrying amid the trees. Above the crackling of machine guns I
could hear orders being screamed.

Someone entered my hut; it was Met Im, a junior military commissar, who was to
escort me farther east, to the front that stretches south of Highway 10, the
headquarters of Met Kanika, the senior army commissar responsible for keeping
the highway closed and Khmer Rouge communication routes open.

Im was hung about with bandoleers. He said his unit was engaged in cleaning out
a group of Vietnamese guerrillas nearby. The crack Vietnamese 75th Division was
only five miles away, but showed little disposition to venture beyond its strong
points.

Im said we were leaving. He cautioned me about land mines, black scorpions,
giant red ants and punji sticks. ''I'll look after you,'' he assured me. ''That
way, you'll stay alive.''

We set out at dawn through the never-ending forest. Soon it was daylight. The
heat, the stench of fungus, the shrilling of the monkeys began to weigh on me. I
kept brushing leeches off my clothes. Gray anthills protruded under my feet like
excrescences on some dead moon.

To my relief, the brush opened up on a stockade. At its entrance, Khmer Rouge
soldiers were proudly photographing four severed heads.  Yuons, I was told; a
raiding party had brought them in that morning.  Somewhere close by, a
Vietnamese sniper was picking off anyone who moved beyond the rampart. Later
that day, I saw the guerrillas bury more than 50 of their own men. The corpses
were bloated, a week old.

We were in the village of Phnom Raang. The huts stood on stilts.  Small pariah
dogs barked at me, and men and women peered suspiciously over bamboo wattles.
The guide led me to a hut higher than the rest; it was there that I met Comrade
Kanika. He put on the obligatory show for foreign visitors - yotheas staged mock
fights with AK-47's and machetelike Cambodian knives, and completed the
entertainment with folk dances.

That night, the village was bathed in brilliant moonlight. I was allowed to talk
to the villagers. We sat around the campfires, and the men spoke of their
concerns - cattle that were sick, rice that had been stolen from them, spies for
the Vietnamese, who, they were sure, had been infiltrated in their midst. The
soldiers told me these agents were known and would be dealt with by the
Nokorbal, Pol Pot's secret police.

I slept on a camp bed, out in the open, under a mosquito net. After sunrise, we
began our ascent of the Cardamom Mountains, Pol Pot's supposed stronghold. At
various points during my 200-mile journey, some of the company dropped out of
the column and others joined in.

We slogged across gnarled valleys and overgrown ravines. At dusk, in the
darkening mist, we came upon a desolate clearing; in its center, several beaming
yotheas stood around a small table covered by a blue tablecloth. They had been
informed of my impending arrival and had waited for hours to greet me with a
ceremonial meal. We sat down to soupe Chinoise and rice; then, waving goodbye,
the men walked back into the mountains.

As we started off in another direction, Comrade Im grabbed my arm.  ''Don't
move,'' he said. He pointed down at my feet. Three inches away, two bamboo
prongs protruded from the ground. Two other spikes were visible a little ahead.
''Vietnamese punji sticks.''

We shuffled along, trying not to lift our feet from the ground, until we reached
the pebbly bed of a dry stream; it was safer, the soldiers said, on the other
side.

Beyond the trackless mass of vegetation, the mountains stood out sharply against
the dying sky. The men did not pitch their tents that night; it was too hot. The
jungle was silent here - only the hum of myriads of insects and, now and then, a
bird's cry. A dozen yotheas sat motionlessly around a campfire, listening to a
boy with a smoothshaven head recount a tale of death and glory, in a kind of
native chant. Comrade Im translated.

''The Angkar's blessings are remembered,'' the boy intoned, his eyes agleam.
''All types of airplanes, including the dreadful B-52's, dropped bombs which
shook the land and shook the water. The Angkar taught me how to fight with ardor
and keep my anger ever keen against my enemies.''

I awoke. It was night. More than two weeks had passed since I left Thailand. I
had seen village after village, and had frequently wakened to the sound of
military action. This time, too, there was the sound of firing a mile or so
away. The men were moving about.

Im told me we were joining the fight, and we moved out in a long line - about 50
men with rifles, heavy automatics, mortars, portable rocket launchers, radios.
Fording a stream, we came upon a shattered hamlet, its earthen walls blackened
by flames. There was the dull whump, whump, whump of a Vietnamese gunship, and
the unit scrambled for cover. Im dragged me by the collar into a ditch.

Tracers flashed; three mortars thumped nearby; two more helicopter gunships slid
up overhead and peppered the village in long, leisurely bursts. Ahead of us, I
could see men firing up from the ruins - locals, more of them than I had
realized were there. Then I heard the grinding drone of tanks, growing louder. A
volley of machine-gun bullets flung up pebbles and red dirt all around us. A
mortar shell landed somewhere behind. For a while, the noise of battle was
incessant. Then the firing died out. I stood up and peered through my field
glasses in the direction of the receding fire.

Just then, on the summit of a distant hillside, I saw a figure that made me
catch my breath: a pudgy Cambodian, with field glasses hanging from his neck.
The eyes in his head looked dead and stony. I could not make him out in any
detail, but I had seen enough pictures of the supreme leader to convince me, at
that precise second, that I was staring at Pol Pot. Next to him, I could make
out some other figures, stacks of rifles, a few tents. Thinking back on it now,
I am still fairly sure it was Pol Pot I saw - whoever he may be.

Im took me in tow. We entered the village. The attack had been repulsed. I was
told that some of the tanks had been disabled by yotheas who had crouched right
in front of them and fired their rockets into the gas tanks.

A soldier led us to the headman's hut. I asked him about his village. Once, he
said, it had a population of 2,500; today, it was almost deserted.

I inquired of Pol Pot's whereabouts. The headman answered curtly.  Im
translated. ''He says there is no military chief here.'' The palaver was ended.
A soldier led me to an empty hut.  Over the next few days, the village returned
to life. Yotheas milled about. A revolutionary cadre supervised the distribution
of rice, vegetables and canned products. Medical teams set up temporary
dispensaries under the charred beams of burned-out houses. A woman ''barefoot
doctor'' wore a brown shirt displaying the Red Cross insignia. She gaped when I
said I was an American journalist, but told me they were depending heavily on
native herbal medicine, although supplies of modern drugs were improving. The
village women observed me with distrustful, curious eyes. Some of them
approached to ask for medicine.

Im escorted me to the abandoned campsites of Vietnamese. The walls of a radio
shack stood amid the ruins. Scattered in the rubble were old copies of the Hanoi
daily Nhan Dan, letters, documents, charts.

Comrade Im stopped. We had been walking a long time - another week of moving
from place to place, to no apparent purpose, except to insure my safety. It
seemed to me, in fact, that they had been killing time, waiting to find out from
the high command where to take me next.

They had apparently got their answer. With his bayonet, Im pointed to a a brown
patch in the forest some 300 yards down a hillside, next to a banana grove. It
was a cluster of mat huts, a Thai village. It was Thailand.

The hills rolled away to the west, flattening out into the plain.  My journey
was over. I had described a semicircle through Khmer Rouge territory and was at
the Bo Rai border point, some way south of where my expedition had begun. The
Thai sentry post was just ahead.

I looked back. By an old Cambodian cemetery a blind man was chanting the
Ramayana, a part of Cambodia's cultural heritage, as he twanged a primitive
guitar. What better personification of Cambodia could I have found than this old
singer, whose heroic and poetic ballad had ceased to have any connection with
anything I had just seen? Cambodia, a land possessed, its ancient hymns, like
its temples, fallen on evil days. Of all dead lands, the most dead.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Khieu Samphan, Prime Minister of the jungle
government photo of Prince Norodom Sihanouk photo of Ieng Sary photo of Pol Pot
in 1979 photo of Cambodian guerrilla army

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN DEFENSE OF KNOWHOW

BYLINE: By LYNN WHITE, Jr.;
Lynn White, Jr. is professor of medieval history emeritus at UCLA.  His most
recent book is ''MedievalReligion and Technology.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1470 words


BLAMING TECHNOLOGY The Irrational Search for Scapegoats.By Samuel C. Florman.
207 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $12.95.

By LYNN WHITE Jr.

WHILE reviewing Samuel Florman's new book, I decided to look at his earlier
work, ''The Existential Pleasures of Engineering,'' published in 1975. The
libraries of my university possess three copies. Those in the research library
and the undergraduate library were checked out. The engineering library's copy
stood serene on its shelf. This is not statistical proof, but it indicates
correctly that Mr.  Florman directs his pen less toward his fellow engineers
than toward the vastly greater public of Americans who know almost nothing about
engineering but at present have qualms about it and the way in which it is
affecting our lives. Mr. Florman is a respected professional engineer and a man
of wide cultivation. He writes with beautiful clarity, and his wit springs from
his material; it is not applique.  The reader is never in doubt about what Mr.
Florman is saying. In an age of murky prose, this quality alone should win him
an enthusiastic readership.

There is a significant and troubling difference in temper between Mr. Florman's
earlier book and his new one. Five years ago he was trying to explain ''the
nature of the engineering experience in our time.'' His tone was largely happy,
because he is a successful engineer trying to express and share his enthusiasms.
To be sure, he spent some pages refuting the leading gurus of the
counterculture, who in the 60's and early 70's made the wickedness of technology
a major article of their faith. Mr. Florman was certain, however, that such
''irrationality'' was simply a passing phenomenon evoked by the triple crises of
Vietnam, Watergate and the public's discovery of ecological problems.

But it didn't all go away. The demonstrators of yore have trimmed their beards
neatly, have donned more conventional garb and are working for banks, law firms,
newspapers and churches. A few have even entered politics successfully. It is
now a commonplace that the counterculture of a few years ago is today an
integral part of the general culture. The decline of
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Lynn White Jr. is professor of medieval history emeritus at UCLA.  His most
recent book is ''Medieval Religion and Technology.''
Congressional support for both technology and science is an important symptom of
this fact. Politicians can be mistaken, but they are rarely ''irrational'' about
how they think their constituents want them to vote.

Mr. Florman has come to realize this, and he is fighting back, hard. As his
subtitle, ''The Irrational Search for Scapegoats,'' indicates, this book is much
more polemical than his earlier one.  ''To my dismay,'' he says, ''feelings
about technology have become (since 1975) even more frenzied. Distraction
spreads, not only among latter-day Luddites, but among beleaguered scientists
and engineers.  ... My aim in this book is to bring common sense to bear upon
some of the issues that, loosely connected, constitute the public debate about
technology. I do not propose to do battle on behalf of the engineering
profession. Nevertheless implicit in all that I write is a personal belief that
technological creativity is a wondrous manifestation of the human spirit.''

Despite his disclaimer, Mr. Florman in fact does mighty battle on behalf of
engineering. Not all of it, of course; no ''anti-nuke'' zealot could be more
critical than he is of the carelessness that caused the Three Mile Island
episode or of the perennial evasiveness of the Atomic Energy Commission over how
to store radioactive waste.  But, he cautions, ''to persist in saying that we
are optimistic or pessimistic about technology is to acknowledge that we will
not grow up. ... I mean to oppose those who would evade harsh truths by intoning
platitudes. I particularly mean to challenge those who enjoy the benefits of
technology but refuse to accept responsibility for its consequences.''

Mr. Florman tries to dispel two of the major myths that muddy the current
discussion of technology and engineering. The first is that technology is a
disembodied autonomous movement, out of human control (''whatever can be done
will be done''). Mr. Florman discusses a significant counterexample to this
myth: the Wankel engine, on which both Japanese and American automobile makers
lost fabulous sums in the early 70's, and which now lies in the archives of
engineering history, perhaps awaiting some still unforeseen human need for which
it can be debugged and put into service. Mr. Florman's argument would have been
strengthened if he had known that the essential feature of the Wankel - its
triangular rotor - first appeared in 1588 in a pump designed by Agostino
Ramelli. It didn't ''sell'' then, either, although Ramelli was a man of great
reputation.

Another counterexample from the history of technology is the parachute, which
was conceived by a Sienese engineer in the late 1470's, was sketched by Leonardo
da Vinci a few years later and was known to many European engineers after about
1616, when it was pictured in a widely used ''machine-book'' (an illustrated
book on machine design) by a Hungarian bishop. But it, too, didn't ''sell'' -
until 1783, when Joseph and Jacques Montgolfier began to ascend in balloons and
decided that the parachute (dormant during four centuries) would be a good
escape mechanism in case of trouble. In our time it has become essential to the
first-strike capability of armies, and it is the most efficient means of
recovering space vehicles.

So Mr. Florman is correct. What can be done in technology is not necessarily
done. What in fact is done depends on human choices made in constantly shifting
circumstances. Engineering dictates nothing to us, save perhaps when our society
has chosen foolishly -as for example, in permitting petroleum to dominate our
energy uses - and a mop-up is required.

But who is ''our society,'' that makes such choices for our wellbeing or
detriment? Mr. Florman remarks that ''a gossip column devoted to the shadowy
world of the executive suite would do much to disprove the theory that
technologies have a life of their own.'' But who occupies the executive suites?
Not engineers! The second myth that Mr. Florman deflates is that of a
technocratic elite. Only 4 percent of those listed in Who's Who in America ''are
engineers by training, and many of these are academics, unarguably distinguished
but hardly powerful.'' Of some 40,000 persons in the top grades of the Federal
Civil Service, the proportion of engineers dwindles from 16 percent in grade 15
to 5 percent in the highest grade, 18. In 1980, only two of the 535 members of
Congress were engineers. And ''in the country's 100 largest corporations during
the late 1970's,'' the author notes, ''slightly less than 15 percent of the
chief executive officers had engineering backgrounds.''

One of Mr. Florman's most sardonic chapters is devoted to the way the women's
liberation movement is neglecting to urge ambitious young women to go into
engineering, ''the only field in which average starting salaries for women are
higher than those for men'' - ''perhaps,'' he speculates, because feminists
''are more concerned about battering on closed doors than they are about walking
through those that are open.'' Mr. Florman quotes a thoughtful professional
engineer who offers a deeper reason: ''It has to do with their perception of
power. ... They don't see engineers as the ones who have the say in our society.
And, let's face it, to a great extent they're right. We may have the knowhow,
but we don't have the power.''

I hope that Mr. Florman will be successful in his battle against the pernicious
myths of technological determinism and of the autocracy of a technological
elite. But so many people among us have an inner need for scapegoats that I fear
that five years hence he will still feel frustration.

Let me make one suggestion for Mr. Florman's 1986 book. His 1981 book is written
for Occidentals, in terms of the uniquely Occidental belief - explicit as early
as the ninth century -that technological progress is part of God's loving will
for mankind. This belief persisted within the area of Latin Christendom and its
offshoot, Protestantism, well into the 19th century. It began to decline with
Romanticism, and today has very nearly vanished in the West, except in
secularized form among the engineers for whom Mr. Florman speaks.  Perhaps in
preparation for his next book, Mr. Florman should look into the very different
attitudes toward engineering in some of the great and complex non-Western
cultures, notably Islam. Before using loaded words like irrational, one should
develop standards of comparison.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FIRST WE MUST SPEAK CLEARLY

BYLINE: By JOHN WILLIAM WARD; John William Ward is the former president of
Amherst College.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 993 words


THE UNIVERSITY AND THE PUBLIC INTEREST By A. Bartlett Giamatti.  184 pp. New
York: Atheneum. $12.95.

THESE are hard times for the universities. Higher education is, as the saying
goes, a ''declining industry.'' The pressures are many: inflation in costs,
decline in resources, demographic trends that promise fewer students and fewer
possibilities for faculty, a litigious environment of self-conscious
constituencies, complex financial relationships with Federal and state
governments, and a resurgence of the anti-intellectualism latent in American
society throughout our history. One need not be a Marxist to recognize that the
pleasures of the mind and the delights of the imagination require a material
base. Survival is primary.

One of the perils of higher education in the 1980's is that those who are
supposed to be our educational leaders will become simply managers, patterning
their careers on the industrial model. Indeed, some argue, the first
responsibility of those who lead our universities is to maintain the fiscal
integrity of their institutions.

A. Bartlett Giamatti, the president of Yale University, means to be more than a
manager. The title of his book is a measure of his ambition. ''The University
and the Public Interest'' consists of 13 occasional essays, all but one written
since he became Yale's 19th president in 1977. The range of subjects is wide,
and his standards of social responsibility are high. One wonders what the Yale
Athletic Association, let alone the football coaches of America, thought about a
defense of athletics that draws upon John Henry Cardinal Newman to argue that
only when ''an athletic contest (is) enjoyable in itself, with no expectation of
a consequence beyond the playing of it,'' is it part of ''liberal'' education.
One wonders what the freshman class thought, in the fall of 1980, listening to
their president explore the ''fictional'' nature of time, whether a decade or a
millennium, in order to urge the young to spurn the apocalyptic style, which
derives from Saint John and the Book of Revelations, and to embrace the tolerant
and skeptical goals of liberal education.

Whatever his particular subject - science in the curriculum, the purpose of
secondary schools, the reporting requirements of Federal agencies - Mr. Giamatti
has a single general subject: ''the nature of our institutions for education and
the purposes for which those institutions are intended.'' Development of that
subject depends upon the definition of its two key terms, institution and
purpose.

In a brief, perhaps too elliptical preface, Mr. Giamatti writes: ''The
institutions themselves are varied: language is one, private universities
another, the Federal government yet another, and our public schools. I am
concerned with the civic goals of education, by which I mean that set of
intellectual processes that are infused with a set of values, values American
and humane.''

It will strike some as curious to call language an ''institution,'' but Mr.
Giamatti, a former professor of comparative literature, sees language as
central. ''I believe that all of us are what we say we are - that as individuals
and as a people we define through language what we have, and what we will be,
and that a group of people who cannot clearly and precisely speak and write will
never be a genuine society. We shape ourselves and our institutions, and we and
our institutions are shaped, through those individual acts of negotiation
between ourselves and our language.'' There is much that is sensitively correct
about this view of reality, but not everything.  The one essay written before
his presidency, ''Sentimentality,'' an attack on the corruption of language and
thought by the student left in the 60's, is a case in point.

The Free Speech Movement at Berkeley (which then Professor Giamatti called the
''Filthy Speech Movement'') began with one student sitting on the steps of
Sproul Hall holding a placard with one word on it, a blunt, four-letter
Anglo-Saxon word that family newspapers like The New York Times still refuse to
print. The student was hauled off by the police on the charge of obscenity. That
was his whole point, of course, that society could understand only words as
obscene, not actions such as the Vietnam war and the complicity of the
''multi-versity'' in it.  From a different perspective, one might even argue
that the student left was in agreement with Professor Giamatti, but that the
abstractions of words did not express those political feelings that demanded a
new vernacular.

A similar problem lurks in his definition of the purposes of education - civic
goals that become a set of intellectual processes, so that means become the end.
Mr. Giamatti is overly fond of paradox (''the most practical part of the
American soul is its capacity to assert and live by principles''). One has the
sense of a mind passionately struggling with language but almost wholly enclosed
within it. Other forms of reality rarely intrude. For example, arguing for the
need for ''a broad, deep base of shared assumptions and perceptions'' in liberal
education, the how of the matter is left to a phrase, ''growing out of a
carefully wrought curriculum.'' Still, as President William Bowen of Princeton
once remarked, the surest way to assure a contentious faculty meeting was to
allow someone to bring the matter of the curriculum to the floor. So one
understands why a university president is gingerly in descending from high
principle to concrete particulars, but throughout Mr. Giamatti's essays one is
left wondering how the noble goals he so eloquently argues are to be realized.

Yet, however much one may disagree or want to argue about this or that
particular, the posture, the stance, of a president constantly seeking to run
lines of connection between the university and the purposes of education and the
issues of the larger society is admirable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOPE AND A KIDNAPPING

BYLINE: By ALAN CHEUSE; Alan Cheuse is the author of ''Candace & Other
Stories.'' His novel ''The Bohemians'' will be published this winter.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 946 words


THE LAST SCAM By David Harris.  364 pp. New York: Delacorte Press/Seymour
Lawrence. $13.95.
ROCKABYE By Laird Koenig.  246 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $11.95.

''HE was wearing clean jeans... His papers identified him as a businessman from
Colorado on vacation. He was distinguishable from the rest of the tourists only
in the fluency of his Spanish and the way his fingers dug into the arm of his
seat throughout the 40-minute flight. Airplane rides frightened Amazon. The one
from Mexico City to Oa-xaca had been full of particularly vicious updrafts, and
his forehead was covered with sweat.''

Faithful readers of The New York Times Magazine may recognize this passage when
they encounter it a little more than midway through David Harris's engrossing
new novel about the dangerous work of American marijuana smugglers in Mexico's
southern state of Oaxaca.  The description of the supposedly fearless dope
trafficker winging his way south to complete a huge deal first appeared in Mr.
Harris's article on the multimillion-dollar business that keeps multimillions of
North Americans supplied with their drug of choice. The piece was vividly
written, but ''The Last Scam,'' the novel he has constructed out of his
knowledge of the lives - and deaths - of the big dealers and foot soldiers of
the drug-smuggling trade, is even better.

The nervous, sweating Henry Amazon of that frightening airplane ride has, in
fact, a lot more to worry about than updrafts. After more than a decade of
smuggling marijuana and hashish from Oaxaca to the American Southwest, a decade
that the former Vietnam Marine veteran has lived ''in a perpetual present
tense,'' he feels ''burnt out on it all'' from ''too much hassle, too much
fear,'' and has constructed a two-part million-dollar-plus smuggling scam that
will mark his departure from the business - and from Mexico, where, as he sees
it, ''dreams didn't come true ... they just got unbearable.'' Partners present
and past, such as the purple-eyed thug from Chihuahua, Zorro CeAttle, and Jerome
Whitehurst, a.k.a. Ramon Ramon (like Amazon a former Vietnam Marine veteran),
who is wanted for killing a narcotics agent in Albuquerque, N.M.; Federal agent
Purdee (''Call me Purd!'') Fletcher, with his cops-and-robbers enthusiasm, on
loan to the Mexican drug squad;the activities of a Oaxacan guerrilla movement
and the subsequent reaction of the Mexican army; the return to Oaxaca, under
duress, of Judy Rosenberg, a.k.a. Wanda Lamar, former girl friend of both Amazon
and Whitehurst: these are some of the people and events that come awfully close
to making Amazon's ''last scam'' the final act of his life.

Mr. Harris has made his nervous, battle-scarred smuggler into a sympathetic
protagonist with convincing dreams of lost love and affecting family-like ties
to some of the local inhabitants. We worry a lot about his health as the main
pieces of the plot fall into place, accompanied by helicopter crashes, fire
fights and the screams of smugglers, who are often tortured (and, if female,
gang-raped) and murdered by the callous Mexican police. The conclusion of this
first-rate, carefully documented adventure drama - Mr. Harris's ''Oaxacan
connection'' - includes a number of particularly vicious updrafts that make for
a great deal of sweat.

If Laird Koenig's new novel offers any truth beyond the moment, it's that
certain novels don't seem to be written for the movies anymore; rather, they're
written to become television movies. Read ''Rockabye'' and you can picture the
commercials for hair spray, mouthwash and deodorant at appropriate intervals.

Dec, 21, 8:15 P.M.: Susannah Bartok, a fatigued young mother just off the
airplane from California (where her surfer husband has abandoned her and their
blond, blue-eyed 2-year-old son, Laddie, in their tract house), slogs through
the wintry New York City night unaware that she's entered, as a seemingly
sympathetic police lieutenant later describes it to her, ''a city under siege.''
She no sooner takes Laddie to visit a department store Santa than thugs wearing
dark glasses spray her with Chemical Mace, snatch Laddie from her grasp and sell
him to a Brazilian couple at a nearby hotel who have ordered just such an
angelic child for Christmas.

For the next two days Susannah goes without much sleep or food as she out thinks
the New York police department, survives a courageous, though headline-seeking
lesbian journalist who helps her in her search (and gets pushed down an elevator
shaft for her troubles), tracks down the gang, murders one of its members (with
a .357 Magnum she buys in an Eighth Avenue liquor store), captures the evil
drugdealing female M.D. who leads the baby snatchers, makes it in a taxi from
Eighth Avenue to Kennedy Airport in less than 45 minutes during the height of
holiday traffic - you can see that I'm listing Susannah's accomplishments in
ascending order of difficulty - and stops an international airliner from taking
off for Rio with her Laddie aboard.

Although it's Susannah's ''averageness'' that Mr. Koenig stresses, her feats
would make even Charles Bronson scratch his head in wonder. But this avenging
mama does have her flaws. While poking about the soon-to-be-dead reporter's
apartment, she notices a copy of ''One Hundred Years of Solitude,'' a novel
we're told that she ''had once started reading ... but found ... exasperatingly
difficult'' and ''still felt a pang of guilt about abandoning ... halfway
through.'' Mr. Koenig doesn't tell us what Susannah did after saving Laddie, but
I suspect that she sat down in her tract house living room and turned on a
television movie.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Paperbacks: New and Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words


Some vintage books by outstanding authors that have just become available in
trade paperback editions are described below.

ROBERT STONE, whose ''A Flag for Sunrise'' is one of The Book Review's Editors'
Choices for 1981, is the author of two other critically acclaimed novels. A Hall
of Mirrors (1966) is the story of three young Americans who meet in New Orleans
during the Mardi Gras and get caught in a tide of events that ends in violent
death. Dog Soldiers (1974) depicts greed and brutality, double-crossing and
triple-crossing practiced among heroin-dealing renegades during the Vietnam War.
The latter won a National Book Award. Both are published by Houghton Mifflin at
$5.95.

EDWIN WAY TEALE (1899-1981) combined in his writing the enthusiasm of a poet for
natural beauty and the zeal of a scientist for exact detail. Four volumes in
which he recorded his adventures and observations while journeying across North
America -North With the Spring (1951), Journey Into Summer (1960), Autumn Across
America (1956) and Wandering Through Winter (1965) - have been reissued by Dodd,
Mead at $8.95each. All are illustrated with photographs by the author.

E.V. CUNNINGHAM is the pseudonym under which Howard Fast is writing a series of
smart, exciting, rather original police procedural novels featuring Masao
Masuto, a Nisei who is a member of the Beverly Hills police force. In The Case
of the One-Penny Orange, Masuto applies his Zen-inspired genius to a case
involving an S.S.  commander who mysteriously disappeared at the end of World
War II. In The Case of the Russian Diplomat, his assignment is to solve, with
scarcely a clue, the death of an unidentified man found floating in the swimming
pool of a plush hotel. The books are published by Holt at $3.50each.

MARY CHALMERS chose a young cat named Harry for the central character of a
series of picture stories about the relations between children and mothers that
have amused, even as they edified, several generations of 3- to 6-year-olds. The
titles indicate the story line of each: Be Good, Harry; Take a Nap, Harry; Throw
a Kiss, Harry and Merry Christmas, Harry. These tiny books, published by Harper,
are $1.50 each.

EVELYN WAUGH (1903-66) is best remembered for his 1945 novel Brideshead
Revisited, which Little, Brown is reissuing (at $4.95) as a tie-in for a PBS
series scheduled to be televised next month. In it he describes, in highly
polished style, the decline of an aristocratic English Catholic family and in
the course of it makes quite evident his reservations about democracy and what
is usually counted as progress.

VLADIMIR NABOKOV (1899-1977), one of the most important writers of this century,
now has all his principal works available in paperback. McGraw-Hill has just
released three: Mary ($4.95), his first novel, written in Russian and published
in 1926, describes the dilemma of a young Russian exiled in Berlin as he tries
to decide whether to attempt to revive an idyllic love affair when his old flame
is temporarily close by. Transparent Things ($4.95) is a 1972 novella about a
middle-aged American who falls in love as he trails a Swiss girl to learn about
her past; it is elliptical, ironical, typical of Nabokov's late work. Poems and
Problems ($5.95) offers the author's translation from the Russian of 39 poems
written between 1917 and 1967, 14 poems written in English between 1942 and
1956, and 18 chess problems of Nabokovian design, together with their solutions.

MARGUERITE YOURCENAR, a native of France who has lived on Mount Desert Island in
Maine for 30 years, early this year became the first woman to be elected to the
French Academy. Farrar Straus & Giroux has issued in soft covers three books
that indicate how she attained this extraordinary place in French letters. Her
1939 novella Coup de Grace ($4.95) is a parable, the story of the unrequited
passion that an aristocratic young woman develops for an ambivalent Prussian
officer during the Russian Revolution. Her 1954 novel Memoirs of Hadrian ($9.95)
tells the life story of the Roman Emperor in the form of a letter he wrote to
his adopted grandson as he lay dying. It is remarkable for its vigor and its
precise historical detail. Her 1968 work The Abyss ($8.95) is a novel of ideas,
the tale of a freethinking physician, alchemist and philosopher who is caught in
the abyss between Protestantism and Catholicism that bifurcated the European Low
Countries during the 16th century.

MAY SARTON, in the course of a long and prolific career, has written poetry,
memoirs and novels. Examples of her work in the latter two genres have just been
published in paperback by Norton, each at $3.95. The House by the Sea (1977) is
a journal she kept after moving to the Maine seacoast to escape personal anguish
and in solitude found the inspiration she needed to resume writing. A Reckoning
(1978) is a novel about a widow whose days are numbered; ostensibly it is about
dying, but actually it is about coming to terms with homosexuality as well as
with cancer.

Nipponese novelists. At a time when Americans are increasingly curious about the
ways of Japanese business and social life, Putnam's Perigee Books has reissued
the works of two Nipponese fiction writers that were critically acclaimed when
they were published in this country during the 1950's and 1960's but were later
allowed to go out of print. The careers of both men spanned World War II; as a
consequence, their work records the changes brought about by Japan's sudden
entrance into the modern world and the conflict between traditional Eastern and
Western values. Both were keen students of English literature, a fact reflected
in the way they treated family relationships and romantic attachments. On
occasion, both considered the situation of aging men in love with young women.

The newly reissued works of Junichiro Tanizaki (1886-1965) include ''Some Prefer
Nettles'' ($4.95), ''The Makioka Sisters'' ($7.95), ''The Key'' ($4.95), ''Seven
Japanese Tales'' ($5.95) and ''Diary of a Mad Old Man'' ($4.95).

The fiction of Yasunari Kawabata (1899-1972), winner of the Nobel Prize in
Literature in 1968, includes ''Snow Country,'' ''Thousand Cranes,'' ''The Master
of Go,'' ''The Sound of the Mountain'' and ''Beauty and Sadness.'' All are
priced $4.95.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of designs

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DEFECTING POLE SAYS 'BRUTALITY' FORCED HIS MOVE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 945 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 20


Poland's Ambassador to Washington, Warsaw's most senior diplomat, asked for and
was granted political asylum today in the United States.

The Ambassador, Romuald Spasowski, in a dramatic and emotional message to
Americans and to the people of Poland, described his defection as ''my
expression of solidarity'' with Lech Walesa.

''A week ago, a state of war has been imposed on Poland, a state of war against
the Polish people,'' the Ambassador said in a statement read at the State
Department. ''A cruel night of darkness and silence was spread over my
country.''

'I Cannot Be Silent'

Mr. Spasowski, reading in a clear but occasionally faltering voice from a
statement handwritten on a sheaf of notepaper, said: ''I, ladies and gentlemen,
cannot be silent. I shall not have any association - not speaking about
representation - with the authorities responsible for this brutality and
inhumanity.''

The 61-year-old Ambassador, dressed in a black suit and tie, and his wife,
Wanda, who stood beside him, appeared shaken, strained and pale. Diplomats and
American acquaintances of the Spasowskis here said that the Ambassador and Mrs.
Spasowski have spent a deeply anguished week since the Polish Government
declared martial law and began arresting thousands of Poles, including Mr.
Walesa, the head of the Solidarity free trade union.

Before concluding his remarks, the Ambassador addressed the people of Poland,
saying: ''All Poles abroad salute you. We will never stop struggling until
Poland be Poland and you experience that dignity which should be part of every
human being. So help us God.''

Statement Broadcast to Poland

Ambassador Spasowski's statement was broadcast to Poland by Radio Free Europe
within an hour of its delivery, according to officials of the network here. The
Voice of America - which asked the Ambassador to repeat his remarks in Polish, a
request he declined -announced the defection and translated the statement for
worldwide broadcasts.

In his speech today, Mr. Spasowski appeared to be calling on other Polish
diplomats to consider their positions in the light of events in Warsaw.

''Be Polish and true to yourself,'' he said. ''Do whatever your conscience
dictates you to do in order to assist our brothers and sisters in Poland.''

The State Department said it had no information that other diplomats in the
Polish Embassy here were also planning to seek asylum.

In assessing the situation in Poland that led to his decision to defect, the
Ambassador said there were ''indications'' that some of the Poles who have been
arrested over the last week have been ''transported to camps in neighboring
countries.''

''Now,'' he said, ''thousands of the best sons and daughters of the Polish
nation are faced with the ordeals of imprisonment. In prison, in camps, in the
open air without shelter, without enough food, without heating in freezing
temperatures, my brothers, old and young, men and women, face brute force and
are exposed to enormous sufferings.''

The Ambassador made his formal request for asylum yesterday to President Reagan.
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., speaking on a television news program
today, announced that the request had been made and that asylum had been
granted.

The Ambassador said today he had chosen defection when he heard of the arrest of
Mr. Walesa. ''I have decided this at the moment I have learned that Lech Walesa,
the most beloved leader of Solidarity, is arrested and kept by force,'' he said.
''This - what I am doing now - is my expression of solidarity with him.''

Under Heavy F.B.I. Guard

Mr. Spasowski, who arrived at the State Department today under heavy Federal
Bureau of Investigation escort, declined to talk with reporters. The telephone
at the embassy residence was not being answered this afternoon. The State
Department would not comment on where Mr. Spasowski will be living.

The Spasowskis, who have a married daughter living in this country, were
apparently happy with their life in Washington and were reported to have talked
occasionally about retiring in the United States. This was the Ambassador's
second tour of duty here; he had served in Washington as Ambassador from 1955 to
1961. Before returning here in 1978 Mr. Spasowski had been director of political
affairs in the Polish Foreign Ministry. He has also been an envoy in London and
Buenos Aires.

The Polish Embassy press counselor, Lucjan Mieczkowski, reached by telephone at
the embassy today, said that there would be no comment on Mr. Spasowski's
action.

When asked whether Stansilaw Pawliszewski, the deputy chief of mission, would be
taking over the functions of the ambassador, Mr.  Mieczkowski replied, ''That
would be the normal routine.''

Mr. Spasowski was the highest-ranking Communist-bloc diplomat to defect in the
United States since Arkady N. Shevchenko, the topranking Soviet official in the
United Nations secretariat, sought asylum in April 1978. Mr. Shevchenko is now
reported to be living in seclusion in the Washington area.

The last major defection of a Communist-bloc envoy in Washington occurred in May
1967 when Janos Radvanyi, the Hungarian charge d'affaires, was granted asylum.
Mr. Radvanyi later said that he had defected because the Hungarian Government
had given the United States false assurances about Hanoi's position on proposed
peace talks on Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Romuald Spaskowski

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EX-G.I.'S, IN HANOI, ARE HOPEFUL ON TALKS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Dec. 20


After six hours of talks with Hanoi officials, four American veterans of the
Vietnam War expressed hope today that the emotional issue of the 2,500 United
States servicemen still missing in Southeast Asia could be resolved in the near
future.

Robert O. Muller, executive director of the Vietnam Veterans of America, the
leader of the visiting group, urged the Vietnamese to invite the United States
to send personnel to assist in the search for the missing Americans. Such a step
would ''substantially improve'' Vietnam's relations with the United States and
ease the ''logistical burdens'' that the Vietnamese claim to have in hunting for
the remains of the servicemen.

Most of the 2,500 servicemen missing in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia are believed
dead, although anguished American families believe that some of them remain
alive as prisoners of war. Reagan Administration officials believe that the
Vietnamese Government has been uncooperative in the search for the missing
Americans, although the Hanoi Government insists that there are no American
prisoners of war alive in Vietnam, and all remains have been handed over to the
American side.

Vo Hoang, director of the Vietnamese office in charge of finding missing
Americans, said that the ''logistical problems were enormous'' in terms of
sending out helicopters and search parties to jungles to hunt for the remains.
Mr. Hoang told Mr. Muller that there was ''considerable hostility'' in villages
to search parties looking for Americans.

Interested In American Proposal

''The village people ask why are we doing this for the Americans,'' Mr. Hoang
said. ''Why do we dwell on the past? Why don't we build the future?''

Nonetheless, Mr. Muller, a 36-year-old former Marine, said that the Vietnamese
''viewed with interest'' his group's proposal to send Americans to Vietnam to
join the search.

''This type of move would remove a very clear obstacle to the development of
relations between Hanoi and the United States,'' Mr.  Muller said. ''We told
them that, and they knew it.''

The Vietnamese, in a meeting with the four Americans who are here unofficially,
also promised to allow more Vietnam War veterans to visit the country.

''I get the distinct sense that the Vietnamese want to have good relations with
the United States Government,'' Mr. Muller said.  Other members of the group who
are visiting Vietnam for six days are Michael Harbert, a former Air Force
sergeant, Tom Bird, an infantryman during the war with the 1st Air Cavalry
Division and John Terzano, a former Navy seaman. All are members of the Vietnam
Veterans of America.

Several Blunt Exchanges

The group has held several blunt exchanges with Vietnamese officials and has had
some internal bickering and conflicts. This morning, for example, the group
reluctantly agreed to acquiesce to a Vietnamese request to lay a wreath at the
tomb of Ho Chi Minh, but only after asking the Vietnamese to bar photographs.

The veterans themselves, traveling around the city in Russian-made limousines to
meet Vietnamese officials, express a range of emotions as they gaze at
Vietnamese families pedaling bicycles over the streets.

''Its so quiet, and the primitive level of everything here is stunning,'' Mr.
Muller said. ''When you see this place it's almost obscene to think what we
dumped on these people. There's nothing here.''

Mr. Harbert said that the ''standard opening lines of rhetoric at each meeting
about United States imperialism'' disturbed him.  ''I don't like it,'' he said.
''I'd like to reply. They've done some pretty nasty things too.'' Mr. Bird, who
is currently director of the Veterans Ensemble Theater in New York, said ''a
couple of years ago I would have been given a medal for shooting some of the
people I'm meeting with.''

''It blows my mind,'' he went on.  ''What a crazy world this is.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF PRIME MINISTER BEGIN'S STATEMENT TO THE U.S. ENVOY TO ISRAEL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1260 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Dec. 20


Following is a transcript of Prime Minister Menachem Begin's statement to the
United States Ambassador, Samuel W. Lewis, as read today by Cabinet Secretary
Aryeh Naor and translated from the Hebrew by The New York Times

Over the last six months, the United States Government has punished Israel three
times. On the seventh of June we destroyed the nuclear reactor Osirak near
Baghdad. And I don'twant to tell you today from whom we received the information
that this reactor was about to produce atomic bombs. We did not doubt it.
Therefore our action was one of rescue, an act of national self-defense in the
highest sense of the term. We saved the lives of hundreds of thousands of
citizens, among them tens of thousands of children.

Nevertheless, you announced that you were punishing us, and you breached a
signed contract that included dates of deliveries of aircraft.

Not much time passed before, in self-defense, and after some of our people were
murdered - three killed, including a survivor of Auschwitz, and 29 wounded - we
bombed the P.L.O. headquarters in Beirut.

You don't have the right, from a moral perspective, to preach to us regarding
civilian loss of life. We have read the history of World War II, and we know
what happened to civilians when you took action against the enemy. We have also
read the history of the Vietnam War, and your concept of ''body counts.'' We
always make efforts to prevent casualties among civilians, but sometimes this is
unavoidable, as happened in the bombing of the P.L.O. headquarters.
Nevertheless, you punished us, and you suspended the delivery of F-15's.

The Golan Heights

A week ago, as per the Cabinet's proposal, the Knesset passed by a decisive
two-thirds majority the Golan Heights law. Now you are once again priding
yourselves on punishing Israel.

What kind of talk is this, ''punishing Israel?'' Are we a vassal state of yours?
Are we a banana republic? Are we 14-year-olds who, if we misbehave, we get our
wrists slapped? Let me tell you whom this Cabinet comprises. It is composed of
people whose lives were marked by resistance, fighting and suffering.

You will not frighten us with punishments. He who threatens us will find us deaf
to his threats. We are willing to listen only to rational arguments. You have no
right to punish Israel, and I protest the use of this term.

Memorandum of Understanding

You announced that you were suspending the discussion of the memorandum of
understanding on strategic cooperation. And your resumption of participation in
talks whose dates were set in advance will be conditional on progress in the
autonomy talks and on the situation in Lebanon.

You are trying to make Israel a hostage to the meorandum of understanding. I
regard your announcement of the suspension of the discussion of the memorandum
of understanding as its cancellation. No sword of Damocles will hang over our
head. We take note of the fact that you have canceled the memorandum of
understanding.

The people of Israel have lived 3,700 years without a memorandum of
understanding with America and will continue to live without it another 3,700
years. In our eyes, it is a cancellation of the memorandum.

We shall not agree to your demand that we permit the Arabs of East Jerusalem to
participate in the elections to the autonomy institutions and that if we don't
agree, you will suspend the memorandum.

You have subjected us to financial punishment, and you have broken the
President's word. When Secretary of State Haig was here, he read from President
Reagan's written note that you would buy $200 million worth of arms and other
equipment. This is breaking the President's word. Is this acceptable and proper?

You canceled another $100 mliiion. What did you want to do? To hit us in the
pocketbook?In 1946 an English general named Barker lived in this house. Now I
live here. When we fought him, you called us terrorists, and we continued to
fight. After we attacked his headquarters in the King David Hotel, Barker said,
''This race will be affected only when we hit it in its pocketbook.'' And he
ordered his British soldiers not to patronize Jewish cafes any longer.

Hitting us in the pocketbook was Barker's philosophy.

The Saudi Arms Deal

Now I understand all this effort in the Senate to win a majority for the arms
deal with Saudi Arabia, accompanied by an ugly anti-Semitic campaign. First we
heard the slogan 'Begin or Reagan,' and then it followed that anyone who opposed
the deal with Saudi Arabia supported a foreign head of state and was not loyal
to the United States. And thus Senators like Jackson, Kennedy, Packwood and of
course Senator Boschwitz are not loyal citizens.

Afterward we heard the slogan, 'We will not let the Jews determine the foreign
policy of the United States.' What does this slogan mean? The Greek minority in
the United States determined the Senate deciision that deprived Turkey of arms
deliveries after it invaded Cyprus.

No one will frighten the large and free Jewish community of the United States.
No one will succeed in deterring them with anti-Semitic propaganda. They will
stand by our side. This is the land of their forefathers, and they have a right
and a duty to support it.

There are those who say we must rescind the Golan Heights law that was passed in
the Knesset. To rescind is a concept from the days of the Inquisition. Our
forefathers were burned at the stake and would not rescind their faith.

We do not have to burn at the stake. We, thank God, have enough strength to
defend our independence and our rights. If the matter depended on me, I would
say that the law should not be rescinded. But as far as I know, there is no one
in the entire world who can influence the Knesset to repeal the law that was
passed by a twothirds majority.

U.N. Resolution 242

Mr. Weinberger said, and afterward Mr. Haig, that the passage of the law harms
Security Council Resolution 242. Whoever says this either did not read the
resolution, or forgot it or did not understand it. The essense of the resolution
is negotiations for the determination of recognized, secure borders. Syria
announced that it would not negotiate with us, that it does not recognize us and
that it will not recognize us. And thus it took the essence out of 242.  How
could we therefore harm 242?

As to the future, kindly inform the Secretary of State that the Golan Heights
law will remain in force. There is no power on earth that will bring about its
repeal. As to the claim that we surprised you, the truth is that we did not want
to embarrass you.

We knew your difficulties. You come to Riyadh and Damascus. And it was President
Reagan who said that Mr. Begin was right. If Israel had come to the United
States in the first place about the law, the United States would have said no.
We did not want you to say no and then afterward to apply Israeli law to the
Golan. Our intention was to not embarrass you.

On the matter of Lebanon, I asked that the Secretary of State be informed that
we will not initiate a war, but if we are attacked by the terrorists or the
Syrians, we will respond by a counterattack.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Aryeh Naor

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
MONDAY, DECEMBER 21, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 930 words


International
Prime Minister Menachem Begin charged the Reagan Administration with
anti-Semitism and with treating Israel like a ''vassal state.'' His statement
came in response to the Administration's indefinite suspension of further
discussion on a strategic accord with Israel because of its annexation of the
Golan Heights. (Page A1, Column 6.)
Despite Israel's bitter reaction to Washington's suspension of further talks on
carrying out the American-Israeli agreement, the Reagan Administration said it
hoped that the accord would not be canceled. Prime Minister Begin responded to
the suspension in terms that no State Department official could ever remember
coming from an ally. (A1:4-5.)
The U.S. granted political asylum to Romuald Spasowski, the Polish Ambassador to
Washington, who was Poland's senior diplomat. He said in Washington in a message
to Americans and Poles that his defection was ''my expression of solidarity''
with Lech Walesa. (A1:2.)
Steady resistance to martial law was acknowledged by Polish authorities. Tass,
the Soviet press agency, reported that Solidarity union activists had blown up
the exit from a mine in southern Poland, trapping hundreds of miners. Reports
from Poland's official news media, monitored outside the country, indicated that
strikes and sit-ins continued on the Baltic coast, and in northwest Poland.
(A1:1.)
The issue of the U.S. servicemen still missing in Southeast Asia after the end
of the Vietnam War could be resolved in the near future, according to the four
American veterans who were invited to Hanoi by Vietnamese officials. Robert
Muller, executive director of the Vietnam Veterans of America, the leader of the
visiting group, urged the Vietnamese to invite the United States to send
personnel to assist in the search for the missing Americans, saying that such
action would ''substantially improve'' Vietnam's relations with the United
States. (A3:4-6.)
National
Approval of $45 billion in new taxes over the next two fiscal years by President
Reagan is being sought by several senior White House advisers and Administration
budget officials. An Administration official said that the proposal to generate
the taxes was based on new economic forecasts that would be presented to
disclosed to Mr.  Reagan by midweek. (A1:3.)
Violence persists at Santa Fe's prison nearly two years after the most savage
prison riot in the nation's history and despite the large amounts of money and
manpower the state has provided for its prison system with wide public support,
and a reduction in the number of inmates by 500 of its most violent members.
(A1:5-6.)
The theft of college test materials used to determine the eligibility of foreign
students for admission to American colleges and universities has resulted in the
arrest in San Francisco of two persons believed to be Taiwanese. The arrests
have led to an investigation to determine whether there is a ''coaching school''
in Taiwan that helps Chinese gain admission to American educational
institutions. (A22:1-2.)
A White House nomination was blocked by an aide to President Reagan, who
overruled other Administration officials in their choice of a Senate staff
member to become a member of the Interstate Commerce Commission. Michael K.
Deaver, the deputy White House chief of staff, intervened. The nominee, William
K. Ris Jr., counsel to the Democrats on the Senate Commerce Committee, was
opposed by the head of a trucking organization that had employed Mr. Deaver as a
public relations consultant. (A25:1-6.)
Metropolitan
Hope for New York City's future has dimmed markedly over the last four years,
according to a poll of the city's residents. In addition, nearly half of the
participants in the poll said they would rather be living somewhere else four
years from now. (A1:3-4.)
Both the Giants and the Jets qualified for postseason play in the National
Football League after the Jets beat the Green Bay Packers, 28-3, at Shea
Stadium. The Giants, who had defeated the Dallas Cowboys on Saturday, became
eligible for the playoffs because the Packers and the Detroit Lions lost and
were eliminated. (A1:1-3.)
The Reagan proposals for the aged hospitalized in nursing homes or long-term
care facilities raised protests from nursing home associations and state
officials. They reacted with dismay and bafflement to the Administration's plans
to relax or repeal many Federal health regulations affecting the treatment of
aged patients.  (B1:6.)
The Sun Belt as a job center is catching up with the Northeast and for some jobs
is paying blue- and white-collar workers higher wages than New York City,
traditionally one of the nation's sources of high wages. This reversal is
described as ''a historical turnaround of quite a fundamental sort'' by Samuel
M. Ehrenhalt, Regional Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics in New
York, who provided the analysis of the Federal data. (B2:1-4.)
The 375-354 vote by parishioners of St. Bartholomew's Episcopal Church on Park
Avenue on Friday in favor of building a 59-story office tower on the site of its
community house will be challenged in court by other church members who oppose
the project, according to J. Sinclair Armstrong, the opposition's leader.
(B3:4-6.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 22, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN VETERANS TREATED WARMLY IN A THREADBARE HANOI

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 819 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 21


Darkness falls quickly in Hanoi now, and by 6 P.M. the steets are silent except
for the sound of bicycles wheeling lazily beneath the banyan and pines.

''Its very drab, very isolating,'' said a young Asian diplomat eating soup in a
crowded downtown restaurant. ''Life doesn't change here much. You live in a kind
of suspended animation waiting for something to happen, but nothing does. I keep
thinking I lost two years of my life in this place.''

Hanoi is a threadbare but still graceful city filled with contrasts. The other
night at the Cuban-built Tang Loi Hotel a small group of foreigners, including
four visiting American veterans of the Vietnam War, were seated in the gloomy
dining room celebrating a birthday with a bottle of French champagne. A large
rat darted past the table. The waitress giggled.

The Americans voiced amazement at the simplicity of the city. ''You visit Ho Chi
Minh's two-room wooden-frame house, and you see two phones, one to the army and
one to the air force, and that's how he carried on the war against us,'' said
Robert O. Muller, executive director of the Vietnam Veterans of America. ''It
knocked me out. It was so incredibly basic.''

Vietnamese 'Incredibly Warm'

If the American veterans were nervous about their trip to a country and people
they had fought against, the mood was quickly dispelled as soon as they climbed
off the plane from Bangkok, Thailand, on Friday. In encounters with passers-by
on the street and in dinners and meetings with Vietnamese officials to discuss
two main issues - the fate of the 2,500 United States servicemen still listed as
missing in action and the impact of the defoilant Agent Orange in Vietnam - the
reaction from the Vietnamese has been what one of the veterans, Tom Bird, called
''incredibly warm and sensitive and friendly.''

Visiting a war museum in downtown Hanoi, where photographs and weapons depict
the campaign against the Americans, one of the veterans, Michael Harbert, a
former Air Force weapons controller who flew 47 missions over North Vietnam,
stared at an outdoor exhibit of a Soviet MIG-21 perched atop parts of the
wreckage of an American B-52. Mr. Harbert stepped away from his colleagues and
suddenly began weeping.

''I haven't cried in 14 years,'' said the 35-year-old New Yorker.  ''I don't
know what happened. It's the face-to-face reality of seeing that MIG, with its
14 stars meaning it shot down 14 planes, and seeing that wreckage. They are
proud of it, and I guess they have a right to be, but it just upset me.''

As Mr. Harbert wept, his startled Vietnamese hosts expressed worry and confusion
about why the museum visit had stirred him.

Veterans Are Uninhibited

The veterans, without a trace of inhibition, move down such busy streets as
Trang Tien behaving like the servicemen they once were, passing out candy and
chewing gum to giggling children, nodding to pretty girls and striking up
conversations with people in bookshops and gift stores.

Many of the Vietnamese have heard of the Americans' visit over the Voice of
America, which seems to be the main source of outside information.

''You were hurt in the war,'' said an elderly man in sandals, pointing to Mr.
Muller's wheelchair as a crowd gathered around the veterans on a street in
downtown Hanoi. Mr. Muller replied with a smile: ''I was in the Marines. Shot
through the chest by an AK-47.''

The old man shrugged. ''Welcome to our city,'' he said. ''Come back again.''

More Outgoing Than Russians

Vietnamese Government officials accompanying the Americans grin and seem a
little startled at the outgoing nature of the Americans, especially as compared
with the hundreds of Soviet technicians and their wives who stroll downtown
aloof and without a word or a nod to the Vietnamese.

''The veterans are so cheerful and friendly,'' a Vietnamese official said. ''We
know the American people are like that.'' At formal meetings with the veterans,
officials inevitably point out that they have ''never have any animosity toward
the American people.'' American Governments, on the other hand, have ''lied and
sought the destruction of our country,'' the Vietnamese say.

Asian and Western diplomats in Hanoi agree that many Vietnamese miss the
personal contact with Americans that they once had. A Western diplomat observed:
''The Vietnamese had 1,000 years of domination under the Chinese, 100 under the
French and 8 under the Americans. You fellows are egalitarians. You treated
Vietnamese with a level of equality that other foreigners never did. There is,
in retrospect, a residue of good will toward the G.I.'s that's very, very
strong.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 22, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 592 words


HEARINGS HELD ON BAN OF VIETNAM WAR BOOK

BANGOR, Me., Dec. 21 (UPI) - The author of a book on the Vietnam War that was
banned by a rural school board because it contained obscene language said today
that only four-letter words could capture the anguish of the wounded soldiers he
depicted.

''The truth as I saw it was that common language failed,'' the author, Dr.
Ronald J. Glasser, testifed at the opening of a Federal District Court hearing.
''It didn't express their anguish. It wasn't enough.''

The case arose after the School Committee in Baileyville, a paper mill town of
2,200 residents on the Canadian border, voted unamiously in April to remove from
its high school library Dr.  Glasser's book ''365 Days,'' a compilation of 17
vignettes of soldiers critically wounded in battle.

Dr. Glasser, a Minneapolis pediatrician, treated wounded soldiers at an Army
hospital in Japan during the war.

'Words Used Every Day'

''I would rather not have used those words. It was not appropriate to me not to
use the words that were used every day,'' he said. ''It showed how desperate
they were.''

Michael Sheck, a former Baileyville High School pupil, now a University of Maine
freshman, challenged the ban and filed the class action suit against the school
committee, asserting that the panel had violated students' First Amendment
rights.

The Maine Civil Liberties Union is representing the plaintiffs.  Mary Ann
Davenport of Baileyville, whose daughter brought the book home from the school
library, asked the school committee to ban the book.

''I glanced through it to see what was in it,'' Mrs. Davenport testified in the
opening day of the hearing. ''I took note of the number of times all the
questionable words were used in the book. It didn't need to use that language.''


Judge to Decide on Trial

Judge Conrad J. Cyr said he would decide after the two-day hearing whether to
issue an injunction against the book ban or schedule a trial on the case.

Thomas Golden, chairman of the school committee, testified that he felt the
obscene language in ''365 Days'' was unnecessary. ''If I were a soldier lying in
bed and found out my leg had been amputated, I don't think I would use those
words.''

Several journalists, including Ward Just, a contributing editor with The
Atlantic Monthly, who covered the war for The Washington Post, and Frances
Fitzgerald, who won a national book award for his Vietnam War book, ''Fire In
The Lake,'' are scheduled to testify against the ban.

Gloria Emerson, who covered the war for The New York Times, said today: ''It's
not an obscene book. It's a beautiful and important record of the results of the
war on these young soldiers.''

Judge Cyr delayed until Jan. 5 a decision on a request by attorneys that an
independent documentary film crew be allowed to enter the courtroom.

The crew is working under a grant from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting
in preparing a documentary on various book banning cases in the United States.

----

Veterans Protest Book Ban

BANGOR, Dec. 21 (AP) -Clad in camouflage uniforms like those they wore in
combat, a half-dozen Vietnam veterans stood in subfreezing temperatures this
morning outside the Federal courthouse where hearings were being held on the
banning of ''365 Days.''

''War is obscene, not history,'' read a sign carried by the protesters.  The
veterans, from Calais, Portland and Bangor, stood at attention, displaying an
American flag and a black flag bearing the initials of their organization,
Vietnam-era Combat Veterans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 22, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 22, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 918 words


International
A strike by 2,800 Polish coal miners in Silesia was confirmed by the Warsaw
radio. There were also reports that activists from the Solidarity labor movement
had barricaded themselves inside a steel mill in Katowice. The broadcasts,
monitored outside Poland, said that the miners had been on strike since last
Tuesday. (Page A1, Col. 6.)
Pope John Paul II extolled freedom in his annual peace message. He declared that
all men should strive to prevent every form of warfare, but he added that
''peoples have a right and even a duty to protect their existence and freedom''
against an unjust aggressor. (A1:2.)
Possible sanctions against Poland and the Soviet Union if martial law is not
eased soon were discussed by President Reagan and the National Security Council,
Administration officials said. They also said any announcements on trade or
financial sanctions would not be made until consultations with allies are
concluded in a day or so. (A1:5.)
American Jewish spokesmen urged Israel and the United States to reassert their
ties in the face of what was widely regarded as the worse crisis in relations
between the two allies. The spokesmen said they doubted that Israel would
rescind its annexation of the Golan Heights, and most urged Washington to cancel
its suspension of a strategic accord. (A12:1-2.)
A resignation at the Voice of America created a stir. The departing official is
Bernard H. Kamenske, the news divison director, who is a strong advocate of
journalistic independence for the agency.  Journalists at the Voice of America
say that there has been an increasing tendency under the Reagan Administration
to increase the network's propaganda or commentary function. (A7:1.)
National
A reopening of auto labor contracts appears increasingly likely. The United
Automobile Workers union said that its councils at General Motors and Ford would
meet on Jan. 8 to decide whether talks should be opened to modify the existing
contracts or negotiate new ones because of the industry's financial troubles.
(A1:1.)
Forty-two buildings were damaged by an explosion in a coin-operated laundry in
Sylacauga, Ala. The blast also injured three persons and ignited a fire that
leveled half a block. The fire chief said that natural gas was leaking at the
site but that the cause of the blast was undetermined. (A16:1.)
The uranium industry is depressed, in part because of the 1979 accident at the
Three Mile Island nuclear plant in Pennsylvania and the consequent opposition of
many Americans to nuclear power. The signs at Grants, N.M., on old Route 66,
describe it as ''the uranium capital of the world,'' but it is now dying.
(A1:1-2.)
An author defended his banned book at a Federal Court hearing in Bangor, Me. Dr.
Ronald J. Glasser, who wrote ''365 Days,'' containing 17 vignettes about the
Vietnam War, testified that only four-letter words could capture the anguish of
the wounded soldiers he depicted.  (A9:1-3.)
The issue of nuclear safeguards has provoked sharp debate among technical
experts. Some American specialists charge that the International Atomic Energy
Agency is not capable of detecting all clandestine diversions of nuclear
material to weapons building, but other experts say that the detection
capabilities, although imperfect, are good enough to deter any potential
wrongdoer.  (C1:1-4.)
The occurrence of toxic shock not involving menstruating women who use tampons
is much wider than previously thought, according to a new study by the Federal
Centers for Disease Control. The study found that the victims of the potentially
fatal syndrome include postsurgical patients, burn patients, women who have just
given birth and people with boils and abscesses. (C1:5-6.)
Metropolitan
A New Jersey state trooper was slain in a shootout on Interstate 80 just east of
the Pennsylvania border. The trooper, 32-year-old Philip Lamonaco, had won seven
commendations and was named Trooper of the Year in 1979 by a state police awards
board that cited him for courage and outstanding police work. (A1:4-6.)
Concern over crime has grown sharply among New York City residents in the last
four years, and their confidence in the ability of the authorities to combat
crime has dropped, according to a New York Times survey. More than six in 10 of
the 1,146 adults interviewed said that they or someone close to them had been
robbed or mugged in the city in the last two years. Of those respondents, only
one in 10 said the criminal had been captured. (B1:5-6.)
Higher top salaries in Trenton are sought by Governor-elect Thomas H. Kean. Mr.
Kean, one of the wealthiest men elected to New Jersey's highest office, said he
would accept a $100,000 salary, including a $35,000 raise. He said he was having
trouble attracting the people he wants for his Cabinet and that he wanted to
offer them higher salaries. (B3:2-4.)
Tentative interest in The Daily News has been expressed by Warner Communications
Inc., the diversified New York-based entertainment company. Felix G. Rohatyn,
the investment banker, has begun talks with representatives of both companies to
determine whether it seemed feasible for Warner to explore the possibility of
buying the newspaper. (B3:4-5.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 22, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR ARMY FORCES, A PLEA FOR SUPPLIES;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1073 words

DATELINE: FORT MCPHERSON, Ga.


There is nothing militarily spectacular about Forces Command headquarters here.
Aside from the uniforms and two brass cannons at the entrance, this quiet
building might be the home office of any major corporation. In a sense, that is
what it is.

The command's mission is to direct in war the mobilization, deployment and
training of more than 750,000 soldiers of the active Army, the Reserve and the
National Guard. The war mission of every Reserve and Guard unit from divisions
to dental care teams has been assigned under the Capstone program, which also
ties these units to active Army units for peacetime training and planning.

Gen. Robert E. Shoemaker, the officer at the head of Forces Command, described
his mission as providing ''trained units that can mobilize, deploy and win in
combat.''

Forces Command is the largest organization in the military establishment. Its
troops are the strategic reserve of the Army, the largest such reserve in the
non-Communist world and the only one with a global mission.

The command's authorized strength includes 290,000 regulars scattered from
Alaska to Panama and from Fort Devens in Massachusetts to Fort MacArthur in
southern California, 251,000 reserves and 412,000 soldiers of the National Guard
who would come under Federal authority on mobilization.

Crisis Duty With Seventh Army

The active Army forces include 11 divisions, six brigades, an armored cavalry
regiment and dozens of smaller combat, combat support and combat service support
units. Of these, eight divisions, an infantry brigade and the cavalry regiment
are scheduled to reinforce the Seventh Army in Europe in a crisis.

Army recruiting is prospering and the educational level of the volunteers has
improved. But senior officers are unhappy about the speed with which new weapons
and equipment are reaching the troops.

Expectations of a flood of new weapons that encouraged the Army in the first
weeks of the Reagan Administration have given way to exasperation. The Army
believes it must be ready to fight a conventional war and that it is not now
ready. Meanwhile, it sees public attention and dollars focused on spectacular
strategic nuclear weapons.

In an interview, General Shoemaker, who is retiring next year, said, ''We need
not only weapons but trucks, ammunition trailers and radios for the Total
Army,'' the official name for the active Army, Reserve and Guard.

Another general officer who asked that his name be withheld, predicted that it
would be from one to two years before needed weapons reached the field army.
Meanwhile, he said bitterly, American M-60 tanks, a product of the technology of
the 1950's, might have to fight Soviet T-64's, a modern sophisticated tank.

Reduction of Tank Strength

The slow delivery of the new M-1 tank, some commanders said, is forcing a
reduction in the tank strength of armored battalions to 48 or even 32 tanks
instead of the regulation 54.

''That's what we mean when we talk about 'a hollow army,' '' one officer said.
Forces Command has worked out a seemingly intricate but basically simple system
that integrates the reserve components, the Reserves and Guard, into training.
Wherever possible these units train with the command with which they will deploy
and fight in war. Because they have been assigned their war mission, the reserve
component units can use training time for the jobs they will be called upon to
carry out in a war.

Mobilization plans cover three phases. One is partial mobilization, which would
involve calling up some Reserve and Guard units. The second is full
mobilization, which would involve all the forces now under this command. The
third is total mobilization, which would mean the revival of the draft and the
formation of what one officer estimated as ''a couple of hundred divisions.''

In the view of officers here a war crisis with the Soviet Union would see full
mobilization followed rapidly by total mobilization.  The Total Army, even when
fully mobilized, would be far smaller than that of the Soviet Union. Here the
emphasis is on assuring that the mobilized units can be inserted quickly into
the overall program.

One method is to give support to high priority reserve component units of either
the Reserves or the Guard support from the active Army. The object is higher
mobilization and deployment readiness.

Units on Part-Time Basis

Another method is ''roundout.'' Some active divisions are maintained at less
than full strength. The missing brigade or battalion is supplied by the Guard or
the Reserve on a part-time basis. On mobilization, that unit would become part
of the division rounding it out to war strength.

''Augmentation'' is another method. Under it a reserve component unit is added
to an active Army formation to increase its power. An artillery or infantry unit
will be attached to a division as a special asset on mobilization.

Finally, there is the partnership program, which pairs all major reserve
component combat units with active Army formations for training support, quality
evaluation and assistance.

The Cohort program is one of the most interesting of the Army's new programs.
Strongly supported by Gen. Edward C. Meyer, the Chief of Staff, the program
aims, at this point, at creating company sized units that will stay together for
a three-year term.

The units will go through their basic training and advanced training in the
combat arms and then join a battalion. The object is to establish companies free
of the personnel turbulence that has marked many Army units since the end of the
Vietnam war.

The program owes something to the British Army system, which seeks to keep
soldiers together throughout their service and, when possible, to recruit them
from the same geographical area. Also it tries to inculcate that sense of unit
pride that most senior officers regard as the basis of battlefield morale.

Twenty of these companies have been formed and trained. This year seven were
sent to units of the Seventh Army in West Germany and four to the forces in
South Korea.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 23, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LATIN EXILES FOCUS ON NICARAGUA AS THEY TRAIN URGENTLY IN FLORIDA

BYLINE: By JO THOMAS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column Z; National Desk

LENGTH: 1162 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Dec. 22


In a camp near the Florida Everglades, the military training of exiles to
infiltrate and overthrow the Government of Nicaragua has taken on a special
urgency.

''Within three months the situation in Nicaragua will blow up,'' Hector Fabian,
one of the Cuban leaders of the exile group, the Inter-American Defense Force,
said. The force, which says it is financed by Panamanian and Cuban exile groups
and fund-raising efforts by Nicaraguans, has been training for months. It says
it is dedicated to the armed overthrow of the Governments of Nicaragua, Cuba and
Panama.

This year, according to Mr. Fabian, 800 exiles have been trained in the 78-acre
camp west of Miami, and, he says, at least 100 Nicaraguans have been infiltrated
across their country's borders to take up arms against their Government. One of
these was killed in October on the northern frontier, Mr. Fabian said.

Some exiles, such as Rene Selva, one of the Nicaraguan leaders who have been
living in exile in south Florida, are reported to have been able to travel in
and out of their country over the northern frontier with Honduras.

Diplomats Express Concern

The training of exiles in Florida and elsewhere in the United States has
concerned high-ranking Nicaraguan diplomats. According to Thomas O. Enders,
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, diplomats ''have raised
it to our attention a number of times.'' It is an issue involving basic
questions about how the Reagan Administration interprets the Neutrality Act of
1794, which forbids a military attack or a conspiracy to attack a nation with
which the United States is not at war.

''As long as they don't hurt anybody and as long as they don't actually conspire
to invade in a specific way,'' Mr. Enders said, the exiles are not breaking the
law.

''If you attack a country or assist in an attack on a country, or conspire to do
this, all these things are illegal,'' he said.  ''However, it is not illegal to
have military exercises, guys running around the fields with guns, or to say
'Uncle Sam, we're ready when you're ready -wink, wink - and here we go.' ''

''It's a problem of interpretation,'' Mr. Fabian said. ''Under the Carter and
Nixon administrations, what we were doing was a crime.  With the Reagan
Administration, no one has bothered us for 10 months.''

Mr. Fabian said he spent eight years directing the New York operations of
Orlando Bosch, who proclaimed himself in charge of anti-Castro terrorism in the
late 1960's and early 70's. Mr. Fabian said he himself had been interviewed by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation and by Federal grand juries 70 times from
1973 to 1980, but ''Dec. 5, 1980, was the last time the F.B.I. bothered me.''

Change in Attitude Seen

He said that the cause was a change in attitude in Washington.  ''For the first
time in 20 years,'' he said, ''the United States is disposed to defend its own
interests. Now, our fight fits. We're doing nothing against the law. We are on
private property, and we have no automatic weapons.''

In Miami, Welton Merry, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
said there had been no change in attitude toward the exile groups, but added
that the agency would probably not investigate their activities unless there was
some specific charge of a criminal conspiracy.

A recent visit to the camp itself indicated that the military training was more
disciplined and the trainees were more fit and more serious than they were in a
visit earlier this year. A greater number also seemed to be Nicaraguan, although
some were from Honduras as well as Cuba, Panama, Venezuela, Colombia and the
Dominican Republic.

The training course, which began Oct. 7 and is scheduled to end Jan. 28, is held
on weekends and on Wednesdays and Thursdays and provides instruction in
parachute jumping, urban warfare, guerrilla warfare, day and night navigation
and training for frogmen. According to Mr. Fabian, the students are those who
will serve as officers when they reach Nicaragua. The weapons being used were
AR-15's, the civilian version of the military M-16 rifle, and Ruger Mini-14's,
carbines that use M-16 cartridges.

Most Have Latin Backgrounds

The instructors include former United States Army Rangers and Vietnam veterans.
Of these, Mr. Fabian said, four are Americans with no family ties to the exile
communities, 11 are of Cuban descent and seven are Nicaraguans.

Mr. Fabian said he and several other Cubans, including the commander of the
camp, Jorge Gonzalez, better known by his nickname, ''Bombillo,'' or ''Light
Bulb,'' had approached officials at the Department of State and the Department
of Defense in search of assistance but have so far received nothing.

''We want arms and air support,'' Mr. Selva said.  In Washington, a
knowledgeable source in the Reagan Administration said that the exile groups had
indeed made an approach and confirmed that the intelligence agencies were aware
of the training facilities in Florida. This official said that no intelligence
agency had offered or planned to offer any support.

Haig Gives No Assurances

In testimony before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on Nov.  12, however,
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. declined to give assurances sought by a
committee member, Representative Gerry E. Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts,
that the United States would not support or encourage Nicaraguan exile groups in
this country or Honduras who might be trying to weaken or overthrow the
Sandinist Government in Nicaragua.

''We're always trying to get help,'' said Col. Salvador Arguello, one of the
Nicaraguans in charge of the training camp. ''We don't want the presence of any
North American soldier.'' He said that ''our friends'' in Nicaragua had the
soldiers, but ''we need resources'' and they were in the United States.

When asked whether the Nicaraguans were planning an invasion of their country,
Colonel Arguello answered, ''Invasion is a word we don't use.'' He said that the
Sandinist Government was ''already invaded by our forces and our people.''

''We want to initiate and assure a process,'' he said.  ''Our goal,'' Mr. Fabian
said, ''is the liberation of Nicaragua, Cuba and Panama, although the struggle
in Nicaragua is more advanced, and we've intensified our efforts.'' In the
future, he said, the group hoped to use Nicaragua as a base for an attack
against the Government of Cuba and to assist in a military coup to overthrow the
successors of Gen. Omar Torrijos, the late Panamanian leader.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of a Nicaraguan trainee (Page A14) Photo of some
of the 800 exiles at training camp near Miami (Page a14)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 23, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI AIDE WELCOMES STUDY OF HERBICIDE IMPACT

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 437 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 22


Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach told visiting Americans on Monday that Vietnam
would welcome specialists who wanted to study the impact of the herbicide Agent
Orange used during the war.

At the conclusion of a 90-minute meeting with four American veterans of the
Vietnam War, Mr. Thach embraced each one of them and said: ''We are all victims;
we are not enemies.''

In his remarks, he charged that the Reagan Administration remained hostile
toward Vietnam and he denied that the Vietnamese were withholding information
about the fate of 2,500 Americans missing in action.

He said Hanoi would henceforth deal on the issue with the Vietnam veterans'
group and not with Washington.  ''The Vietnamese Government will cooperate with
you on the missing in action on a humanitarian basis without any conditions,''
he said.  ''We will cooperate with you, not with Reagan and the Administration.
They have repaid our humanitarian activity with hostility.''

One of the Americans, Robert O. Muller, who is executive director of the Vietnam
Veterans of America, said later that he ''welcomed this new initiative.'' He
said his group would deal with Vietnam's mission to the United Nations.

Mr. Thach, who spoke in English, welcomed the visitors by saying: ''The way for
friendship is very long. The way for war is very short. The American people must
come to know the Vietnamese people.  We must cooperate with one another. Tell
your people that, between Vietnam and the American people, there was no victory
or defeat. We were all victims. It was a war of Johnson and Nixon against the
American people.''

Mr. Muller, a former Marine officer crippled in the war, said the ''priority
issues'' were the question of the missing in action as well as the problem of
the herbicide, which was sprayed as a defoliant in South Vietnam and may cause
cancer and birth defects.

Mr. Thach agreed to Mr. Muller's suggestion that American physicians and
scientists come to Vietnam to assess the impact of the herbicide. Mr. Muller
said his aim was to use the possible findings in connection with claims by
veterans that they and their offspring had been affected.

Mr. Thach said, ''We will cooperate with you,'' but he added that the Vietnamese
Government would grant visas only to investigators who were ''independent and
not connected with Reagan.'' Mr. Muller assured him that there were people not
connected with the Government who would come.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 23, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MONITOR SALVADOR'S BORDER

BYLINE: By Rusty Davenport

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 853 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The killing in El Salvador is spilling northward across the border into
neighboring Honduras with increasing and alarming frequency. The targets are
Salvadoran refugees, relief workers, and Honduran civilians.

The military strategy appears to be to clear the remote mountainous region,
which runs the length of the border, in order to turn the frontier into a new
combat zone. The appearance of a member of the United States Special Forces,
reported to me by five Salvadoran refugees and Honduran civilians, strongly
suggests some measure of United States complicity in this strategy.

A recent victim of Salvadoran raids into Honduras was 30-year-old Lucio Aguirre,
a Honduran working in the refugee camps for the Roman Catholic relief agency
Caritas. He was murdered Dec. 7 by members of the Salvadoran National Guard in
the village of La Cuesta, in southwestern Honduras, according to eyewitness
accounts by reliefagency personnel. About a month earlier, a Caritas worker was
kidnapped and summarily executed and seven Salvadoran refugees were kidnapped -
two from La Cuesta and five from Guajiniquil, a nearby hamlet - though the
chance presence of an international aid delegation prevented a massacre at the
nearby La Virtud refugee camp.

Relief workers and visitors (I was among them) were initially caught by surprise
when 30 Salvadoran soldiers marched across the somnolent plaza shortly before
noon and entered the local Honduran military barracks. Minutes later, we were
jolted by a message that the Salvadorans had entered the camp, which held 3,000
refugees, and were taking prisoners at gunpoint. The armed Salvadorans, some of
them soldiers and others identified by refugees as members of the death squad
known as Orden, were kidnapping 20 peasants. The ragged procession was being
hurried toward the El Salvador border, two and a half miles away. There was no
mistaking the soldiers' purpose.  ''Please don't let them take me away,'' cried
a captive, his thumbs tied behind his bent back. ''I don't want to die.''

Our requests for Honduran help in protecting the refugees were refused, so we
chased the raiders along the bank of a narrow stream, haranguing them with
threats of international exposure. Eventually, the prisoners were released but
not before several were beaten with rifle butts and several of us were
threatened. A second kidnapping attempt by uniformed Salvadoran soldiers, this
one involving 10 refugees, was also blocked by our intervention, though some of
our cameras and most of our film were confiscated and one relief worker was
slammed in the guts with a rifle barrel. (I was seized but got away.)

Honduran officials were quick to deny that the incident took place, while State
Department officials in Washington initially tried to attribute it to hot
pursuit of leftist guerrillas. While such responses are by now predictable, they
were - for once - contradicted by facts that call into question far more than
the particulars of this single event.

Based upon our first-hand observation and photographs of the incident, members
of both groups of kidnappers were identified as Salvadoran Army regulars. The
links between them and the Honduran Army were apparent - we saw them all
rendezvous in the center of the town, and later Honduran troops refused to block
the kidnappings.

The Reagan Administration is encouraging cooperation between the two Central
American governments. There are United States military training missions in both
countries; the Green Beret was seen in La Virtud two days before the November
kidnappings. State Department officials routinely describe the refugee camps as
''hotbeds of support for the guerrillas.''

Under these circumstances, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that
Washington encourages, at least tacitly, the type of operation now being carried
out in La Virtud and the surrounding area.

The scenario is familiar. It harks back to the repeated American attempts to
seal the Vietnam border and create a free-fire zone in order to to prevent the
movement of hostile troops and their materiel in the area.

But widening of the conflict in El Salvador will have its greatest effects on
the civilian populations of both countries, while having a neglible impact on
the Salvadoran guerrillas, who are seldom seen close to the border.

If this region is turned into a free-fire zone, the lives of thousands of
refugees and Honduran peasant farmers will be endangered. Further, those
displaced by the war inside El Salvador will be directly threatened as they seek
to escape to Honduras, for there will be no access to the refugee camps.

If a bloodbath is to be avoided, a continuous international presence -United
Nations and church monitors, for example - is necessary along the border. What
is also needed is a clear statement by all the Governments involved - including
that of the United States - that innocent civilians will not be made military
targets.  ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Rusty Davenport is Latin-American projects officer for Oxfam America, a
humanitarian aid agency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 23, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 503 words


In Siberia, a writer steps into the path of progress A2
Druse families still meet in Golan zone controlled by U.N.  A3
Syrian leader flies to Saudi Ara- bia for talks A3
Brezhnev says he still favors meeting with Reagan A4
Salvadoran rebel leader appeals for arms aid A6
Polish regime to relax curfew for Christmas Eve mass A8
Vietnamese Foreign Minister welcomes U.S. war veterans A10
Around the World A11
Catholics in Northern Ireland bit- ter about house searches A11

Government/Politics
Bell criticizes Federal rules on colleges A12
Council leaders say plan could lead to elections in spring B3
State agency orders Consolidated Edison refund of $40 million B3

Washington Talk
Briefing B4
Embassy row B4
A look at past and present White House Christmases B4
An Administration official speaks for cities and states B4

Energy
Panel asks proposed diesel pollu- tion limits be delayed D16

General
Ex-Nazi loses citizenship but is al- lowed to stay in U.S.  A14
Ex-C.I.A. agent's business associ- ate arrested in Texas A14
Around the Nation A14
Five-year, $7.9 billion transit im- provement plan is approved B7

Health/Science
Generic drug law upheld by New York Court of Appeals B3

The Living Section
Food The nitrite question: What can you eat?  C1

The seasoning of a three-star chef C1

A treasury of Dickens's drink recipes C3

The 60-Minute Gourmet C3

Wine Talk C7
Living Christmas spirit - on the family plan C1

Metropolitan Diary C2

Personal Health C5

Best Buys C6

Discoveries C8

Arts/Entertainment
Marketing of films; right way and wrong way C9
Pro Arte Chamber Orchestra with Swiss pianist C10
Y Chamber Symphony presents Mozart and French music C10
Chic discovers there is life after disco C12
Hee-Sun Lee in oboe recital C13
''Hansel and Gretel'' at Met C13
Richard Westenburg and Musica Sacra present ''Messiah'' C13

Features/Notes
About New York B3
Sports People B9
Notes on People C20
Going Out Guide C12

Obituaries
Allan Dwan, movie director B5

Sports
Red Smith on Bowie Kuhn and his opponents B6
Pat Sheehan prospering in shift from skiing to golf B6
John Henry named horse of the year B6
76ers down Knicks, 112-105 B7
Islanders win 5th in row, topping Jets, 5-2 B7
Yanks close to agreement with Collins but not Jackson B7
Giants' unanswered question is availability of Van Pelt B7
B6
Jets' Ward has score to settle with Bills B7
Patriots dismiss Ron Erhardt B8

News Analysis
John Herbers on priorities of state and local officials A12
Tony Schwartz assesses cable TV's present and future C8

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18

The recession dividend Making coal pay for itself How ideology drowns charity
Topics: space, time and mud Letters A18
James Reston: the old and new Jerusalem A19
Russell Baker: Red and dead as a doornail A19
Robert Pastor: for a Caribbean compact A19
Edward G. Rogoff: disserving taxi riders A19
Rusty Davenport: monitor El Sal- vador's border A19

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 24, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET READY TO BOLSTER ITS AFGHAN FORCE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 791 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 23


The Soviet Union is preparing to send more military forces and equipment,
particularly helicopters, into Afghanistan, according to military analysts here.

The analysts are surprised, they said, because only a few weeks ago they saw no
signs of such a move. They thought then that Moscow would not send more troops
into Afghanistan so it could give priority to forces that might be needed for
Poland.

The Soviet high command, which sent a survey team of senior officers to Kabul
recently, appears to have decided that it must add to its 85,000 to 90,000
troops in Afghanistan because they are bogged down.

United States officials said they had seen evidence of preparations for the
reinforcements in the Soviet Union near Afghanistan, including the assembly of
helicopters and the gathering of ground forces. The officials would not discuss
how they got their information, but it is known that satellites have the areas
under constant surveillance.

In the two years since Soviet troops moved into Afghanistan, they have been
unable to defeat the Afghan resistance and have barely been able to contain it,
the analysts said, despite the overwhelming superiority of Soviet firepower and
sophisticated weapons.

Some Reasons for Failure

They said that Soviet leaders had been slow to adapt their tactics, which are
designed for conventional land warfare, to counterinsurgency, that Soviet troops
suffered from poor morale and discipline and that many weapons, such as tanks
and armored personnel carriers, were inadequate for the constant skirmishing
with elusive Afghans.

On the other side, the officials said that the Afghans had steadily become
better armed, that they had improved their tactics and that they had been able
to tie down many Soviet soldiers in routine guard duty while they controlled
large parts of the countryside.

The analysts said that Afghans had even been able to bring down Russian
helicopters with rifles. Afghan marksmen high up on mountainsides shoot down on
the lightly armored tops of Russian Hind helicopters, they said. Some also
disabled helicopters by shooting the rear rotor.

The analysts said they had reports that Afghan machine-gunners had tried to
shoot down MIG jet fighters as they flew down valleys. The machine-gunners fired
from the mountainsides hoping that the MIG's would fly into the hail of bullets.
The analysts said they thought the Afghans had had only limited success with
that technique.

Problems of Morale

Steady casualties have hurt the morale of Soviet soldiers, the anaylsts said. Up
to 5,000 have been killed in the two years, they said, and perhaps as many more
have been wounded.

They said the bodies had been returned to the Soviet Union for burial, but that
the Soviet press had almost ignored the fighting in Afghanistan. The officials
said that, so far as they could determine, relatives of the soldiers have not
protested the war.

With boredom a prime enemy of morale, the analysts said, Soviet soldiers had
turned to heavy drinking and in some instances to drugs. Some Soviet soldiers
have sold their rifles in the black market to get money for alcohol and drugs,
they said.

In addition, many Soviet soldiers have contracted hepatitis and other illnesses
because of unsanitary water supplies. The medical problem has been aggravated by
Afghanistan's relatively poor medical facilities, they said.

The analysts said that the Soviet forces had come to rely on helicopters more
and more but they said Soviet pilots and tactics were about 15 years behind the
United States, or back where the United States was in the early days of the
Vietnam War.

Equipment Problems

Specifically, they said that Soviet helicopters were not built for Afghanistan's
high altitudes and, because they were heavy, often could not reach the tops of
mountains where insurgents take refuge.

On the ground, the analysts said, Soviet tanks have become nearly static
pillboxes useful only for general support fire for infantry troops. Moreover,
some are unable to raise their guns high enough to fire at insurgents on
mountainsides.

Similarly, armored personnel carriers, which are intended to carry troops into
battle and support them with covering fire, have been forced to stay on roads
with their troops buttoned up inside.  Otherwise, the soldiers could be cut down
in ambushes.

As for the Afghan Army, the analysts said, it has become little more than a
shadow force. The Afghan Government sent out a call for 130,000 men in October
and only 8,000 came forward.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 24, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE PROMISE OF THE TRIP TO VIETNAM

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 266 words


To the Editor:

For many Americans, Christmas week is a time of joy, remembrance and
reconciliation. It is also a time inextricably linked to the history of a
terrible conflict, now a decade old, which seared the land and people of Vietnam
as well as the bodies and minds of combatants on both sides.

It is nine Christmases ago that American warplanes bombed Hanoi.  This
Christmas, some American veterans of that conflict have returned to Hanoi to
begin a dialogue about M.I.A.'s (those missing in action) and victims of Agent
Orange in both countries.

Their return to Vietnam is painful and poignant for them, but it also holds hope
and promise for all of us.  We wish to call on the American people - in our
churches, synagogues and homes - to pause and pray that a time of healing may
finally have come: that this journey back by some of those who fought will lead
us to a much greater reconciliation of individuals and nations still suffering
from the physical and psychological violence of that era.

For Christians, Christmas is a time of peace which began with the journey to
Bethlehem. Perhaps the journey of these veterans to Hanoi can help us all find a
new path toward peace.  WILLIAM SLOANE COFFIN JR.  PAUL MOORE JR., STEPHEN G.
CARY AVERY POST, WILLIAM P. THOMAS New York, Dec. 21, 1981

The writers are, respectively, senior minister of the Riverside Church, Bishop
of the Episcopal Diocese of New York, chairman of the American Friends Service
Committee, president of the United Church of Christ and Stated Clerk of the
General Assembly of the United Presbyterian Church.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 24, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
GHOSTS

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 23


This is the season in which, nine years ago, the United States ended its direct
military role in Vietnam with a last burst of pointless violence. For 12 days
100 B-52's and 500 smaller planes bombed Hanoi and Haiphong. The Nixon White
House called it Operation Linebacker II. To the public it was the Christmas
bombing.

Remembering is difficult in the country whose culture is indifferent to history.
But it is necessary to remember, especially at a time when right-wing
politicians and the intellectuals who bark at their side are busy trying to
convince us that the American war in Vietnam was a wonderful thing.

The Christmas bombing is a prickly issue for the right because its futility has
been made so plain by history. It was undertaken, the apologists say, to force
North Vietnam to sign a peace agreement.  When the bombing ended, North Vietnam
did sign. It was a famous victory - unless one looks at what came before and
after.

In October 1972, American and North Vietnamese diplomats agreed on peace terms.
Henry Kissinger said peace was ''at hand.'' But he had not kept President Thieu
of South Vietnam informed, and Mr. Thieu balked. He demanded 69 changes in the
draft -''preposterous'' ones, Mr. Kissinger says in his memoirs, which caused
Hanoi in turn to demand changes in its favor.

That was the point at which the Christmas bombing was ordered. Mr.  Kissinger's
deputy, Alexander Haig, flew to Saigon, explained to President Thieu that the
United States was ''brutalizing'' the North and warned him that he had better
agree to the peace terms now or lose American support. He reluctantly agreed.

If Mr. Thieu had not objected, in short, there would have been an agreement in
October - without the Christmas bombing, without two more months of American and
Vietnamese deaths. The bombing, and a vast resupply operation for President
Thieu, were undertaken to persuade him that he could live with the peace terms.

The record leaves no doubt about that prelude to the bombing.  Nevertheless, the
right-wing revisionists argue that (1) the bombing was not as damaging as
critics said at the time, and that (2) it did bring about some changes in the
peace terms favorable to South Vietnam. There is something to both points, but
not much.

Casualty figures produced afterward by Hanoi showed that there had not been
civilian casualties on a large scale. Those of us who thought the

B-52's were having that effect were wrong.  But the death and destruction that
admittedly took place still required justification. And to suggest that that
could be found in a few obscure modifications of the peace agreement is a
mockery. Not even Henry Kissinger can remember what they were any more. And the
words certainly proved of no use in resisting the Communist forces.

What really mattered in the peace terms was the concession made by President
Nixon and Mr. Kissinger earlier in 1972: the agreement that North Vietnam could
keep its troops in the South. That was the crucial pause kept hidden from
President Thieu until October. Once that was agreed, all the flowery phrases and
paper truce teams did not make any difference. And the right-wing critics know
it.

The real point of the Christmas bombing episode does not lie in the details. It
is, rather, a reflection of one unhappy truth about the whole war. That was that
American leaders went on with policies that they knew would not work because
they did not have the political courage to admit it.

At least by 1969, when the Nixon Administration took office, it was clear that
no politically possible American tactics - nothing short of turning Vietnam into
a salt plain - would ''win'' the war.  President Nixon indeed reduced the
commitment of American forces. Yet for four years he would not admit the
obvious: that we could not achieve ''victory'' as we cut back.

The Christmas bombing was part of that pattern. Roger Morris, a former Kissinger
aide, says in his book ''Uncertain Greatness'': ''Officials admitted then and
later that the final savagery of the B-52's, like the mining and bombing the May
before, like the secret raids on Cambodia in 1969-70, like the millions of tons
of explosives dropped on Indochina throughout the war, had made no appreciable
difference in the military contest between North and South.''

We fought the war, officials said at the time, to draw the line against Chinese
Communism. So history mocks the strategic justification, too.

We cannot condone the brutalities of the Hanoi Government: the detentions, the
boat people. The question, rather, is whether our war made things better. Right
now four American veterans of the war are in Hanoi. One of them, Robert O.
Muller, said the other day:

''The primitive level of everything here is so stunning. When you see this place
it's almost obscene to think what we dumped on these people. There's nothing
here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

4 VETERANS END VIETNAM TRIP NERVOUS ABOUT RETURN TO U.S.

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 558 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Dec. 24


Four American veterans of the Vietnam War left here today after a six-day visit,
convinced that they had achieved a breakthrough with the Hanoi Government and
nervous about the reception that awaited them at home.

''We've got to be very, very careful,'' said Michael Harbert, a New York
management consultant who is associate director of the Vietnam Veterans of
America. ''This is only the start. We can't go back to the United States and say
that Vietnam is a great place because we accomplished a great deal. Vietnam is
not a great place.''

Robert O. Muller, executive director of the organization, said: ''If I said what
I truly feel it would be a problem at home. As veterans, each of us have
undergone a profound experience.  Objectively, the trip was a success. But
personally, emotionally, it's changed my view of the Vietnamese people and the
reality is I've got to temper this when I get home.''

The veterans arrived in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, on Wednesday from
Hanoi, after a meeting with Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach.

Agent Orange an Issue

Mr. Thach told the veterans that he would welcome cultural exchanges with the
United States and would open up Vietnam to doctors and scientists in order to
assess the impact of the herbicide Agent Orange on the populace. Many veterans
charge that Agent Orange has caused severe health problems for many Americans
who fought in the war.

Perhaps most intriguing, Mr. Thach asked that the veterans group serve as
liaison with the Hanoi Government over the question of the fate of 2,500
servicemen missing in action. The Foreign Minister voiced anger at the Reagan
Administration for declaring that Hanoi was not doing enough to recover the
remains of Americans or to divulge further information about those missing.

As the group departed for Bangkok, Thailand, after spending about 24 hours here
mostly visiting hospitals and talking to doctors about medical needs, the former
servicemen echoed the view of Mr. Muller about the personal impact of the trip.

''The war finally stopped in my mind,'' said Tom A. Bird, a former infantryman
who was briefly captured and tortured by the North Vietnamese. The other day I
told some Vietnamese officials in Hanoi that I killed some of their people. I
needed to tell them. They said they understood.''

'The War Is Over'

''The war is over, really over for me,'' said Mr. Harbert. ''I went through some
real anxiety when I came here. I was nervous as hell. I had fantasies that they
were going to take me prisoner because I was in the Air Force and flew in
bombing missions over the North. But now we're dealing with issues, we're
dealing with reality and not the past.''

The four veterans, including John Terzano, who heads the group's Washington
office, expressed surprise at the poverty that seemed to afflict Hanoi compared
to Ho Chi Minh City. Beyond this, they expressed some annoyance at the
''posturing'' and ''propaganda'' in the opening statement by some Hanoi
officials.

''I could have done without all those words they used: 'aggression, evil,
imperialist,' '' said Mr. Bird. ''I didn't take it personally. It just sort of
surprised me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Christmas Beacons

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 449 words


Faith and freedom, as President Reagan aptly put it, are the twin beacons that
brighten the American sky this day. Faith in the power of love to conquer
cruelty; freedom to pursue the potential of every person and community. It was
altogether fitting for Mr. Reagan to join his Christmas prayer to a solemn
warning that Americans would, without violence, punish the foes of freedom who
desecrate this holiday.

First of all in Poland. The President's warnings to Warsaw and Moscow are timely
and measured. They still offer a choice: East-West collaboration in rebuilding
Polish society or painful sanctions against the strained economies of the entire
Soviet bloc.

This is, to be sure, intervention, but not to implant America's preference in
social systems. It is intervention in defense of civilized values that
Communists profess to share - the most basic rights of dissent and conscience.

In rebelling against a failed system, the Polish people do not threaten the
Warsaw Pact. They demand only workers' rights in a workers' state. If that
somehow threatens Soviet ideology, the remedy lies in Soviet reforms, not in the
export of martial terror.  Barbarity, like freedom, is contagious. The defeat of
Stalinism is the business of every modern state.

Believing that there may yet be a path out of the Polish darkness, Mr. Reagan
has so far imposed only the mildest sanctions. Yet he was firm in warning of
costlier actions if Warsaw and Moscow persist in their war against the Polish
people. To enjoy - indeed, depend upon - constructive relations with other
peoples, the Communist governments simply have to learn to deal humanely with
movements like Solidarity.

Today of all days, we recognize that the ideals of freedom are only imperfectly
realized on earth. A mere nine years ago, Americans were ruthlessly bombing
North Vietnam. One evil, however, does not validate another. To stop judging
others would be to let all values disappear.
So not only Poland, Mr. President: there are, alas, not enough White House
windows to light a candle for all the world's oppressed this Christmas.

As in Poland, Governments are now at war with their own people in Guatemala, El
Salvador and Afghanistan. In Indonesia, the people of East Timor are still being
destroyed with genocidal fury. In South Africa and Iran, protest against
appalling suppression and racism is cruelly crushed.

These brutalities, too, are defended as ideologically imperative, but all offend
faith and freedom. Their perpetrators, too, deserve notice that such crimes
against humanity ''will cost them dearly.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
FRIDAY, DECEMBER 25, 1981

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 921 words


International
Poland's leader sought to pacify the nation in a Christmas Eve address. The
military commander, Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, asserted that there was still a
place for independent labor unions in Poland and he denied that hundreds of
Poles had been killed or held in inhumane conditions under martial law. (Page 1,
Column 6.)
A second Polish ambassador defected to the United States. The top Polish
diplomat in Japan flew to this country with his family after declaring he could
no longer represent a ''regime which denies the fundamental rights of the Polish
people.'' (1:5.)
Western unity on Poland was sought by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
He said it was ''very important'' for Washington's allies to follow its lead and
''apply whatever pressures'' they could to bring about an end to the repression
by the Polish leadership. (1:6.)
The Pope warned against intervention in Poland. Appearing before 300 Polish
priests and lay people at the Vatican, John Paul II asked them to pray that
Poles alone find the strength to shape their future ''so that no one shall
interfere from the outside.'' (4:1.)
A possible U.N. debate on Poland is being actively considered by the United
States, according to Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the American representative. The
United States began thinking about such a move as the extent of the repression
by the Polish authorities became clearer. (4:1-2.)
Four Vietnam War veterans ended a journey to Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City,
convinced that the six-day visit would lead to future exchanges with the
Vietnamese, but concerned about the reception that awaited them at home. Robert
O. Muller, executive director of the Vietnam Veterans of America, said that the
visit had deeply changed his attitude toward the Vietnamese people, but added,
''I've got to temper this'' at home. (2:3-6.)
National
President Reagan faces problems that are potentially serious after a year of
dramatic political change. But generally, he remains above the troubles and
appears to be keeping his party buoyant as it approaches what may be the most
important off-year election since the Depression. The troubles include rising
unemployment and budget deficits, but his strong position is reflected in
interviews with many politicians, voters, poll takers and small-business people.
(1:2-3.)
The path for a major merger was cleared by a Federal judge. He ruled that the
United States Steel Corporation could buy the Marathon Oil Company on Jan. 7 for
$6.3 billion, thus ending a two-month takeover battle with the Mobil
Corporation. (1:4.)
Delta Air lines announced fare cuts of up to 51 percent on normal coach charges
between 24 Northern and Middle Western cities and its nine Florida destinations,
including a $114 fare between Florida and New York. The new fares take effect
Jan. 6. (1:3-4.)
A police strike in Milwaukee ended after 16 hours. The officers walked out in
protest against the slaying of two white police officers and assertions of
police brutality issued by a black alderman. City officials disavowed the
remarks and pledged not to punish any of the 1,700 striking officers. (7:1-2.)
Metropolitan
Personal prayer is a fixture in the lives of many New York City residents, who
go to houses of worship about as often as their counterparts across the country.
Four in 10 New Yorkers interviewed in a new survey by The New York Times said
they had attended their church or synagogue in the previous week, and more than
half said they prayed daily. (1:1-3.)
Further pressure on the prison system in New York State resulted from a ruling
by a State Supreme Court justice in Albany. He temporarily prohibited the system
from double-bunking - the practice of placing two prisoners in one cell - or
from using corridors, recreation areas or dormitories to hold the prisoners.
(1:1.)
The recent assaults on two nuns has had ''a frightening effect'' on their order,
the Sisters of Charity of St. Vincent de Paul of New York, according to its
president, Sister Agnes Connolly. But she said that the order was determined to
stay in the city ''and do what we can.'' Other religious leaders deplored and
denounced the mugging Wednesday night in the Bronx that left Sister Margaret
Franks critically injured and in a coma. (27:3-5.)
More than 2,000 troopers from states as far away as Florida packed the tiny New
Jersey community of Washington Township to honor Trooper Philip J. Lamonaco, the
much-decorated, 32-year-old officer who was slain Monday on Interstate 80. In
the nearby hills, officers searching for the killers said they had no new leads.
(27:1.)
New Jersey's economy should rebound from the recession in late 1982, according
to the State Economic Policy Council. It also said that President Reagan's
economic policies would begin to reap rewards in 1983 and 1984 after a
''lackluster'' 1982. (26:1-2.)
A gift to the New York Public Library will bring about the reopening of the main
exhibition room. The large, sunny room near the library's Fifth Avenue entrance
was opened in 1911 but has not been used for displays since World War II. The
room will be refurbished with the help of a $1.25 million grant from the D. S.
and R. H. Gottesman Foundation. (25:5-6.)

Business Digest, Page Page 37

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 26, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHRISTMAS IN PEKING: FAITHFUL RETURN

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 998 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Dec. 25


An old man named Yu in a worn gray jacket guided his grandchildren through the
maze of parked bicycles and into the small Protestant church on Meizha Alley.

Mr. Yu was bringing his 7-year-old granddaughter to her first Christmas service,
though his 11-year-old grandson, who was decked out in the red scarf of the
Communist Party's Young Pioneers, had accompanied him before.

''I've attended here for 45 years, when the church has been open,'' he said.
''It's a two-hour trip from my home so I can't do it every Sunday, but I try to
come as often as I can.''

They were but a few of the thousands of Chinese who packed Peking's four working
churches Thursday night and today to celebrate Christmas in an affirmation of
faith or curiosity that would have been too risky a few years ago.

Since the close of the Cultural Revolution and the rise of a new, more pragmatic
leadership in Peking, religious worship has been once more permitted, and
China's Christians, though a tiny minority of the population, turned out for
Christmas this year in the greatest apparent numbers since before the Cultural
Revolution 15 years ago.

An Article on Christmas

The People's Daily today published a rare article on an inside page explaining
what Christmas was and why it was ''the most important and the liveliest
traditional holiday'' in the West.

But another commentary in the party newspaper put Christmas in a political
context, noting that the Vietnamese Army had intervened in Cambodia on Christmas
Eve of 1978 and that the Soviet Army had gone into Afghanistan two days after
Christmas in 1979.

People were again worried at Christmas, The People's Daily said, because ''in
Eastern Europe, not many days ago, something took place whose outcome is
difficult to predict.''

Though Poland was not mentioned by name, the newspaper printed a cartoon below
the article that spelled out more clearly what the fears were: a worried Santa
Claus trudged the street with two daggers labeled ''Vietnam invasion'' and
''Afghanistan invasion'' plunged into the sack slung over his back. Around the
corner, a figure labeled ''U.S.S.R.'' waited with a third dagger drawn.

Because today was a normal working day in China, many Christians in Peking
flocked to the Catholic and Protestant services Thursday night. Several hundred
packed the upstairs worship hall and anterooms of the church on Meizha Alley,
which resembles an ordinary two-story house with a curved tile roof.

Listen Over Loudspeaker

When all the folding chairs were filled, people found room on sofas and tables,
pulled out small green folding stools or clustered around the doorways. Those
who came last were diverted into another hall downstairs, where they could
listen over a loudspeaker to the minister and a choir.

The Rev. Liu Zhonghe, a former Anglican priest who is pastor of the
nondenominational church, said that 300 worshipers were usually in his
congregation, though more tried to squeeze in Thursday night.  Mr. Liu said that
''more and more come every year.''

The church, like others, was closed down by Maoist radicals when the Cultural
Revolution was launched in 1966. It was permitted to reopen in 1971, but only
for foreigners. The Chinese were first allowed back into Christmas services in
1979, two parishioners said.

The carols were all familiar tunes sung loudly in Chinese. The congregation
listened attentively to the nativity lessons about ''Yuesefu'' and ''Malei''
finding no room at the inn in ''Boleihan.''

Many Young Worshipers

This evening, some of the worshipers joined the congregation of another
Protestant church at Gangwashi in Peking to hear a local amateur choir perform
selections from Handel's Messiah.

Many worshipers Thursday night appeared to be younger than the Chinese Communist
nation, which was established in 1949.  The congregation at the Catholic
Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception Thursday night exceeded several thousand.
Well before Bishop Fu Tieshan celebrated the mass at 10 A.M., hundreds had lined
up to make their confession.

Two engineering students from Qinghai University in Peking begged a foreigner to
escort them into the cathedral, which was already beginning to turn away late
arrivals for lack of room.

Mass Said in Latin

''We are no longer afraid to come here,'' said one of the students, who
acknowledged that they had never been in a church before. ''We want to see what
it is like.'' Later, they walked up with other young people who took communion
without quite knowing how to go about it.

The numerous youths in the Catholic congregation included at least one soldier
in the green uniform of the People's Liberation Army. Two girls helped an
elderly woman, her once-bound feet deformed, hobble to one of the few available
seats.

The mass was said in Latin, but many worshipers chanted their responses in
Chinese. Some were still participating when one foreigner left three and a half
hours after the mass began.

A factory technician in his middle 30's named Luo, who said he was a parishioner
of the cathedral, estimated that there were 2,000 Catholic churchgoers in
Peking. He regretted that he could not yet bring along his 4-year-old daughter,
whom he is trying to teach English in his spare time.

As he pointed around the cathedral, Mr. Luo said: ''Her future is learning
English and coming here. When she is older, I shall bring her with me.''

4 Pastors Consecrated in Shanghai

PEKING, Dec. 25 (AP)

Protestant churches in Shanghai consecrated four pastors today, the first
Protestant consecration ceremony held there in 10 years, the New China News
Agency reported.

Similar services were held in the Nanjing Union Theological Seminary, currently
the only seminary operating in mainland China, the press agency added. The
seminary was reopened this year after 14 years' suspension, it said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of parishioners in Peking Catholic church

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 26, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MUSTERING-OUT 101: HOW TO GET A JOB

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 952 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 25


In a Pentagon auditorium the other evening, a civilian management consultant
confronted a gathering of military officers with a sobering thought. ''You're in
one world now, but you're going into another world,'' he said. ''We're not
talking about the Army now, we're talking about the real world.''

J.D. Maynard, who specializes in executive placement, reminded the officers that
in their military world, they told other people who they were with their
insignia of rank and their battle ribbons and thus didn't have to sell
themselves. Unlike the civilian world, he said, ''you just tell, you don't
sell.''

The 150 students in an after-hours course entitled ''Strategy of Career
Transition'' were preparing to leave the service. Even the colonels and captains
among them sat like schoolboys and winced as Mr. Maynard informed them that
''people out there are looking for reasons not to hire you, not for reasons to
hire you.''

For 45 minutes, he lectured on what they had to do to land good jobs. But then
he changed course. ''You've got more training and more ability and more
experience than anybody else out there,'' he said, reminding them that they had
confronted problems that no civilian executive had faced.

''Tell me what plant manager ever had to worry about his plant sinking from
underneath him,'' he said. ''You have the ability; the question is how you
translate it.''

Translating 18 to 22 years of military experience into salable civilian skills
is the object of the course, which was organized and is led by Stanley Hyman, a
management consultant and adjunct professor at Catholic University here.

Mr. Hyman, a bomber pilot in World War II and the Korean War who was shot down
and won the Distinguished Flying Cross and other combat decorations, said the
basic point of the course has been to ''relieve man's age-old fear of the
unknown.'' The course has been taken by 10,000 students over the past 11 years.

In this case, the unknown is the civilian job market. For three hours two nights
a week for seven weeks, Mr. Hyman teaches officers how to analyze their
strengths and weaknesses, to spot civilian job openings, to do research on
industries and companies with potential jobs, to write effective resumes, to
dress properly and, finally, to go through wrenching job interviews. The course
costs $415, which can be paid with the G.I. Bill.

The admonitions of Mr. Hyman, Mr. Maynard and other guest lecturers come as a
shock to those officers who have matured in the ordered, secure world of the
military service. Their questions early in the course betray their bewilderment.
''Do civilian clothing stores sell two pairs of pants with a suit, like they do
in the PX?'' was one such query. Another: ''Is it really true that you can
negotiate your salary in civilian life?''

Reasons for Leaving

Some officers have decided to leave because they are tired of military life, of
moving their families every two years, of the big bureaucracy. Others need more
money to provide college educations for their children. Still others realize
they aren't going to ''see stars,'' meaning they are not going to be promoted to
general or admiral.

Early in the course, Mr. Hyman arranges for each student to take a seven-hour
battery of psychological tests, followed by an hour-and-ahalf talk with a
psychologist. ''The point of that is to tell the guy the difference between his
fantasies and what reality is,'' Mr. Hyman said.

In drilling his students on how to write resumes, Mr. Hyman emphasizes
''grabbers,'' or verbs of action, such as ''planned, organized, directed.'' But
he and others strongly advise them to ''hide'' their military service. ''There
is an idiocratic prejudice against the military out there,'' John Scott, another
guest lecturer, told the officers.

According to Mr. Hyman, the prejudice is probably due less to the Vietnam War or
other ideological causes than to a perception in business that military officers
are time-servers in a bureaucracy and have never met a payroll or had to produce
a profit.

But the advice clearly bothered some. ''I'm at a little bit of a loss as to how
to disguise the fact that I've been in intelligence for 20 years,'' one student
said. ''What do I do if I get caught in a lie?'' another asked.

In response, Mr. Scott advised the first to trade on his experience in managing
people, budgets and programs, and he told the second to let the fact come out at
an appropriate time in a job interview.

The teachers emphasize dressing properly. ''If you wear a checkered sport coat,
a shiny shirt with stubby collars, a thin black tie with a bird colonel's tie
pin, shiny pants, scuffy shoes and white socks, you are not going to get the
job,'' Mr. Scott said. The students were told, instead, to have a ''sincere
suit'' of blue or gray pinstripes. ''Everybody needs a sincere suit,'' Mr. Scott
said, ''for weddings, funerals and job interviews.''

Final class sessions were devoted to practicing job interviews, with an
instructor playing a company executive and the student playing himself. At
first, the students made all the obvious mistakes and were roundly criticized by
their classmates: ''Wrong vocabulary,'' ''You told him your failures,'' ''You
were too relaxed,'' ''You were too stiff,'' ''You had a motormouth,'' ''You
lacked aggressiveness.''

But then they began to catch on and more hands shot up when Mr.  Hyman asked the
class: ''Would you have hired him?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 26, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

No More Budget Hocus-Pocus

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 488 words


President Reagan's most urgent task in this holiday season is to compose a 1983
budget that will be credible to more than a handful of ideologues.

He failed that assignment earlier this year and the nation is paying with
recession. The Administration's budget forecasts last February were woefully -
and deliberately - exaggerated. The promised break in inflationary expectations,
once spending and taxes were slashed, never occurred. The miscalculations fed
anxieties about future deficits and helped drive interest rates to alarming
heights.

Now the supply-siders who sold this hocus-pocus to the President are again
battling for his ear, with disturbing success. Although nearly all the top White
House advisers want at least modest tax increases in fiscal 1983 and 1984, the
supply-siders say this would undermine recovery from recession. The President
echoes their view: ''I have no plans for increasing taxes in any way,'' he says.

Mr. Reagan needs to recognize the danger in this plan. Economists may disagree
about when the recession will end, but they tend to agree about the risk of
putting off tax increases beyond 1983. Even with optimistic assumptions about
growth, the Government is headed for historic deficits.

The Administration now expects deficits of about $300 billion for 1983 and 1984.
Congressional analysts fear worse. That prospect threatens to repeat the whole
cycle: intensified inflationary expectations, followed by more inflation and
rising interest rates that again limit investment and growth.

The last President who failed in his responsibility to increase taxes was Lyndon
Johnson; he thought in 1966 that he could protect Great Society programs by
hiding the true costs of an escalating war in Vietnam. The inflation that
resulted still haunts us. Mr. Reagan has the same problem. He cannot pay for
both guns and massive tax cuts except with more inflation.

In the absence of a miracle, he has to indicate a willingness to raise some
taxes that do not interfere with savings and investment and to cut spending for
Social Security and defense.

Timing such a reversal is a political problem, to be sure.  Forecasts are due
within weeks, but the new taxes should not take effect until months later, as
the recession lifts. Ideological obstacles may be greater still. Mr. Reagan
favors tax cuts that help to shrink Government more than tax increases that
might enhance it.  And he is still being told that the magic will work.

Only the tarnished heretic may be blunt enough to get through with the message
Mr. Reagan does not want to hear. In his Atlantic Monthly interviews, David
Stockman, the budget director, said that troubled times tend ''to generate
crackpot theories which then find their way into the legislative channels.'' He
should know.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN VIETNAM, TEARS AS THE PAST IS REMEMBERED

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Dec. 24


Christmastime in Ho Chi Minh City is especially sad.  The warm air is scented
with jasmine and incense, the stores drape silver papier-mache stars in windows,
but the downtown streets are curiously lifeless.

''Merry Christmas, poppa!'' shout swarms of begging half-American children to
foreigners. They clutch a visitor's arm. ''You take me home, poppa?''

If the outcast urchins are searing and visible remnants of the war - many of
them are blue-eyed and fair-haired -there are other haunting encounters on the
downtown streets. Near the market, a young Vietnamese woman is shocked to see an
American she once knew. She is eking out a living teaching English and hopes
next year to join her parents who fled to the United States during the fall of
this city, then called Saigon.

'It's So Difficult Now'

She starts to laugh nervously. ''I've become so skinny, so ugly,'' she said.
''My face is old.'' Her eyes turn wet. ''It's so difficult now.''

She starts to speak but says conversation with an American is dangerous and
starts to slip away. ''Life is hard,'' she whispers.  At the Majestic Hotel, a
middle-aged employee looks up and watches a group of American Vietnam War
veterans depart after their recent visit to discuss with Government authorities
reports of American servicemen still missing after the war. ''Saigon is no
more,'' he says. ''Saigon is dead.''

The city is certainly quieter and perhaps cleaner than it was a decade ago.
Every symbol and sign of the American and South Vietnamese presence -building
names, streets, billboards that once advertised Coca Cola - have been stripped
away.

Tu Do, the raffish main street, has been renamed Dong Khoi (General Uprising),
which commemorates the Communist takeover in 1975. The famed Caravelle Hotel is
now the Son Doc Lap (Hotel Freedom) and is filled with Russians.

There are posters everywhere exhorting Vietnamese to work in the fields,
pictures in shop windows of Ho Chi Minh
smiling angelically, Vietnamese and Soviet flags linked.  Around the city, most
well-known buildings are intact but seem a bit dilapidated.  The old United
States aid headquarters, which spent billions assisting the South Vietnamese,
has laundry drying on its windows.  Cercle Sportif, the last stronghold of
French colonialism, is a workers club. The American Embassy is used by Vietnam's
gas and oil authority. The landmark Continental Palace Hotel is shut down but
may open soon as a barracks for foreign sailors.

Peddlers Hawk Their Goods

Changes are everywhere, yet the Christmas season has somehow stirred memories of
the old Saigon. Outside the cathedral, peddlers hawk toys and cards and tinsel.
There are holiday sweet cakes in Givral's and in La Pagode, the popular
coffeeshop, which is still crammed with bored youths, wearing American
sweatshirts and Adidas sneakers. They seem utterly untouched by the
''liberation.''

Yet the bulk of the city's residents seem bereft, hard pressed.  Officially
there are 200,000 unemployed, but the figure is probably closer to four or five
times that.

A special hospital has been set up for malnourished children. Wages are low -
civil servants earn the equivalent of $30 to $40 a month, about the price of a
pair of shoes.

Inflation Has Doubled

Inflation of many basic staples has doubled over the past years.  The shops are
crammed with black market goods - Heineken beer, Salem cigarettes, champagne,
tubes of shaving cream, medical supplies - mostly sent as gift parcels from
abroad.

Especially poignant, somehow, are the ceramics - jade and porcelain that
families sold to buy official exit visas.  It is unclear who buys these things:
the Russians, the major foreign group, are known as ''Americans without money.''
Nonetheless the wheeling-dealing black market economy, now as before, lingers,
with Communist officials turning a blind eye to it.

In his office in the old French-built city hall, Le Quang Chanh, deputy chairman
of the People's Committee of Ho Chi Minh City and a founding member of the
National Liberation Front, said that his aim was to make ''hard work and
production'' the dominant values of the city instead of ''luxury and
entertainment.''

'First Social Evil'

Mr. Chanh, a man in a green bush suit and wearing eyeglasses, said that the
''first social evil'' he had found in the city was prostitution. ''We built
schools for these women. We cured them of their disease and tried to make them
human beings again.''

''We have resolved this problem,'' he said.  Unresolved, however, is the legacy
of prostitution - the Vietnamese-American children who beg and prowl the city
streets and are objects of scorn in socialist Vietnam. Their number is estimated
at 8,000. Pathetically, some of them hold up photographs of their mothers and
fathers, usually a G.I. with his arm draped around the young woman.

During the visit of the four American Vietnam War veterans, the children touched
their arms, besieged them with photographs and letters, struggled to speak
English and gazed at the four with awe.

The American group was led by Robert O. Muller, executive director of the
Vietnam Veterans of America. His companions were Michael Harbert, a former Air
Force sergeant; Tom Bird, a former infantryman, and John Terzano, who was a Navy
seaman.  All are members of Vietnam Veterans of America.

As the Americans boarded their van to leave the city, they handed out candy and
gum and some money to the children, who waved feverishly and blew kisses. Two
fair-haired little girls began to weep. It was heartbreaking.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Tom Bird meeting orphans in Ho Chi Minh City
(page 18) photo of Muller meeting children of American servicemen (page 18)
photo of Robert Muller at orphanage in Ho Chi Minh City

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINESE MAY TRADE MINERALS FOR ARMS

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 901 words


China may have found a solution to its most pressing military problem: how to
modernize its army on limited financial resources.  The solution, according to a
recent study, may be the production and sale of strategic minerals to the United
States and other members of the Atlantic alliance to provide the money required
to begin in earnest the modernization program the army needs.

The authors of the study, Douglas T. Stuart and William T. Tow of the University
of Southern California's School of International Relations, have explored the
topic and its ramifications.

One of their conclusions is that the United States and China will continue to
expand arms trade in the medium term but that ''actual weapons purchases will
probably be infrequent and of limited financial or military importance.''

Few Actual Arms Deals Made

A similar conclusion has been reached by American and West European analysts.
West European governments are disappointed by the failure of the Chinese so far
to make extensive purchases of arms.  The pattern in Britain, France and Belgium
has been one of extensive consultation between Chinese missions but limited
purchases of weapons systems that will serve as models for reproduction in
China.

The authors of the study regard these tentative approaches as a variation on the
traditional Chinese strategy of ''making barbarians fight barbarians.'' But they
point out that, until the Chinese have found the money, they are likely to
continue what one British analyst called ''comparison shopping'' in the arms
field.

The costs of modernizing the army are astronomical. United States Government
studies estimate that the provision of what is called ''a confident capability''
for defense against Soviet attack would cost $41 million to $63 billion.

China Exports Strategic Minerals

China, according to the authors, may be an alternative supplier of strategic
metals such as titanium, vanadium and tantalum. These are lightweight and
heat-resistant and essential in the production of advanced aircraft.

A high percentage of these metals imported into the United States come from
southern Africa and other regions where political instability is common.

Peking formed the China National Metallurgical Import and Export Corporation in
1980 to market these minerals. Success came rapidly.  The study reports that in
the first half of 1981 the corporation signed contracts for the export of
nonferrous and rare metals totaling $290 million. This was an increase of 150
percent over the same period in 1980. The expectation is that these exports will
pass the $1 billion mark in 1982.

This return is unlikely to be devoted solely to military purchases. Government
analysts in the United States and abroad as well as the authors of the study
point out that, although China has been moving ponderously toward weapons
modernization, certain constraints on that movement exist within the Government
apparatus.

Military Spending Is Down

Military expenditure has been reduced despite the Government's concern about
what it considers the Soviet threat and the recognition that the Chinese forces
in the brief war with Vietnam early in 1979 demonstrated startling deficiencies
in the air force, command and control systems and combat support.

According to the study, military expenditures have fallen from 17.5 percent of
the Chinese budget in 1979 to 15.6 percent of the 1981 budget. This reduction
has been part of a general retrenchment in China's industry, agriculture and
transportation.

Moreover the program of modernization espoused by Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese
leader, has been opposed by those sections of the Communist Party and the
military that adhere to the comfortable if dangerous philosophy that any invader
will ''drown in the human sea'' of China's army of nearly four million men.

The study concludes that the modernizers are ''not yet in firm control within
the military'' and that many in the army resent the treatment given it by the
present political leadership.

U.S. Policy Is Assessed

The authors of the study agree that the Reagan Administration ''will continue to
move further and faster toward a policy of arming China against Russia, in spite
of the limitations imposed by China's economic and military underdevelopment.''
Most Government analysts in the United States and abroad agree. Virtually all
raise the question of the effect of this program on the Soviet Union.

The Russians, they emphasize, have a strong if perhaps irrational fear of China
that is centuries old. The improvement in relations between China and the United
States and the prospect of extensive American sales of weapons to China has
already exacerbated that fear, according to experts on Soviet military behavior.

The Chinese, for their part, are single-minded about their program. They know
they need modern weapons to the extent that they will be able to deter any
Soviet adventures. Western analysts, while accepting this as the basic Chinese
view, also point out that the army and the political leadership have old scores
to settle in East Asia, starting with Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Fund at Halfway Point For Vietnam Memorial

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 51, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 209 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 26


The Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund has reached the halfway point in its $7
million fund-raising effort and plans to break ground in March for the V-shaped
structure on a plot between the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial.

Jan Scruggs, president of the fund, announced the status of the drive on
Wednesday. He also acknowledged recent criticism of the design, but said the
fund was willing to consider some small modifications, including the placement
of a flag over the monument, to ease complaints.

The Veterans of Foreign Wars presented the fund this week with a $180,000 check,
and the commander, Arthur Fellwock, predicted that his group's total
contribution will reach $250,000 in the next few months.

The monument will consist of two, long ground-level walls of black granite. On
the walls, in chronological order, will be engraved the names of the 57,692
Americans killed or missing in Vietnam. The walls, from the center of the V,
will appear to recede into the ground.

Earlier this month several veterans called the design an insult to veterans and
a monument to war protesters.  The memorial is to be dedicated next Veterans
Day, Nov. 11.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Film View;
FOR AMERICAN MOVIES, A MINOR RENAISSANCE

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2475 words


In a year that witnesses the release of such dillies as ''Endless Love,'' ''Just
a Gigolo'' and ''Tarzan the Ape Man,'' as well as the second attempt in less
than 12 months to open ''Heaven's Gate'' in a neither all-new nor improved form,
almost anything else is bound to look good, at least in retrospect.

The 1981 calendar year got off to an unquivocally rousing start with the Radio
City Music Hall premiere of ''Napoleon,'' Kevin Brownlow's immaculately
reconstituted version of Abel Gance's 1927 silent classic, presented with live
musical accompaniment furnished by a 60-piece symphony orchestra under the
direction of Carmine Coppola, who also wrote the score. ''Napoleon,'' which went
on to tour the country and to give Gance some long deserved shining hours just
before his death, remains the year's most stunning cinematic event, but because
it now stands outside of time, fixed forever in its own special pantheon, it
should not, I think, be condescended to by being cited in anything as mundane as
a list of the 10 best films of 1981.

Though 1981, especially the first six months, offered lean pickings, there
always seemed to be some films available that were disarmingly, harmlessly
likable or that were, in spite of their failures, worth talking, writing and
arguing about.

Among the former were Richard Lester's ''Superman II,'' which wasn't much
different from the instantly forgettable ''Superman'' except that it was witty,
fun and not so quickly forgettable; Mel Brooks's low and rude ''History of the
World, Part Two''; Brian De Palma's movie-obsessed ''Blow Out''; Lamont
Johnson's ''Cattle Annie and Little Britches,'' with its lovely debut
performance by Amanda Plummer; John Carpenter's great looking ''Escape from New
York''; Frank Perry's ''Mommie Dearest,'' with Faye Dunaway's ghoulishly
affecting performance as Joan Crawford; Robert Alda's nice-guy movie, ''Four
Seasons''; Robert Aldrich's ''All the Marbles,'' and Michael Wadleigh's stylish
thriller, ''Wolfen.''

Worth taking seriously even when they didn't measure up to their serious
aspirations were Rainer Werner Fassbinder's ''Lili Marleen,'' a sort of
existential Darryl F. Zanuck, 1943, 20th Century-Fox movie musical; ''Ragtime,''
the Milos Forman-Michael Weller adaptation of the E.L. Doctorow novel; John
Irvin's ''The Dogs of War''; Herbert Ross's ''Pennies from Heaven,'' a sort of
Hollywood idea of what a Rainer Werner Fassbinder movie musical would look like;
Daniel Petrie's ''Fort Apache -the Bronx''; ''Prince of the City,'' the attempt
by Sidney Lumet and Jay Presson Allen to dramatize the conflicting loyalties of
a squealing narcotics detective; and Andrzej Wajda's ''Man of Marble'' (made in
1977) and ''Man of Iron,'' whose astonishing political timeliness and import
overwhelm their impact as cinema.

Though the bottom may be dropping out of movie exhibition - at this writing the
Christmas releases do not appear to be doing very well at the box office - 1981
saw something of a mini-renaissance in the quality and variety of the best
American-made films. This year's 10-best list includes more American films than
have appeared in several years, as well as two films by American directors
making their theatrical film debuts. I should also admit that at least four of
the films that appear in the list of 10 runners-up might as easily have appeared
on the 10-best list. That they didn't make it is a reflection only of certain
indefensible biases that operate in the compilation of any such list.

The 10 best films of 1981, in alphabetical order, are: ''Arthur,'' the first
film to be directed as well as written by Steve Gordon, whose only other
theatrical film credit is the screenplay for the awful Henry Winkler comedy,
''The One and Only.'' ''Arthur'' is a contemporary screwball comedy whose
uninhibited high spirits are matched by the performance of Dudley Moore in the
title role, as an aged Manhattan sprite who drinks too much and stands to
inherit $750 million if he marries the insufferably self-assured society girl
his family has picked out for him. Instead, Arthur falls in love with the
unsuitable Linda Marolla (Liza Minnelli), whom he chances to meet one day as she
is shoplifting at Bergdorf's. Mr.  Moore and Miss Minnelli are fine company, but
it's the great Sir John Gielgud, as Arthur's manservant, who provides the film
with its comic backbone. If Mr. Gordon can keep up the pace he establishes in
''Arthur,'' he could be one of the great discoveries of the 80's.

''Atlantic City'' is one of the most joyous and original American movies in
years, though I'm aware that it is, technically, a Canadian-French co-production
and that its director, Louis Malle, is French, but he is a director who works as
successfully in this country (''Pretty Baby,'' ''My Dinner With Andre'') as he
does in France (''Lacombe, Lucien,'' ''Murmur of the Heart''). In ''Atlantic
City,'' the movie as well as the place, Mr. Malle and his collaborator, John
Guare, the New York playwright who wrote the screenplay, tell an elegiacal fairy
tale of love and luck about an aging, one-time Mob gofer (Burt Lancaster at his
very best), a spoiled, bedridden, former beauty (Kate Reid), whom he nurses to
earn pocket money, and some of the younger people who drift into the ''new''
Atlantic City to make their fortunes in the legalized gambling boom. The movie,
photographed by Richard Ciupka in such an extraordinary way that the real
Atlantic City becomes a place of myth, has the manner of a happy ghost story, in
which the spirits of Atlantic City Past meet (and, in one case, make love to)
the spirits of Atlantic City Present. The excellent cast includes Susan
Sarandon, Hollis McLaren and Robert Joy.

''Body Heat,'' the first film to be directed by Lawrence Kasdan, is a gritty,
steamy, amoral and thoroughly satisfying melodrama about adultery, murder and
double-and triple-crosses in the kind of seedy Florida cities most tourists fly
over. ''Body Heat'' recalls James M. Cain's ''Double Indemnity'' and some other
40's films, but it has a nastily fascinating life of its own, largely because of
the extraordinarily accomplished direction of Mr. Kasdan, who also wrote the
screenplay. The world of ''Body Heat'' suggests what life would be like lived
inside an especially gaudy pinball machine. William Hurt, who could be starting
a superstar career with this film, plays the none-too-bright, small-town lawyer;
Kathleen Turner is the beautiful, overheated wife he unfortunately falls in love
with; Richard Crenna is her disposable husband, and the supporting cast inclues
Ted Danson, J.A. Preston and Mickey Rourke, who gives a memorable performance in
the small but vivid role of a professional arsonist.

''Four Friends,'' directed by Arthur Penn and written by Steve Tesich, is their
ambitious, very moving attempt to get a fix on America in the 1960's. Craig
Wasson plays the Tesich surrogate figure, a Yugoslavian-born, East Chicago-bred
young man who wanders, undaunted, through the decade of political
assassinations, dropping out and turning on, and the rising fury of the anti-
Vietnam movement. The movie is episodic, sometimes dreamlike, sometimes
overwritten, but it has at its center one of the most surprising and terrifying
sequences Mr. Penn has ever filmed, including anything in ''Bonnie and Clyde.''
In addition to Mr. Wasson's, the performances one remembers are those of James
Leo Herlihy and Lois Smith, as a rich, profoundly messed up Long Island couple;
Reed Birney, who plays their gallant, dying son, and Miklos Simon and Elizabeth
Lawrence, who play Mr. Wasson's drawn, tightlipped, immigrant parents.

''Pixote,'' the third film by the Argentine-born Brazilian director, Hector
Babenco, is a stinging but sometimes lyrical study of Sao Paulo's street boys,
particularly of Pixote (Fernando Ramos Da Silva) a runty, ancient-looking kid
who drifts casually from petty thievery into drug dealing and homicide. The
movie looks like a documentary but it displays the freedom of the imagination of
great fiction. It's the best film of its kind since Luis Bunuel's ''Los
Olvidados'' and like it, ''Pixote'' may become a classic. Pixote's friends are
played to scary perfection by Jorge Juliao, Gilberto Moura and Jose Nelson dos
Santos. The stand-out, though, is Marila Pera, as a tired Sao Paulo prostitute
who, briefly, befriends Pixote and his urban marauders.

''Raiders of the Lost Ark.'' If Hollywood insists on making films designed to
gross hundreds of millions of dollars by appealing to the largest possible
audiences, it could not do much better than this imaginative, breathless, very
funny homage to the glorious days of B-pictures and 15-part movie serials. The
screenplay is by Lawrence Kasdan (''Body Heat,'' ''Continental Divide'') and the
director is Steven Spielberg (''Jaws,'' ''Close Encounters of the Third Kind'').
Harrison Ford stars as Indiana Jones, a professor of archeology who has a close
brush with death every 90 seconds, and Karen Allen plays his intended, a young
woman named Marion Ravenswood who, when first met, is running a low-life bar in
upper Nepal. More about the story, don't ask. Go.

''Reds'' is Warren Beatty's big-budget chef d'oeuvre, about the lives and loves
of John Reed (Mr. Beatty), the talented, privileged American journalist, and
Louise Bryant (Diane Keaton), whom he saved from a life worse than death in
Portland, Ore., circa 1915. The film moves from Mexico to Portland to Greenwich
Village to Provincetown, Mass., in the years immediately preceeding America's
entry into World War I, and then goes on to Russia to attend the Bolshevik
Revolution of 1917, which it sees through the dazzled eyes of Mr.  and Mrs.
Reed. The supporting cast of thousands includes fine performances by Maureen
Stapleton, Jack Nicholson and Jerzy Kosinski, plus more than two dozen very,
very old people, billed only as The Witnesses, whom Mr. Beatty interviewed about
the Reeds and their long-gone times. More than anything else in ''Reds,'' these
interviews give the film its poignant point of view and separate it from all
other romantic adventure films ever made.

''Stevie'' is Stevie Smith, the marvelously idiosyncratic English poet who died
in 1971 at the age of 69. Stevie lived most of her life in a neat little house
in Golders Green, just outside London, writing her short, brilliant poems, which
connect the suburbs to the stars, and caring for her mother's beloved sister,
called simply ''Aunt'' or ''the lion aunt.'' The film, adapted by Hugh Whitemore
from his own play and directed by Robert Enders, makes no foolish efforts to
disguise its theatrical origins, and in this way gives us the opportunity to
enjoy the full effect of two remarkable performances.  Glenda Jackson has never
been finer than she is as Stevie, and Mona Washborne is not far behind as her
aunt. Though ''Stevie'' was produced in 1978, it remained unreleased in New York
until 1981. The film was made on a small scale, but it is as big and
encompassing as Stevie's remarkable mind.

''True Confessions,'' Ulu Grosbard's screen version of John Gregory Dunne's
novel, adapted by Mr. Dunne and Joan Didion, is the year's best mystery film.
The time is the postwar 40's and the place is Los Angeles where, one morning,
the mutilated, body of a so-called ''party girl'' is found in a vacant lot.
''True Confessions'' is more than a whodunit, though. It's about the mysterious
relations between church and community, between the police and the members of
the underworld they often inhabit. Mostly, however, it's about the mysterious
ties of two brothers, one (Robert Duvall) a hard-nosed vice cop, and the other
(Robert De Niro) an ambitious, careeroriented Roman Catholic monsignor. The
supercast also includes Rose Gregorio, Burgess Meredith, Kenneth McMillan,
Charles Durning and Ed Flanders. Mr. Grosbard's direction is just about
flawless.

''The Woman Next Door,'' Francois Truffaut's romantic melodrama about two former
lovers who, suddenly and without premeditation, find themselves living outside
Grenoble in adjacent houses but, unfortunately, married to other people. The
film begins in such a deceptively lighthearted way it almost seems to be farce
or, at least, a comedy of manners. Then, imperceptibly, it evolves into a love
story of wildly out-of-control, obsessive passion. Gerard Depardieu is the
former lover and husband whose placid life is shattered by the arrival of his
former mistress, played by Fanny Ardant, a dark-haired beauty whose icy calm and
poise initially give no hint of the volcano within. She is a major film
discovery. ''The Woman Next Door'' ranks with Mr. Truffaut's best, including the
underappreciated classic, ''La Peau Douce.''

The 10 runners-up, also in alphabetical order, are: Sydney Pollack's ''Absence
of Malice,'' in which Paul Newman strikes back at the kind of wanton
investigative reporting that can ruin lives, with Sally Field as the gullible
newspaper reporter; ''Chariots of Fire,'' Hugh Hudson's elegant tribute to the
members of the track team that represented Great Britain at the 1924 Olympics,
featuring a cast of talented newcomers headed by Ben Cross, Ian Charleson and
Alice Krige; ''City of Women,'' another of Federico Fellini's extravagant,
guilt-ridden fantasies about the joys of being a man (Marcello Mastroianni)
surrounded by women of all sizes, shapes, ages and dispositions; ''Gal Young
Un,'' Victor Nunez's beautiful adaptation of Katherine Anne Porter's novella,
featuring a stellar performance by Dana Preu, a nonprofessional; ''The French
Lieutenant's Woman,'' Karel Reisz's film version of the John Fowles novel,
sumptuously set, decorated and acted (principally by Meryl Streep and Jeremy
Irons), but saddled with a not-great screenplay by Harold Pinter.

Also, ''Heartland,'' a beautifully acted frontier story with Rip Torn, Conchata
Ferrell and Megan Folsom, directed by Richard Pearce and written by Beth Ferris;
''The Last Metro,'' Francois Truffaut's stylish film about life in a Parisian
theater company during the Nazi occupation of Paris, though the film is as much
a tribute to its regal star, Catherine Deneuve, as to the characters celebrated
within the film; ''Over the Edge,'' Jonathan Kaplan's furiously overstated,
romanticized melodrama about comparatively privileged children running amok in
an ideal housing community; ''S.O.B.,'' Blake Edwards's invigoratingly
misanthropic account of the Hollywood he loathes and can't stay away from, with
fine performances by Julie Andrews, Robert Preston and the late William Holden;
and ''Taxi zum Klo,'' Frank Ripploh's funny, shocking, tell-all, show-all,
autobiographical film about his life as a German school teacher and homosexual,
and about the day he decided to emerge from the closet - not a film for the
faint of heart or stomach.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo from 'Four Friends' photo of Glenda Jackson photo
of Gerard Depardieu and Fanny Ardant photo of William Hurt and Kathleen Turner
photo of Robert DeNiro and Robert Duvall

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV View;
STRONG ACTING RESCUED GENERALLY WEAK SCRIPTS

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1422 words


As far as new weekly series were concerned, the year 1981 was not especially
dazzling. The failure rate remained high, perhaps because the networks continued
to whip new entries off the air before they had a chance to develop audiences.
The one exception, and by far the best new show of the year, was ''Hill Street
Blues.'' The series, mixing standard police-precinct action with
sharper-than-usual characterizations, initially chalked up audience ratings that
spelled imminent cancellation. But, encouraged by the enthusiasm of reviewers
and trade insiders, NBC stuck with ''Hill Street Blues'' through several
schedule changes, despite the dire warnings of some programming experts. Now
shown on Thursdays at 10 P.M., the program recently edged up into the Top 10,
giving Grant Tinker, Fred Silverman's successor, a solid foundation for
improving NBC's dreary ratings position.

Elsewhere, the weekly-series picture was distressingly spotty.  NBC's ''Gimme a
Break'' has the hefty -literally and figuratively - asset of Nell Carter playing
housekeeper for a widower police chief and his family. She's black and sassy;
he's white and grumpy. With those givens, just about everything is predictable,
but Miss Carter and Dolph Sweet make a diverting odd couple. The series
immediately precedes ''Hill Street Blues.''

Over on CBS, Monday evenings at 8:30, ''The Two of Us'' has been the beneficiary
of some inspired casting. Mimi Kennedy plays a television talk-show host who is
raising a young daughter on her own. Peter Cook plays the very proper British
butler she has hired to help bring an element of order to her sometimes hectic
household. Although the scripts can get downright soggy, Miss Kennedy and Mr.
Cook work delightfully together.

In the category of comedy-and-music specials, familiar names dominated the
quality presentations. In CBS's ''Lily: Sold Out,'' Lily Tomlin took her special
deadpan approach to Las Vegas for a hilarious sendup of the sequins-and-feathers
scene. On ABC, ''The Muppets Go to the Movies'' surrounded Kermit and Miss Piggy
with several stars for a nifty take-off on classic Hollywood films. And NBC
notched impressive showings with two programs: ''Steve Martin's Best Show Ever''
very nearly turned out to be exactly that, laced with nutty bits on ''The
Elephant Man'' and a game show for suckers; ''Frank Sinatra - The Man and His
Music'' provided the acclaimed performer with one of his most tasteful and
effective showcases.

Drama specials relied heavily on book adaptations, some of them venturing into
the tricky nonfiction terrain of the ''docu-drama.'' NBC's ''Kent State'' used a
number of published sources and new interviews to re-create, with admirable
care, the days leading up to the killing of some students during Vietnam War
protests on the Ohio campus. On ABC, John Steinbeck's ''East of Eden'' was newly
dramatized in a production that was far more faithful to the novel than Elia
Kazan's 1955 film starring James Dean. And NBC, also returning to Steinbeck,
offered a fine new version of ''Of Mice and Men,'' starring Robert Blake and
Randy Quaid, supported beautifully by Lew Ayres.

ABC's mini-series ''Masada,'' based on an Ernest K. Gann novel about the
conflict between Jewish Zealots and the ancient Romans, was made gripping by
remarkable performances from Peter Strauss and, in particular, Peter O'Toole.
NBC's production of ''Sophisticated Gents'' offered a Melvin Van Peebles
adaptation of a John Williams novel, in the process employing a cast that
featured some of this country's most talented black actors.

As is often the case with commercial television, while uniformly strong scripts
seemed generally in short supply, there was no dearth of good performances. For
instance, just to mention a few, there was Faye Dunaway in ''Evita Peron,''
Cicely Tyson in ''The Marva Collins Story,'' Glenda Jackson and Dirk Bogarde in
''The Patricia Neal Story,'' Mickey Rooney in ''Bill,'' Gregory Harrison and
Marc Singer in ''For Ladies Only'' and Kevin Dobson in ''Margin for Murder.''

Drama on public television was dominated, as usual, by imports.  From Britain
came ''Staying On,'' a superb adaptation of one of Paul Scott's India novels,
made all the more memorable by Trevor Howard and Celia Johnson in the leading
roles. On the long-running ''Masterpiece Theater,'' ''A Town Like Alice'' turned
out to be the first non-British production presented in the series. This one
came from Australia, and its vivid depictions of war and peace, involving
Australians and assorted outsiders, provided incontestable proof that the
reported film and television boom Down Under is to be taken seriously.

Public television retained its virtual programming monopoly in other cultural
areas not yet infiltrated by expanding cable interests. The lineup included: the
continuation of the BBC's ''Shakespeare Plays'' project, which, under the
energetic direction of Jonathan Miller, succeeded splendidly with ''The Winter's
Tale'' and ''Timon of Athens,'' even while taking an embarrassing pratfall with
''Antony and Cleopatra''; ''Live From the Met,'' another ongoing series, aimed
for welcomed variety in a mix that ranged from Birgit Nilsson in ''Elektra'' to
Placido Domingo and Ileana Cotrubas in ''La Traviata.''

Also, ''The Shock of the New'' surveyed the history of modern art in
calculatingly provocative essays delivered with relish by Robert Hughes, art
critic for Time magazine; the ''Dance in America'' production of ''The
Spellbound Child'' combined a well-known score by Ravel with the always
imaginative choreography of George Balanchine to create an original television
piece of utter enchantment; and, live from New York's Public Theater via Boston
station WGBH, ''The Haggadah: A Passover Cantata'' used the music of Elizabeth
Swados, a youthful and spirited cast, and magnificent puppets and special
effects as the main ingredients in a joyous theatrical event.

One of public television's most worthy projects turned out to be a rather
modestly budgeted series produced by KERA-TV in Dallas. ''With Ossie and Ruby''
simply let the husband-and-wife acting team of Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee wander
through the kind of literary material they clearly enjoy. Most of the works came
from black writers, such as Langston Hughes, but occasional excursions were made
into other quarters, most notably the Latin areas covered by Piri Thomas and
Felipe Luciano.

On the documentary front, most honors would have to go to CBS's multi-part ''The
Defense of the United States.'' Presented over five consecutive nights, it
typified the kind of the commitment that television news should evidence more
often. Indeed, by shedding valuable light on a complex subject the project
admirably demonstrated what television reportage is capable of. On public
television, a documentary of a very different sort entered the world of
professional modeling to capture some of the more bizarre, unsettling aspects of
image peddling. Frederick Wiseman's ''Model'' managed to be devastating without
for a moment being cruel.

Elsewhere on the television news beat, no figure was more prominent or more
impressive than Bill Moyers. In the first half of the year, he ended yet another
stint on public television with a series of first-rate ''conversations'' with
such unlikely television guests as Joseph Campbell, George Steiner, Myles Horton
and Rebecca West. His ''The Ordeal of Jacobo Timerman'' was properly
impassioned. He then left again for CBS News, but his Eric Sevareid-type
commentaries on the evening news have appeared only sporadically, prompting
rumors of his renewed unease. Then, a couple of weeks ago, he appeared in the
documentary ''Bittersweet Memories: A Vietman Reunion.'' Chatting easily with
veterans and their wives, he proved once more that he is a master at making
human connections while the cameras are rolling.

Finally, a special citation of merit could be awarded to Prince Charles and Lady
Diane Spencer, who performed impeccably in the popular and tightly scripted
production of ''The Royal Wedding.'' Without doubt, television's variety is
almost infinite.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Peter O'Toole photo of Fay Dunaway photo of
Cicely Tyson photo of Jane Seymour

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Begin's Gorge Rises Sharply

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 523 words


''With friends like that....'' So Washington probably was thinking last week
after Israel's Prime Minister Menachem Begin said it out loud.

Outraged that the Reagan Administration had suspended a new agreement on
strategic cooperation after Israel had suddenly annexed the Golan Heights, Mr.
Begin responded with a fury that was calculated and that brought relations with
the United States to a new low. ''Are we a vassal state of yours? Are we a
banana republic?'' he asked. ''No power on earth,'' he vowed, would make Israel
repeal its annexation of the formerly Syrian territory whose status, the United
States and most of the rest of the world maintain, should be settled through
negotiations.

Mr. Begin also contended that ''an ugly anti-Semitic campaign'' had accompanied
the Administration's Senate fight to approve the Awacs sale to Saudi Arabia. And
for good measure, he said the United States, given its conduct in Vietnam, had
no ''right, from a moral perspective,'' to condemn such Israeli actions as the
bombing of a Palestine Liberation Organization office in a heavily populated
quarter of Beirut.

While some Israelis were upset by Mr. Begin's astonishingly harsh tone, his
Government easily survived another motion of no-confidence, by a vote of 57 to
47. Washington, meanwhile, counted slowly to 10.  ''I'm very optimistic that
today's storm clouds will pass,'' said Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
Maybe.

The storm had been gathering for months, with the Begin Government
underestimating Washington's anger at its previous raids on Iraq's nuclear
reactor and Beirut. More fundamentally, however, the latest exchange underlined
diverging national interests. So far, the Reagan Administration's Middle East
policy has amounted mostly to a concept of strategic cooperation based on a
perception of a pre-eminent Soviet threat that is shared by neither Israel nor
the Arabs. The Administration also has urged ''continuing the Camp David peace
process,'' but has come up with no new, positive ideas for progress.  Defense
Minister Ariel Sharon said the Golan was annexed to block American pressure on
Israel to ''return to the indefensible 1967 lines'' after withdrawal from Sinai
is completed in April.

Meanwhile, the extraordinary verbal assault by Israel on its only powerful ally
helped unify the Arabs, if just for the moment. Touring the Persian Gulf oil
states last week, President Hafez al-Assad of Syria sought to patch up relations
with Saudi Arabia, whose peace plan he torpedoed last month by boycotting an
Arab League summit meeting in Morocco. ''If we can regain our land by peaceful
means, all the better,'' said Crown Prince Fahd after seeing the Syrian leader.
''If this is not possible, then the Arabs together will have to consider what
appropriate measures to take.''

A simultaneous Saudi announcement said that Prince Fahd was postponing
indefinitely a scheduled Jan. 19 visit to the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
AN EPILOGUE TO VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Barbara Slavin and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 357 words


Four American Vietnam veterans walked through the looking glass last week and
got a glimpse of what the war had been like on the other side. Whether their
visit to Hanoi achieved much toward their main goal - clarifying the fate of
2,500 Americans still listed as missing in action - was questionable.  But they
said it did help them come to terms with their lingering feelings of anger,
guilt and fear.

"The war finally stopped in my mind," said former infantryman Tom Bird.

The sight of a Soviet MIG-21 perched atop the wreckage of an American B-52 in
Hanoi war museum brought it all back for former Air Force Sgt. Michael Harbert,
much as the mothballed World War II bomber did for Dana Andrews in Frank Capra's
film, "The Best Years of Our Lives."

Mr. Harbert burst into tears.  "I haven't cried in 14 years," he said. "It's the
face-to-face reality of seeing that MIG, with its 14 stars meaning it shot down
14 planes . . . They are proud of it, but I guess they have a right to be, but
it just upset me."

The veterans also met with Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach.  He asked them to
serve as a liaison with Hanoi, with which Washington has no diplomatic
relations, to help resolve the issue of the missing-inaction.

Some anguished American families believe that some of the missing are still
being held as prisoners.  Hanoi denies this and also says that it has turned
over all remains of American servicemen that it has found.

The Vietnamese Foreign Minister also said Vietnam would admit American doctors
and scientists not connected with the Reagan Government to assess the effects of
Agent Orange, a defoliant blamed by veterans for severe health problems.

The Americans, members of the Vietnam Veterans of America, said they were aware
that their visit might be used for propaganda in Vietnam and attract bad
publicity at home.

The Vietnamese remarked on the friendliness of the Americans, who strolled the
streets passing out candy and chewing gum to children, for all the world like
they were still G.I.'s.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SARTRE IN SEARCH OF FLAUBERT

BYLINE: By FREDERICK JAMESON;
Frederick Jameson is the editor of Social Text; his most recent book is ''The
Political Unconscious'

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2310 words


THE FAMILY IDIOT Gustave Flaubert 1821-1857.  Volume I.  By Jean-Paul Sartre.
Translated by Carol Cosman.  627 pp. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
$25.
SARTRE & FLAUBERT By Hazel E. Barnes.  449 pp. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press. $25.

JEAN-PAUL SARTRE, whose first novel, ''Nausea,'' had a biographer as its hero,
spent the last 10 years of his working life on a massive psychobiography of a
writer he had always detested for his estheticism and his reactionary opinions -
Gustave Flaubert. He customarily explained this curious project as an attempt to
synthesize what can be understood today about an individual life, given what we
have learned from a century of work in psychoanalysis, social psychology,
linguistics, anthropology and the symbolic analysis of culture and individual
behavior. But for Sartre, understanding always involved the discovery of that
point at which all constraints - external accidents, the miseries of psychic
determinism and social conditioning - are suddenly transformed into the active
gestures and free choices of an individual - what he called ''praxis.'' It is
never easy to reach that magical point.  ''The Family Idiot'' takes some 3,000
pages to get there.

This vast work is now beginning to appear in a splendid translation by Carol
Cosman. There are four more volumes scheduled to appear in the next eight years.
Simultaneously with this first volume the University of Chicago Press is
publishing a study by Hazel Barnes in which ''The Family Idiot'' is
recapitulated in its entirety. Her summary is very useful, for this last work of
Sartre's is marked by an exasperating prolixity. Blindness forced him to abandon
the final volume, which was to have been an analysis of ''Madame Bovary.'' Miss
Barnes's study not only provides a quick preview of the whole work, but it gives
for the first time anywhere an account of Sartre's notes for the final,
unwritten volume.

Sartre called ''The Family Idiot'' a ''true novel,'' and it does tell a story
and eventually reach a shattering climax. The work can be described most simply
as a dialectic, which shifts between two seemingly alternative interpretations
of Flaubert's destiny: a psychoanalytic one, centered on his family and on his
childhood, and a Marxist one, whose guiding themes are the status of the artist
in Flaubert's period and the historical and ideological contradictions faced by
his social class, the bourgeoisie. But there is no determinism in his approach,
for Sartre insisted on seeing contradictions - whether psychic-familial or
socio-economic - as so many situations for which we cannot but invent responses:
''Neurosis,'' as he says in an earlier work, ''is an original solution the child
invents on the point of stifling to death.''

In his Marxist interpretation of Flaubert's situation as a young bourgeois
artist in the middle of the 19th century, Sartre articulates two levels of
dilemma: the crisis of the serious middleclass artist in a marketsystem, faced
with a disappearing audience; and the ideological crisis of the French
bourgeoisie, which during the French Revolution had invented the notion of a
universal human nature as a weapon against the aristocracy, only to find itself
confronted in the days of the 1848 revolution with a new proletarian underclass
it was reluctant to recognize as part of that universal humanity. The
bourgeoisie will ''solve'' this new problem by becoming Victorian, by repressing
the animal and physical ''nature'' it seemed to share with the proletarians and
by transforming its earlier humanism into a misanthropic positivism.

The bourgeois artist faced additional problems. As commoners, Flaubert's
generation could no longer enjoy the metaphysical confidence of the earlier
aristocratic Romantics like Chateaubriand, whose ''genius'' and ''suffering''
expressed a whole class's repudiation of the new middle-class business world.
And the revolutionary vocation of the the great bourgeois writers of the
Enlightenment was also denied them, precisely because those writers succeeded in
overthrowing the ancien regime. Yet Flaubert's generation was formed by the
works of both these preceding literary generations.

Sartre here develops a theory of generational ''misprision'' (or misreading),
drawing on the concept of the ''practico-inert,'' which he had developed in his
''Critique of Dialectical Reason.'' Sartre had always seen literary works as
responses to concrete situations, responses that become intelligible only when
grasped within those situations. He now draws the unexpected consequences: Like
tools, literary works outlive the situations for which they were intended, and
they are passed down with a new material inertia. ''The tradition of all the
dead generations,'' Marx said, ''weighs like a nightmare on the brain of the
living.'' The artists of Flaubert's generation had no way of understanding the
practical purposes for which the older generation had invented their now inert
themes: critical negativity, misanthropy, the ideal of classlessness, the
defense of the autonomy of the intellectual (which will now be ''mistranslated''
as art for art's sake), and a quasi-religious conviction of the nothingness of
the world and the emptiness of life. Crippled by the themes of their
predecessors, the following generation became artists without inspiration. This
was not a subjective matter, a lack of talent or vocation. Rather, Sartre's idea
of the practico-inert -the weight of so many dead artistic ideologies from an
incomprehensible past - suggests a situation in which it was objectively
impossible for them to have something to say.

Flaubert's solution opened a door that had not existed before; ''Madame Bovary''
was not just another novel, but an original and creative act, which in one
stroke resolved all the objective contradictions that paralyzed Flaubert's
contemporaries. This solution was the discovery of what Sartre calls ''the
imaginary'' and its ''derealizing'' operation on the world: ''I would like to
write a book about nothing, a book without external links, which would be held
together by the internal force of its style ... just as the earth without being
suspended moves in the air, a book which would have almost no subject matter or
at least whose subject would be almost invisible if that is possible,'' Flaubert
declared.

Now the riddle that Sartre set out to solve in ''The Family Idiot'' becomes
clear. In Flaubert, the moment met the man, as the old historians liked to put
it. But who was Flaubert? What gave this Norman doctor's son his chance with
history? To reach the answerto this question Sartre had to return to the
subjective moment of his dialectic and patiently work through the formation of
Gustave's psyche in childhood. Unavoidably, this emphasis on the subjective
moment makes its relationship to the objective social situation of the writer in
Flaubert's time problematical. Sartre's solution seems to posit what the
philosophers used to call some ''pre-established harmony'' between Gustave's
private neurosis and the public dilemmas of 19th-century intellectuals and
bourgeoisie (which Sartre, parodying Hegel, terms the ''objective neurosis'' of
the age).  Today, however, ''pre-established harmony'' has another name:
overdetermination. The Flaubert family, within which Gustave elaborated his
private solution, his personal neurosis, was itself the result of objective
social and historical forces.

As for the plot of ''The Family Idiot,'' however, nothing was apparently less
dramatic than the private life of Gustave Flaubert.  Second son of a well-known
Rouen physician, Gustave finds his elder brother, Achille, is heir in advance to
the profession of his father. Meanwhile the correct but unloving attention of
his mother (who scrupulously bathes the infant Gustave ''as though it were a
corpse'') blocks the development of any healthy narcissism and encourages a
self-loathing that will later be reinforced by Gustave's repugnance for the
bourgeoisie, which, inasmuch as he is bourgeois, turns back on Gustave himself.

One thinks of the parable in Sartre's autobiography, ''Words'': Life is a train,
but all the compartments are already filled up, and there is no seat left for
the newcomer. When the conductor asks for your ticket -your justification for
existing -your pockets are empty (just like everybody else's, but of course
you're not aware of that). Meanwhile Gustave is growing up; ticket or no, he has
to do something in the world; the family sends him to Paris to study law and
become a real bourgeois.

Now, after 2,000 pages, the climax of ''The Family Idiot'': Gustave is 21; on
vacation at home, he has a mysterious seizure and collapses (the ''crisis'' of
Pont-l'Eveque). There are no particular crippling aftereffects, but Dr. Flaubert
concludes that his second son will never be able to live an active life and
should remain in the care of his family. The father's own death shortly
afterward leaves Gustave materially secure; the ''hermit of Croisset'' is born,
and the novels of ''Flaubert'' can now be written.

Gustave's convulsion has been variously diagnosed (on the flimsiest evidence),
most often as an epileptic fit; biographers have considered it a minor episode,
at most an obstacle to Gustave's later career. For Sartre, however, it was the
central event in Flaubert's life and of a piece with his literary vocation. The
philosopher of freedom reinterprets this seemingly physical trauma as an
intentional act whose intelligibility greatly transcends the ''psychosomatic.''
Faced with the intolerable prospect of ''real life'' in a business society,
Gustave used his body to invent the ultimate solution to an unresolvable
dilemma, committing suicide without dying. After that he was able to live a
posthumous life - to die to the world, to bourgeois ambition, to money and
profession, as well as to the hated self.

Only one problem remained: what to do with himself for the rest of his suspended
earthly existence. Art, ''the imaginary'' and ''Madame Bovary'' provided the
final turn of the screw; and it begins to become clear how, in the last,
unwritten volume of ''The Family Idiot,'' the two great circuits of the
subject-object dialectic would at last have coincided in the ''symbolic act'' of
the work of art - both private expression and public ideology. The predestined
catastrophe that hangs over ''Madame Bovary'' -from one perspective the
elaboration of Flaubert's private trauma - will then slowly, in what Sartre
calls ''prophetic anteriority,'' begin to resonate across a whole public world,
at length coming to seem a virtual prophecy of the collapse of the Second Empire
itself in 1870.

For Sartre, the meaning and dynamic of the ''imaginary'' is most clear in
Flaubert's style, which he sees as the correlative of Gustave's lifelong
suicide: It is a way of killing off the outside world without changing a thing,
of transforming human instruments and activities into the suspended objects of
esthetic contemplation. The point of the ''imaginary'' - for Sartre a veritable
passion, demonic and inhuman - is not to turn away from the world in religious
or other worldly fashion, but to keep your eyes filled with the richness of
things and relationships while secretly emptying them of their density in an
''internal hemorrhage of being.'' Flaubert's style ''derealizes'' things,
transforms them into images, in order to draw the whole immense being of the
world into nothingness without changing a leaf or a blade of grass in the
process. Yet that style is an operation born of resentment; it is meant to
demoralize bourgeois readers without their becoming aware that their world has
been pulled out from under them. ''Words'' was Sartre's guilty confession of
this passion for the imaginary in himself as a young man, and his attempt to
exorcise it. ''The Family Idiot'' is its epic.

When one thinks of the 10 years during which Sartre shackled himself to this
immense project - a period of unparalleled political militancy in his life,
punctuated by the uprising of May 1968 and culminating in a rich series of
experiments in all kinds of new political action - ''The Family Idiot''
sometimes looks like a form of self-imposed penance, a private duty jealously
guarded against the reproaches of his Maoist friends (they wanted him to write a
proletarian novel). If, however, one sees the theme of the imaginary in
inseparable dialectical tension with that other lifelong theme of Sartre's work,
which is praxis, then Sartre's stubborn devotion to his Flaubert project becomes
more comprehensible; the study of the ''imaginary'' can then be taken as a
self-diagnosis of bourgeois ''objective neurosis,'' while praxis - deliberate
action in the real world - stands as the projection of a radically different
mode of activity, identified with the proletariat.

For it should not be thought that the nihilism of the imaginary, as it is
elaborately anatomized in ''The Family Idiot,'' is a mere 19th-century curiosity
or a local feature of some specifically French middle-class culture; nor is it a
private obsession of Jean-Paul Sartre himself. Turning things into images,
abolishing the real world, grasping the world as little more than a text or
sign-system - this is notoriously the very logic of our own consumer society,
the society of the image or the media event (the Vietnam War as a television
series). Flaubert's private solution, his invention of a new ''derealizing''
esthetic strategy, may seem strange and distant, not because it is archaic, but
because it has gradually become the logic of our media society, thereby becoming
invisible to us. This is the sense in which ''The Family Idiot'' - at first
glance so cumbersome and forbidding a project - may well speak with terrifying
immediacy to Americans in the 1980's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of Gustave Flaubert

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

R.O.T.C. REVIVES ON CAMPUS

BYLINE: By JOANNE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words


MAJ. KENT SHOWALTER was talking on the telephone at the meticulously organized
desk in his office in the University of Connecticut Reserve Officers Training
Corps hangar.

''All right, Debbie, have you had your high-school transcript forwarded to us
here?'' he asked.  A moment later, the major, UConn's enrollment officer for the
Army R.O.T.C. program, penned a decisive line across the bottom of the page.

''Well, that's just great,'' he said. ''It looks like we're right on schedule.''
The scene, according to Major Showalter and other officials from Army and Air
Force R.O.T.C. units, is becoming increasingly familiar. R.O.T.C. enrollments,
which fell off sharply during the Vietnam War, are on the rise.

Last year's Army R.O.T.C. enrollment of 221, while less than half of the 542
students enrolled in the 1966-67 school year, was more than twice the 103
enrolled in 1971-72. Air Force R.O.T.C.  enrollment, which had dipped to 92 in
1971-72, is at 136 this academic year.

And UConn's enrollment trends have mirrored those of the nation.  Army and Air
Force statistics indicate than 92,000 students were enrolled in R.O.T.C.
programs on American campuses last year, up 73 percent from a 1973 enrollment of
53,000.

''Of course, this is coming as a surprise to people who last thought about
R.O.T.C. cadets during the Vietnam War, when antimilitary sentiment made them
especially visible,'' said Col.  Ronald Dubois, professor of military science at
UConn and the head of the university's Army R.O.T.C. program. ''But the fact is
that we're starting to see recovery from the enrollment low that came during
that period.''

Colonel Dubois and Lieut. Col. Nancy Samuelson of UConn's Air Force R.O.T.C.
attributed part of UConn's increase to the cross-enrollment program, under which
students attending other state schools may enroll at UConn and receive credit
from their own institution.

About 30 percent of the cadets enrolled in UConn's R.O.T.C. program are from
other schools, said Col. Dubois. UConn's Army R.O.T.C.  offers courses at the
university's main campus at Storrs and at its Hartford campus. For the last
three years, an Army R.O.T.C. program has also been offered at the University of
Bridgeport.

Financial aid, especially at a time when the economy is in a recession, and the
Government is cutting back on loans to students, has also figured in the
enrollment rise, R.O.T.C. officials acknowledged.

After completing a two-year basic course, during which no military commitment is
required, eligible students may sign a contract and enroll in the more
specialized two-year advanced course. A living allowance of up to $1,000 a
school year is provided, as are uniforms, necessary military science textbooks,
and costs for a six-week summer advanced camp where cadets practice classroom
theories in a field environment, Major Showalter said.

Upon graduation, nonscholarship students in the Army R.O.T.C program are obliged
to serve three years of active duty or six years of Reserve Forces duty. Reserve
duty requires a R.O.T.C. graduate to work in his resident state one weekend a
month and two weeks each summer at such things as an infantry ground platoon
worker.

The commitment in most Air Force programs is longer.  Scholarships of up to four
years are also available, Major Showalter said, but because they are awarded on
a worldwide competitive basis, he doubted they were a strong incentive for a
prospective cadet to sign up. All scholarship students incur a fouryear
active-duty obligation, he said.

Congress recently authorized an increase in the number of R.O.T.C, scholarships,
from 6,500 to 7,500 this year, and to 8,500 in the 1982-83 school year.

Congress also approved a 14.3 percent pay increase for military officers. For
example, an Air Force R.O.T.C. graduate would now enter the Air Force as a
second lieutenant with flight status, earning about $15,000 a year.

The simultaneous membership program, in which advanced-course students work as
Army National Guard officer trainees for one weekend a month, gives
undergraduate students $195 per month and a tuition waiver at the institution
they attend, Major Showalter said. Program participants are commissioned as
second lieutenants once they complete the advanced course and receive pay.
Additional retirement and health insurance benefits are also available, should
students choose a military career after graduation, the officer said.

''Frankly, though, I don't think it's the money that is attracting the
students,'' Major Showalter said. ''It has something to do with working as part
of a group. It has something to do with gaining valuable job skills. And corny
as it sounds, I think it has something to do with a feeling you get when you
look at the American flag or when you sing the national anthem.''

Carol Wiggins, vice president for student affairs at UConn, said the R.O.T.C.
program was ''both an academic alternative and a career opportunity.

''I look at it as adding a dimension to the variety in university life that
makes going to school exciting,'' she said.  Col. Howard Stiles, the New England
coordinator for Army R.O.T.C.  agreed with Major Showalter that the more distant
the Vietnam War, the less antimilitary sentiment there has been on campus.

Colonel Stiles, who administers the military programs of some 25 New England
colleges from Fort Devens in Ayer, Mass., added: ''I gather from talking to
students that they want an option when they get out of college besides just the
civilian job market, or that they want to better prepare for a civilian career
than they could do otherwise.''

''By getting involved in a R.O.T.C. program, they have the assurance that they
will make enough money to live on, to allow them to reflect,'' he said. ''They
can stop and think about whether they want to go back to the farm, on to
graduate school, or continue in the military.

''Of course,'' Colonel Stiles added, ''I realize that most of them will go back
to civilian life. But that's no loss; they're doing so as more responsible
citizens.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of R.O.T.C. students in Connecticut (pages 1 and
13)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RED BRIGADES SAY GENERAL IS ON TRIAL

BYLINE: By HENRY TANNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: ROME, Dec. 27


A photograph of Brig. Gen. James L. Dozier was received today by the Milan
bureau of ANSA, the Italian news agency, 10 days after he was abducted by
terrorists. It was accompanied by a statement announcing that the 50-year-old
general had been placed on trial.

The Red Brigades, the leftist guerrilla group, had claimed responsibility for
the kidnapping and vowed that General Dozier would be subjected to a
''proletarian trial.'' The general, who is deputy chief of staff for logistics
and administration at NATO headquarters for southern Europe in Verona, is the
first American abducted by the Red Brigades.

According to the news agency, the terrorists' statement - their second since the
Dec. 17 kidnapping - contained no demands and made no conditions for the release
of the American. Italian officials considered this an ominous sign, indicating
that the kidnappers may already have condemned their hostage to death and may
not try to bargain for his release.

Cites 'Massacres in Vietnam'

The Red Brigades ''communique'' said: ''Comrades, proletarians, the proletarian
trial of swine Dozier has begun. This swine, this assassin, was a 'hero' of the
American massacres in Vietnam, where he won various decorations for his
'merits.'

''His long career as a swine took him wherever the imperialists found it
necessary to repress and strangle the national liberation struggle of peoples
and to prepare plans for occupation and provocation in the name of his
masters,'' it said. ''His last task, interrupted by the revolutionary forces,
was the actual command of allied land forces in southern Europe.''

In the photograph, the general has a dark mark, possibly a bruise, under his
left eye and what ANSA called a distant look with ''a hint of a smile.''

Photo Called a Composite

Shown in front of a Red Brigades banner, the general seems to be holding a sign
with a four-paragraph text in Italian. The first paragraph says: ''The crisis of
capitalism generates an imperialist war. Only an anti-imperialist civil war can
sink the war! War on the imperialist war is the only path for the transition to
Communism!''

Technicians at ANSA said that the photograph seemed to be a composite and that
the general and the sign apparently had been photographed separately. General
Dozier has only a limited knowledge of Italian.

The enlarged photograph and the six-page statement, bearing today's date, were
found in a trash can on a street in the center of Milan.  An anonymous caller
had directed the agency to the hiding place. An 188-page ideological statement,
entitled ''Resolution of the Strategic Command of the Red Brigades,'' was also
found in the same package.

General Dozier was kidnapped from his sixth-floor apartment in Verona in
northern Italy. Four armed men disguised as plumbers were admitted to the
unguarded apartment by the general. The assailants beat him and tied and gagged
his wife, Judith, with chains and plastic tape, according to United States Army
officials in Verona.

The kidnappers put the general in a container that looked like a steamship
trunk, his wife told investigators. She managed to alert neighbors nearly three
hours later by banging on the floor and the wall of the apartment.

Extensive Search Under Way

A extensive search has been under way throughout northern Italy since the
kidnapping. The Italian police, NATO headquarters in Verona and the American
Embassy here have been silent about the operations.

It has been reported unofficially that no major clues have been found to the
place where the terrorists are holding the general.  The fact that the
kidnappers issued the photograph and the two documents in Milan is regarded as
an indication that the general is being held in Italy.

There had been speculation that the abductors might have driven him across the
mountains to Austria and from there into West Germany.  This would have taken
only a few hours. Some police officials saw an indication to this effect in the
kidnappers' first statement, on Dec. 19; in it the Red Brigades for the first
time praised the Red Army Faction, the West German terrorist movement, and
hinted that the kidnappers had German terrorist support.

Three Arrested in Milan

On Tuesday the police in Milan arrested three persons suspected of belonging to
the Red Brigades, and investigators hoped they had found a connection to General
Dozier. But yesterday the Milan police announced that the three, though members
of the terrorist organization, appeared to have had nothing to do with the
kidnapping and had provided no clues.

Three more arrests were made yesterday near Aosta, the last Italian town on the
highway leading to France. Again there were unconfirmed reports that this might
have a connection with General Dozier, and there were hints that he might have
been taken into France.

Police sources in Verona today said the photograph distributed today was not
conclusive proof that General Dozier was still alive.  It could have been made
some time ago, the sources said.

Terrorist Split Is Seen

ANSA said today that while there was no doubt that General Dozier had been
kidnapped by the Red Brigades, there seemed to be a split within the terrorist
movement.

A day after the first statement was found in Rome, an anonymous caller told the
ANSA office here that the document did not represent Red Brigades policy and
that a more representative statement would be issued later by the organization's
''strategic command.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gen. James L. Dozier

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI, IN ECONOMIC STRAITS, SEEKS TO MOVE TOWARD TIES WITH U.S.

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1650 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 22


Vietnam, facing economic crisis, food shortages and an uneasy relationship with
the Soviet Union, is seeking to open contacts with the United States that would
lead to diplomatic ties.

Comments by Western diplomats in Hanoi, as well as statements by Foreign
Ministry officials, indicate that the Government's welcome to four visiting
American veterans of the Indochina war represents an initial effort to stir
public opinion in the United States.

Hanoi's aim, according to diplomats here, seems to be ''starting a process''
that would alter the Reagan Administration's stern resistance to normal
relations with Vietnam because of the nation's occupation of Cambodia.

Visits by Scientists Planned

''Tell your people we are friends, we are not enemies,'' Vietnam's Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, told the veterans in agreeing to accept American
doctors and scientists to assess the impact of the herbicide Agent Orange and to
work with the Vietnam Veterans of America on the question of Americans missing
in action.

Life is bleak in Vietnam today, a situation brought about by political
isolation, malnutrition in the countryside and urban centers, inflation believed
to run as high as 200 percent a year, a series of devastating typhoons that
damaged crops, a textbook Marxist five-year plan that began in 1976 and ended in
failure, and the damage wrought by the war. The exodus of ethnic Chinese
tradesmen and skilled workers has further aggravated the problems.

Beyond this, as a major legacy of the war there remain numerous reeducation
camps, where former South Vietnamese officials, military men, intellectuals,
lawyers, doctors and businessmen have been placed to be ''rehabilitated.''
Estimates of the number of people confined range anywhere from 20,000 to
200,000; even an approximate figure cannot be determined.

Travel Is Restricted

''The human rights situation in Vietnam is very grave,'' said one Western
diplomat in Hanoi. He said that the Vietnamese now needed travel permits to take
a trip outside their own provinces, that job allocations have split up families,
and that freedom of association was banned.

Even in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, which retains some of the frenetic
tempo of the old ''pre-liberation'' days, authorities have closed down the
city's renowned book market and confiscated ''unconstructive'' works, including
children's fairy tales, romantic novels, mysteries and histories of the French
and American involvement, the diplomat said.

At the moment, food is the major problem. Although Nguyen Lam, chairman of
Vietnam's State Planning Commission, said the nation would meet its goals this
year and produce a record 15 million tons, 600,000 tons more than last year, the
effect of two typhoons in recent years coupled with the north's unsuccessful
attempt to impose farm cooperatives and collectivization on the peasants in the
south has left the population stricken and hungry.

''My students sit and stare and clutch their stomachs with hunger,'' said Nina
McCoy, an American who works for a Swedish aid group teaching English to
Vietnamese medical students at a hospital in Vong Bi, l00 miles northeast of
Hanoi, as well as in the capital.  ''People are lucky if they have rice and
maybe a boiled vegetable twice a day. There's no fish, no high protein, and the
malnutrition among children scares me.''

'I'm Seeing People Shrink'

Miss McCoy, who is from Cottage Grove, Ore., and is a 1967 University of Oregon
graduate, has worked in Vietnam since July 1979, without any difficulty from the
Hanoi authorities. ''I'm seeing people shrink before my eyes,'' she said. ''It's
unbearable. Whatever food people have they try to give to their kids.''

Food rations in many parts of the country, especially the north, have been cut
from an average of 31 pounds a month to 25.5 pounds, far below the 33 pounds
considered the minimum subsistence level necessary before the onset of serious
malnutrition. Fish, which used to be plentiful, is now in short supply, partly
because fuel is scarce and many boats have sailed away with refugees.

On the free market, chicken costs about $2.04 a pound, other meat about $1.30 a
pound, and rice about 45 cents a pound. The average income in Vietnam is put at
only $160 a year, and one Asian diplomat in Hanoi said that the nation's economy
reminded him of ''Bangladesh on a good day.''

Mistakes in Planning Admitted

Vietnamese officials publicly concede that ''mistakes in economic planning'' -
or rigid adherance to collectivization and nationalization of farms - has jolted
food production. One of the reasons for increased food output in recent months
is a relaxation of controls that opens the way for some incentives and private
enterprise.

It is this delicate balancing between ideology and reality that has made it
clear to diplomats in Hanoi that the Government seeks relations with the United
States. It seemed clear to the American veterans, who met Vietnamese officials -
as well as foreign diplomats - that the Hanoi Government's view of the United
States was skewed by the antiwar movement during the 1960's. The Vietnamese
Government presumably feels that by meeting private groups of American citizens
now, such as the veterans, it can build up pressures on the American Government.

The American group was led by Robert O. Muller, executive director of the
Vietnam Veterans of America. His companions were Michael R.  Harbert, a former
Air Force sergeant; Thomas A. Bird, a former infantryman, and John F. Terzano,
who was a Navy seaman. All are members of the Vietnam Veterans of America.

Ties Seemed Near in '78

What Vietnamese Government officials seem not to realize, judging from a
journalist's conversations with some of them, is that Hanoi hardly has the kind
of popular support in the United States that the Government here assumes it has,
and that normal relations with Vietnam are not a priority among Americans.

According to several accounts, normalization of relations between the United
States and Vietnam appeared near at hand in the fall of 1978 and discussions
began on establishment of embassies. In Hanoi, the Vietnamese now show American
visitors the elegant villa on Hai Ba Trung Street that was to have been the
United States Embassy. But the Carter Administration drew back at the last
moment because of the impending normalization of relations with China, which was
antagonistic to Vietnam.

What followed, in November 1978, was a Vietnamese-Soviet treaty of cooperation
that makes the Hanoi Government firmly reliant on Moscow.  Estimates of Soviet
aid run from $3 million a day to $6 million a day for military and civilian
projects, including most of the upkeep of the 200,000 Vietnamese troops in
Cambodia. There are thought to be 8,000 Russians in Vietnam now, and the Soviet
Air Force and Navy have acquired repair and refuelling facilities in Da Nang and
Cam Ranh Bay.

'Guest Workers' Sent Abroad

To repay the huge military and economic assistance, Vietnam has sent
approximately 50,000 ''guest workers'' to factories in the Soviet-bloc
countries, according to Western diplomats. In effect, the workers are paying off
Vietnam's debt by receiving only a part of their East European salaries. The
rest is set aside for debt servicing.

Vietnam's total external debt has climbed to $3 billion, according to official
Vietnamese sources. Of this amount, about $1.6 billion is thought to be owed to
Soviet-bloc countries.

Tensions between the Soviet Union and Vietnam have already arisen over Soviet
influence in Cambodia, and some diplomats here predict that the intensely
nationalistic Vietnamese leaders, who fought the French and the Americans, will
never fall under the total sway of the Russians.

There are grumbles in Hanoi about the poor quality of some of the corn and rice
that the Soviet Union has sent. Beyond this, there are personal complaints.
''The Russians make it obvious that they want no contact at all with the
Vietnamese,'' said one foreign aid worker.  ''The Vietnamese say privately that
the Russians are rude, overbearing people. The Vietnamese laugh at them.
Everyone listens to the Voice of America, and everyone knows what's going on in
Poland, and the Vietnamese are not fooled at all.''

Value of Aid Questioned

Moreover, Asian and Western diplomats in Hanoi say that the Russians are
probably already realizing that aid to Vietnam is of questionable value.
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review, published in Hong Kong, a team of
Soviet shipping experts was shocked recently to find that goods sent from the
Soviet Union in 1968 were rotting in the Haiphong Harbor docks. The Vietnamese
refused a Soviet request that they clean up the goods.

Sweden, the major Western donor of aid, is finding ''severe difficulties,''
according to one Asian diplomat in Hanoi. Sweden has spent nearly $400 million
on a paper mill outside Hanoi that was called ''a classic disaster'' by the
diplomat. ''They are building a high-cost, high-technology paper mill,'' he
said, ''and the problems of electricity and water and labor are incredible.''

The problems for this nation of 54 million, which has failed to grow enough or
earn enough to feed itself, are compounded by the fact that about half the
national wealth is used to support the armed forces. With more than 2.6 million
under arms, Vietnam has the third largest military force in the world after the
Soviet Union and China.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of former American servicemen visiting Hanoi (page
A4) photo of Nguyen Co Thach

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW'S OVERSTATED AFGHANISTAN BURDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 410 words


To the Editor:

Analyses of the Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan frequently emphasize the
detrimental effects of the invasion on the Soviet Union. It is argued, the more
so with regard to the crisis in Poland, that Soviet resources have been strained
because of involvement in the Vietnam-like counter-insurgency war in
Afghanistan.

his point is reiterated in Sanjoy Hazarika's Dec. 17 news article ''The
Kremlin's Costly Commitment to Afghanistan,'' where an Asian diplomat is quoted
as stating, ''Since the Second World War, the Russians have not committed as
much militarily as they have in Afghanistan for so little in return.''

However, Jere Van Dyk's news article of Dec. 17, ''In Afghan Countryside,
Bravery and Bravado,'' refutes this argument, implying that the invasion was
less a mistake than a calculated gamble that has, in fact, been successful.

Most obviously, the invasion consolidated Soviet control over a potentially
wayward satellite. The Soviet Army has, thus far, avoided the mistakes made by
the U.S. in Vietnam. Most of the fighting in Afghanistan has been waged by
native units -with Soviet air support - against the rebels. Russian troops
remain behind, either in the cities or at fortified strategic points in the
countryside. Apparently, they venture out to confront the insurgents (apart from
the odd ambush) where and when the army chooses.

By exercising this choice of contact, the Soviets are able to avoid the adverse
repercussions on morale and public opinion at home that protracted
counter-insurgency campaigns often cause, while also providing their troops with
first-hand combat experience for the first time since World War II.

Accordingly, analyses focusing on the alleged debilitating effect of the
Afghanistan invasion on the Soviet Union are misleading: the Soviets have been
able to solidify their control over that country and accord their army an
excellent opportunity to test its counterinsurgency tactics and its men in
combat conditions: factors which question just how problematic the Soviet
Union's involvement in Afghanistan is.  B. R. HOFFMAN Bronx, Dec. 17, 1981 The
writer is a consultant to the Rand Corporation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
MONDAY, DECEMBER 28, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 938 words


International
Reduced meat rations for all Poles except manual workers will take effect next
month, the Warsaw radio announced. Officials said that the country faced a
serious meat shortage and that large quantities of imports from the Soviet Union
and other Communist-bloc countries would be needed to maintain the ration for
miners and other manual workers at the December level. (Page A1, Column 6.)
The U.S. sanctions against Poland threatened by President Reagan in response to
the imposition of martial law surprised and distressed the country's military
rulers, according to Polish Government sources. They said that the official view
in Poland was that Mr.  Reagan's restrictions on trade, Western credits and
civil air rights agreements, would further isolate Poland from the West and
force it to turn even more to the Soviet trading bloc. A major concern among
Polish officials was that the American action would further reduce Poland's
living standard, leading to extensive unemployment and social unrest and
prolongation of martial law. (A1:5.)
Leonid I. Brezhnev's response to President Reagan's warning of economic and
political action against the Soviet Union over the imposition of martial law in
Poland was ''negative'' in tone, the President said. But another Administration
official said the Soviet leader's letter did not seem to preclude further
discussion on the crisis. The contents of the were not disclosed. (A1:6.)
This week in Poland may be a test of whether the authorities can relax some of
the restrictions on personal freedom that have kept the opposition from mounting
a coordinated anti-Government campaign.  After a four-day break for the
Christmas holiday, work was to resume at factories and coal mines that had been
the focus of early open resistance to the military authorities. (A10:1-6.)
Vietnam is seeking diplomatic ties with the U.S. Western diplomats in Hanoi and
Vietnamese Foreign Ministry officials indicate that the Government's welcome to
four visiting American veterans of the Vietnam war was an initial effort to stir
American public opinion that would overcome the Reagan Administration's stern
resistance to normal relations with Vietnam. (A1:4.)
A photo of Brig. Gen. James L. Dozier accompanied a message received by the
Milan bureau of an Italian news agency saying that the 50-year American general
had been placed on trial by the Red Brigades, the leftist guerrilla group, which
claimed responsibility for his kidnapping in Verona on Dec. 17. Italian
officials regarded it as ominous that the message contained no demands and set
no conditions for the general's release. He is deputy chief of staff for
logistics and administration at NATO headquarters for southern Europe in Verona.
(A1:3-5.)
National
Buffer land acquired by Smith College in Whately, Mass., for its small
observatory has become the focus of an unusual suit, which has possible
implications for the nation's 113 other colleges which, like Smith, admit only
women. In the suit, rising from a $450 tax bill for the 86-acre tract which
Smith has refused to pay Whately, the town has charged that Smith should be
stripped of its tax exempt status because it violates the state's Equal Rights
Admendment by admitting only women undergraduates. Smith maintains that the
state amendment, which is similar to the proposed national Equal Rights
Admendment, which would ban sex discrimination, should not apply to a private
women's college. (A16:-1-2.)
Federal judges should have less power to set aside criminal convictions by state
courts, Chief Justice Warren E. Burger said in urging Congress to take action.
Justice Burger has previously advocated such restrictions, but this was the
first time he specifically suggested that Congress impose them. He asked for the
restrictions in his year-end report on the judiciary. (B12:6.)
Metropolitan
Upstate and suburban judges will continue to supplement New York City judges in
major trial courts for at least another year because of the continuing long
delays and serious backlogs in civil cases. The extension of the assignment
program, which has been strongly criticized by the judges participating in it,
is expected to be announced in the next few days by the state's Chief Judge,
Lawrence H. Cooke. The program was begun two years ago. (A1:3.)
Radical changes in Chinatown have tranformed New York City's oldest ethnic
community. With the press of new immigrants from all of China's 21 provinces and
from east and Southeast Asia, the old Chinatown is giving way to a community of
new institutions and broadening expectations. (A1:1-2.)
Another West Side IRT derailment disrupted morning express service for nearly
four hours. However, the train carried no passengers and crew members were
uninjured. Another minor derailment occurred later on the East Side IRT line.
(B1:-1-2.)
Bird watchers were looking for a gull that has not been seen in the New York
area in this century. They were gathered on West Side piers in the 40's
searching the skies when one of them sighted what he thought might have been a
mew gull. The bird, a rare species and a native of the West, has distinctive
mating cries. Friends joined in the search after the bird watcher reported that
he thought a strange gull he had seen was a mew. (B3:1-3.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SENATOR HART TACKLES PARTY RENEWAL

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 27


Eight years ago, long before it was a fashionable theme for Democrats, Gary Hart
wrote that the 1972 Presidential campaign of George McGovern showed that
''American liberalism was near bankruptcy'' because its intellectual creativity
had dried up.

In the current high tide of Reagan conservativism, that prediction haunts
Democratic Party leaders as the 1982 elections approach. And it goads Mr. Hart,
Mr. McGovern's former campaign manager who is now a Senator from Colorado, to
focus his energies on a pragmatic pruning of Democratic liberalism and a
restless search for new ideas to rejuvenate his party.

Fellow Democrats, knowing he appears in behalf of other Democratic candidates
and speaks on revision of the military, energy independence or economic
revitalization, suspect that Senator Hart is angling for a spot on the
Democratic Presidential ticket in 1984 or in 1988. Against the Reagan-Republican
landslide of 1980, he proved to be the lone survivor among besieged Western
Democratic Senators.

But Mr. Hart denies his eye is on 1984. ''I'm not running,'' he insists. ''I
don't have a political action committee or any organization. I don't have a
political staff. I'm not raising money or doing polling. I'm not operating in
the traditional way. I'm focusing on this effort to redefine the party.''

The Source of Leadership

''What you're really talking about is leadership,'' he goes on, ''and in the
1980's, I think this will come more from a person's mind than from traditional
organization.''

Still, Charles T. Manatt, the Democratic national chairman, quickly includes the
43-year-old Senator on his list of potential contenders along with former Vice
President Walter F. Mondale, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, Senator
John Glenn of Ohio and Gov. John D. Rockefeller 4th of West Virginia.

''I pick up a sense of party people wanting to get to know Gary Hart better, a
feeling that he's quite modern, not particularly an ideologue but someone with a
third viewpoint between liberals and conservatives,'' Mr. Mannatt said. ''He's
got a potential political base in the West and a personal network from the old
McGovern crowd.''

Despite his experience in the McGovern campaign, the Coloradan is not mainly a
nuts-and-bolts politician. Fellow Democratic Senators praise his intellect and
his efforts at innovation, but do not cite him as an outstanding legislative
tactician.

Does Well on Television

Handsome, stylishly conservative in dress, serious and forcefully articulate,
Mr. Hart comes across best on television. Sometimes he acts shy about
traditional handshake politics among crowds.

Quite naturally for a former Yale divinity and law student and a would-be
philosophy teacher, his forte is ''mixing it up intellectually'' whether with
Republican corporate executives, Democratic Party activists, or League of Women
Voters audiences. On Nov. 11, he spoke at Cornell University's convocation
against nuclear war, getting added satisfaction from kicking around ideas at a
small campus lunch with some young economists.

Although Senator Hart resists political labels, others call him a neo-liberal
who opposes wasteful bureaucracy, overregulation and the ineffectiveness of some
Great Society programs and seeks more workable approaches, but who rejects the
''social inequities'' of the Reagan program and elimination of programs like job
training.

''Our challenge now is not to retreat to the 1920's as Reagan would have us do,
but to seek economic alternatives that will give us both economic growth and
social equity,'' Senator Hart says, his lanky, agile figure stretched back
across an armchair, arms clasped behind his head.

Seeking a New Route

Like many Democrats adjusting to the new political climate, he seeks a third
avenue between more doctrinaire New Deal liberals like House Speaker Thomas P.
O'Neill Jr. and the conservative Boll Weevil Democrats who repeatedly joined
forces with President Reagan last year.

Characteristic of the Hart approach is the movement to change the military,
which involves a Congressional group that has tried to break out of the
customary debate over how much to spend on the military to seek new, more
cost-efficient approaches.

For example, he favors different tactics for ground forces in Europe to overcome
Soviet firepower advantages; less complex weapons systems to reduce mechanical
failures; smaller, cheaper aircraft carriers; and ships that would prolong the
life of old hulls by replacing outdated superstructures with modern modules.

The Senator has six members of his staff of 20 here ''rethinking'' three areas -
the military, energy and the economy. In energy, his goal is independence from
Persian Gulf oil by 1990 through conservation, new energy sources and an import
fee of $10 a barrel.  Unsuccessfully, he fought for a ban on imports of Libyan
oil this year.

His Views on the Economy

On the economy, he emphasizes tax incentives to hold down wage and price
increases and to boost small, high-risk, high-technology businesses which
promise good productivity and international competitiveness.

His political evolution mirrors a broader shift among Democrats in Congress, who
are now less idealistic and more hard-headed toward generous-minded, expensive
programs but who are still dedicated to protecting individual liberties and the
little people in America and still averse to big business and now big
government.

But how would the liberal Gary Hart of 1972 get along with the new Gary Hart?
''Of course, I've changed,'' the Senator concedes. ''I'd be disappointed if I
hadn't. In Congress, I'm part of a nation in transition. My political roots are
in the John Kennedy wing of the Democratic Party - pragmatic liberalism as
opposed to the ideological liberalism of Eleanor Roosevelt and Adlai Stevenson.
I worked for McGovern in '72 because I was opposed to our intervention in
Vietnam and he stood in for the Kennedy wing of the party. Gene McCarthy was the
representative of the Roosevelt-Stevenson wing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gary Hart

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REQUIRED READING

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 640 words


Role of Honoraria

In response to a resolution on Congressional remuneration, adopted by unanimous
consent, Dec. 15: Representative Berkley Bedell, Democrat of Iowa: I rise to
object to the increase in members' outside earnings that was passed by the House
today wherein we increased our outside earnings from 15 percent to 30 percent of
our salaries.

I object to the fact that the honoraria limits were increased from $1,000 to
$2,000 per speech.  I object to the fact that the honoraria would be counted in
the time it was received, rather than in the time at which the speech was given.

I have always questioned the appropriateness of honoraria for members of
Congress.  First of all, I have yet to hear a speech by a member of Congress
which was worth $2,000. I do not accept honoraria. Two thousand dollars for a
speech does not necessarily buy influence, but I submit that it is more
difficult to vote against a special interest if they have just paid you $2,000
for addressing their national convention.

Representative Millicent Fenwick, Republican of New Jersey: What is on my mind
is that this afternoon we have done something that is disappointing to the House
and I think will be deeply disappointing to the people of this country. We have
again, without a vote, accepted an increase in our benefits or in our possible
benefits without a vote, without a committee hearing, without anything -just
passing, as though it were with a wand, a measure by which we have doubled the
amount that can be accepted in honorariums by members of this House.

We should not do it this way. We ought to be more honest with the people. This
is sneaky. This is not as dignified and as honorable as this House deserves.
This is beneath the dignity of the House. It is the pickpocket's way. We have
done it in the sly, easy way so that nobody would notice. We cannot do this in
this country. The public is already alarmed by such ways. If we need something,
we should be ready to vote it.

Film Criticism

Representative Larry P. McDonald, Democrat of Georgia, extension of remarks,
Congressional Record, Dec. 16: I would, for the benefit of my colleagues, like
to comment during this Christmas season on the latest fiasco from Hollywood, a
film called ''Reds,'' for which we witnessed two full pages in the Washington
Post and New York Times, advertising its wonderful merits.

Any film depicting even one-tenth the glorification of the only Communist born
in this free land of America to be buried at the seat of modern Communism in
Moscow, would not be an incentive for me to attend. To make my point most
emphatic, it is an insult to the Judeo-Christian heritage of this nation to lend
credence or monetary tribute to that which represents the worldwide forces of
Satan.

Is this a sign of what some of Hollywood is trying to do to poison the greatness
of our land? During the same holy season, we see other full-page advertisements
praising the latest films of Jane Fonda, of Hanoi fame. Was it not she who went
to the capital of Communist North Vietnam, broadcasted propaganda against our
fighting forces in the South, and contributed to the torture and the degradation
of our men being held prisoner in North Vietnam? As we, this Christmas season,
remember our missing in action, would we revel during such a season, again to
repeat, to lend credence or monetary tribute to that which represents the
worldwide forces of Satan? To both Fonda and ''Reds,'' the reply should be an
emphatic NO.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RECRUITERS WANT DOGS FOR MILITARY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 539 words

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO, Dec. 27


All four branches of the military service reached their manpower recruiting
goals for the last fiscal year, but the Federal Government is still looking for
a few good dogs.

Air Force recruiters recently visited Boston and Riverside, Calif., and are to
travel to Atlanta next month looking for German shepherds and other dogs with
similar physical and psychological characteristics.

Not just any old hound dog will do. Animals recruited by the Department of
Defense Dog Center at Lackland Air Force Base are an elite corps in the
tradition of Nemo, a German shepherd credited with saving his master's life in
an air attack in Vietnam 15 years ago.  Nemo was a graduate of the dog center,
and his picture now hangs there.

''We're not just looking for killers - you see all kinds of dispositions,'' said
Staff Sgt. Roger Martin, a trainer at the center, which has 45 military and 11
civilian workers. ''We want a dog that will be aggressive when you want it to be
aggressive, but at the same time can be petted by a child at the commissary.''

The center trains dogs for the Air Force, Navy, Marines and Army, the Secret
Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Federal Aviation
Administration, the Drug Enforcement Administration and other Government
agencies.

Guard Duty and Drug Sniffing

It teaches the dogs to guard military installations and sniff out narcotics and
explosives. Military officials say the dog shortage is partly caused by a strong
demand for animals that can do both - pull guard duty and find drugs. But of
those accepted into the program, only one in 10 will go on to become a
''detector'' dog that sniffs out drugs or explosives, said Richard
Grossenbacher, the program manager. Dogs trained to detect explosives are used
for no other purpose because that duty is so difficult. ''With explosive
devices, there is no margin for error,'' Master Sgt. Michael E. Brown said.

A high failure rate has also aggravated the shortage. Mr.  Grossenbacher said
the center received 799 new dogs last year, but only 332 of them, or about 42
percent, made the grade. He said that temperament, being gun shy or too passive,
disqualified 171 of the animals, and 296 were rejected for medical reasons, most
commonly a hereditary arthritic hip condition often found in large dogs.

Appeal to Patriotism

Dog recruiters try to appeal to people's patriotism in hopes they will donate
dogs, but they are also willing to pay up to $250 for each animal. The basic
requirements are that they be 1 to 3 years old, weigh at least 60 pounds and be
23 inches high at the shoulders, and have ''the general characteristics'' of a
German shepherd, Mr.  Grossenbacher said.

Because of the shortage, the dog center has reduced the training period from 10
to six weeks and modified some procedures.  A dog psychologist at the center has
also drawn up a ''tighter profile'' for canine recruits to reduce the number of
failures. ''He feels he can predict with at least 90 percent accuracy the dogs
that can make it,'' Mr. Grossenbacher said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY RETIREES BUOY SAN ANTONIO ECONOMY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: WINDCREST, Tex., Dec. 27


There is nearly one retired general for every 100 residents in this affluent San
Antonio suburb, nicknamed ''Fort Windcrest'' because of its population of Air
Force, Army and Navy personnel.

Halfway between Fort Sam Houston and Randolph Air Force Base, Windcrest,
population 5,330, is the crown jewel in San Antonio's military community, a
dominant economic force in this metropolitan area of a million people.

Elliot Johnson, staff manager for military affairs for the Greater San Antonio
Chamber of Commerce, said the ''fort'' nickname could be applied to the entire
San Antonio area, which benefits economically from the attraction it exercises
over retired military people because of five major military installations and a
warm climate.

His figures, from military finance offices, show that 42,330 retired service and
reserve personnel live in the area, and that they collected $298 million in
retirement pay last year.

Most From Army and Air Force

Nearly $3.7 million of that went to 4,216 Navy personnel who moved here after
retirement. The rest went to former Air Force and Army officers and enlisted
men, many of whom were stationed in San Antonio in their military careers.

San Antonio's major military installations, Randolph, Brooks, Lackland and Kelly
Air Force Bases and Fort Sam Houston, also have 40,500 personnel on active duty,
who earned $830 million in pay in 1980.

The recent raise added $66 million a year to that figure, Mr.  Johnson said.
''We know the military impact on this community is $1.5 billion every year,'' he
said, including salaries for civil service workers and retired military
personnel at the bases and Audie Murphy Veterans Hospital.

''In this city we try to be promilitary and make them feel at home,'' Mr.
Johnson said.  Most retirees chose to come to the San Antonio area because of
its excellent military facilities, said John Campbell, a retired colonel.

Village Will House 600 People

Colonel Campbell is director of development at Air Force Village, a 15-story
retirement complex that opened in 1970. It is near Wilford Hall Air Force
Hospital, the service's largest medical facility. The village is in the process
of doubling its capacity to 377 units.

The $14 million complex, started at the request of the Air Force Wives Club of
Washington, D.C., and the wife of the former Air Force Chief of Staff, Curtis
LeMay, will have a population of 600 when all its new units open next month. The
facility will include 238 mid-@ and high-rise apartments, 125 garden homes and a
new 68-bed nursing home with complete medical care and meal service.

Colonel Campbell said he considered retiring to California or Arizona but
settled on San Antonio because he and his wife had made many friends here while
on active duty.

Col. Richard Hagauer, also retired, the executive director of the nonprofit
village, said he selected San Antonio as his home because of its frontier
feeling.

'It's the Frontier,' He Says

''I decided years ago that I would eventually retire in San Antonio because it's
the frontier, open, not crowded,'' he said.  Mark Hanson, another retired
colonel, donates one day a week working for the Retired Officers Association. He
said he chose the city for its warmer climate.

''I was stationed at the Pentagon,'' he said. ''My wife had arthritis and we
thought we'd move somewhere in the South where the weather was better. And as
far as the Army goes, this is the main medical center.''

Colonel Hanson said many retirees came to San Antonio to be near other military
personnel from World War II and the Korean and Vietnam Wars.

Many spend their time relaxing, playing golf, traveling and ''telling lies about
the war,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOUR VETERANS DEFEND VISIT TO VIETNAM

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 757 words


Four American veterans of the Indochina war, back in New York from a six-day
visit to Vietnam, defended their trip yesterday against charges that they had
served Vietnamese propaganda purposes.

The accusations came at a news conference held by the four veterans to report
that they had succeeded in opening channels of communication with Hanoi.

In responding to the charges, Robert O. Muller, executive director of the
Vietnam Veterans of America, said they did not feel that they had been ''used by
Vietnamese'' to promote contacts with the United States that might lead to
diplomatic relations and economic aid.

Mr. Muller, a former Marine paralyzed from the waist down by a bullet wound
suffered in fighting in 1969 in what was then South Vietnam, said Vietnam's
Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, had promised them that the Vietnamese
Government would undertake ''renewed efforts'' to account for Americans listed
as missing in action.

The Foreign Minister also promised, Mr. Muller added, that Vietnam would allow
American scientists and doctors to visit Vietnam to gather information about the
effects of Agent Orange, a defoliant used during the war. But Mr. Muller said
that no ''time table'' for either action had been mentioned.

Repeatedly Interrupted

Mr. Muller and the three other veterans were repeatedly interrupted at the news
conference by individuals who denounced their trip as a failure.

''As a Vietnam veteran, I feel you're a total disgrace,'' shouted Albert
Santoli, who said he represented seven veterans' groups, among them the Veterans
of Foreign Wars and the American Legion.

''These gentlemen are a fraud,'' said Frank McCarthy, who identified himself as
president of the Agent Orange Victims International, which is based in Manhattan
and is said to have 1,000 members.

George L. Brooks, the president of the National League of Families of American
Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, said that, as a father of a soldier
shot down over Laos, he was ''greatly disappointed'' that the veterans brought
back no concrete information about Americans listed as missing in action.

Michael R. Harbert, associate director of Vietnam Veterans of America and a
former Air Force sergeant, replied, ''If nobody is going to talk to the
Vietnamese, no one will find those Americans.  You ought to support us.''

The National League of Families is based in Washington and, according to Ann
Mills-Griffiths, the organization's president, has 1,000 family members.

The news conference, held at the Doral Inn, Lexington Avenue at 49th Street, was
sponsored by Penthouse magazine, which paid for the four veterans' trip to
Vietnam. The four returned to New York on Christmas Day.

Denied Previous Visa Requests

In response to a question, Mr. Muller said he would not speculate why the
Vietnamese Government had allowed him and his three associates to visit Vietnam
now when it had denied previous requests by other veterans.

Besides Mr. Muller and Mr. Harbert, those making the trip were Thomas A. Bird, a
director of the organization and a former infantryman, and John F. Terzano, head
of the group's Washington office and a former Navy seaman. The membership of the
organization was put at 10,000.

Mr. Muller said that Foreign Minister Thach had promised to allow the veterans
to return to Vietnam for further talks and to develop a cultural exchange
program. He said the group had tentatively planned a return trip in February.

Defending the first trip, Mr. Muller said: ''We kept our Government advised from
the very beginning of this process, and whatever risk there may have been as to
serving the propaganda needs of Vietnam was more than made up for by the issues
we addressed.''

Mr. Muller said the Vietnamese had ''clearly indicated a willingness to go down
the road'' toward establishing diplomatic relations with the United States.

In Washington, Dean Fischer, the State Department spokesman, said the Reagan
Administration felt such relations to be ''out of the question'' as long as
Vietnam occupied Cambodia and remained ''a threat'' to other countries in the
area.

Mr. Muller said that the Vietnamese understood this to be the American position
and that they said they would leave Cambodia once the country was
''stabilized.'' But, he said, they did not explain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Vietnam veterans

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 930 words


International
Sanctions against the Soviet Union for its role in the imposition of martial law
in Poland are expected to be announced today by President Reagan, according to
senior Administration officials. Mr. Reagan, at his California ranch, made
decisions on what were described in Washington as ''measured steps'' against
Moscow after receiving the recommendations of his advisers by phone. (Page A1,
Col. 6.)
Key Polish factories remained closed or were working at far below normal
production on the first working day after the Christmas holidays, according to
reports from Warsaw. Opposition to martial law was apparently persisting despite
attempts by the military authorities to restore a sense of normality. (A1:4-5.)

Poland, under pressure from Moscow, had been preparing to impose martial law
since last March, according to Zdzislaw Rurarz, the former Polish Ambassador to
Japan who defected to the United States last week. He said that the crackdown
had been directed by the Kremlin and that it occurred in winter because that is
when the Polish people are at their coldest, most hungry and vulnerable.
(A6:1-2.)
Poland's Communist Party has been almost totally eclipsed by the military
authorities running the daily affairs of the martial law regime, but that does
not mean the party has lost power, Western analysts in Warsaw believe. I feel
''the party's interests are being looked after,'' said one analyst, who pointed
out that since all the top officers are also party members, it is hard to tell
where the army leaves off and the party begins. (A1:5-6.)
Israel has reassured Egypt that the withdrawal of Israeli troops from Sinai will
be completed on schedule in April despite violence by settlers protesting the
withdrawal. The Israeli radio said the pledge was made by Prime Minister
Menachem Begin in a seven-page, handwritten letter to President Hosni Mubarak.
(A1:3.)
Four veterans of the Indochina war, in New York after a six-day journey to
Vietnam, defended the trip against charges that they had served Vietnamese
propaganda purposes. The accusations were made by other American veterans during
a news conference held by the four to report they had succeeded in opening
channels of communication with Hanoi. (A3:4-6.)
National
The birth of a ''test-tube'' baby occurred in an American hospital for the first
time. Elizabeth Jordan Carr, who had been conceived in a laboratory dish, was
born in Norfolk, Va. and was described as ''perfectly healthy.'' At least 14
other such babies have been born overseas. (C1:5-6.)
State-operated lotteries are booming and are becoming the fastestgrowing segment
of the legalized gambling industry. Despite the recession, bets in the 15
state-operated lotteries are expected to rise about 20 percent this year to a
record total of nearly $3.6 billion. In Illinois, receipts are running 50
percent ahead of last year. In New York, the receipts are up nearly 70 percent
more than last year. (A12:1-6.)
The murder trial of Wayne Williams began under heavy security in Atlanta with
the questioning of prospective jurors. Mr. Williams is accused of killing two of
the 28 young blacks, mostly children, who were abducted and slain in the Atlanta
area from 1979 to last May.  The jury selection is expected to take nearly two
weeks. (A12:1-2.)
Metropolitan
Possible contamination of water for New York City prompted emergency action. A
scavenging company began pumping 13,000 gallons of heating oil from a northern
Westchester County river that supplies the Muscoot Reservoir in the Croton
watershed. The oil had apparently been pumped out of an oil storage tank by
vandals. (A1:1-2.)
Atlantic City's drinking water is threatened by toxic chemicals dumped into a
landfill a decade ago. As a result, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency
has allotted $500,000 for a six-month study to determine the best way to protect
the water, and an additional $1 million for a standby supply of activated carbon
to purify the water if necessary before a cleanup can be carried out.  (B2:6.)
Major Asian investment in Chinatown has pushed the Manhattan neighborhood far
beyond its traditional boundaries, into the Lower East Side and north to Houston
Street, and has made its once placid business climate fiercely competitive.
(A1:2-4.)
Travel on the Long Island Rail Road was snarled for more than 75,000 riders -
the entire evening-rush crowd through Pennsylvania Station.  They were delayed
30 minutes or longer after a train carrying 700 people broke down and was
stranded for much of the afternoon in a tunnel under the East River. (B1:6.)
E. Leo Milonas was appointed by Governor Carey to the Appellate Division of
State Supreme Court. Judge Milonas, who has administered New York City's courts
for two turbulent years, will be, at 45, the youngest member of the First
Department of the intermediate appeals court. (A1:1-2.)
A ''television library of Judaism'' is to be established in Manhattan by the
Union of American Hebrew Congregations. The sponsors hope that the $25 million
project, the first of its kind in the world, will eventually contain several
thousand television programs, dealing with Jewish culture, history and practice
as well as interviews with major Jewish figures. (B1:2-5.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 30, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Apocalypse Forever?

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 316 words


The Vietnam War is over, but hostilities continue. The intemperate words
''fraud'' and ''total disgrace'' are being unjustly flung at four Americans for
becoming the first Vietnam veterans to journey to Hanoi. The accusers do not
speak for the United States; they are an embittered remnant who should not be
allowed to add sense and humanity to the war's casualty list.

The Reagan Administration endorsed this trip, for America has an interest in
finally resolving the fate of 2,500 servicemen missing in action. That cannot be
done without Vietnam's cooperation. Since Hanoi has resisted official inquiries,
the Administration plainly sees nothing disgraceful in trying another route. The
State Department counseled the four Americans, all members of the
middleof-the-road Vietnam Veterans of America.

Vietnam may be telling the truth in insisting that it is withholding nothing on
M.I.A.'s. But it will take persistent and urgent inquiries before survivors are
persuaded. To cry fraud or to refuse any contact with Vietnam won't bring back
the missing. Neither will it help determine how lasting is the damage caused in
Vietnam by Agent Orange, another matter of passionate concern to the war's
veterans.

Plainly, Hanoi had a wider purpose in inviting the American veterans.
Economically hard pressed, and eager to lessen its dependence on the Soviet
Union, it hopes for better diplomatic and trading relations with the United
States. But the chief obstacle remains: the Vietnamese Army still occupies
Cambodia.

What also remains is the Vietnamese delusion that Americans somehow oppose their
own Government's policy and, out of guilt, want to make one-sided amends by
normalizing relations. Who better to dispel that delusion than Americans who
fought in Vietnam?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 30, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BLACK-EYED PEAS FOR A PARIS NEW YEAR'S

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Vertamae Smart-Grosvenor is a culinary historian, poet and writer.

By VERTAMAE SMART-GROSVENOR

You can take them out of the South but you can't take the South out them on New
Year's Day. An ounce of Southern blood three generations back makes you a
Southerner on New Year's. The tradition transcends class and race. Rich blacks
and poor white folks eat the same thing on Jan. 1: black-eyed peas and rice,
a.k.a. Hopping John. It is unthinkable not to. I am black and when I was growing
up in South Carolina our family never missed Hopping John on New Year's, even
when we couldn't afford a waltzing jacket for a flea.

And Southerners tend to eat it no matter where they are or what's going on. Ed
Bradley was a correspondent for CBS during the Vietnam war but he had his peas
on New Year's Day 1972. I know that's true because I sent him the peas - in
October - so he wouldn't have that worry.

Do black-eyed peas - as the tradition says -bring good luck for the coming year?
How is it that we believe this, considering our present circumstances? Consider
that if we are in this condition after centuries of eating black-eyed peas, what
would our condition be if we didn't eat them?

One of the most pitiful sights to witness is a Southerner outside the United
States looking for a store that sells black-eyed peas.  That was me in 1959 in
Paris. It was a few days before New Year's and too late for Mama to send me
some. Even by air. Even if she would have. She was already upset because she
read in a magazine that I had passed myself off as an African princess in London
and as a singer in Dover. (I knew I wasn't Josephine Baker, but I had gone to
Europe, as so many other blacks at that time did, hoping to re-create her
success.) So I wasn't going to call and have her tell me again that ''That
foreign water must be messing with your mind, child.'' I would solve this crisis
by myself.

I asked the black American cafe society folks if they knew where I could get
some black-eyed peas. Well, you would have thought I had asked them to
hucklebuck in Notre Dame, so uppity they were. And the ones who weren't uppity
didn't cook, so they didn't know where to buy groceries of any kind.

Off I went from rue to rue in search of some black-eyed peas. I decided that
before the day was over I would find some peas or jump in the Seine. A few
minutes before I thought I would have to jump, voila! in the shadow of the
Louvre I found them. I didn't bother to ask what they were called in French; I
just screamed ''Give me some.''

The man shrugged his shoulders as only the French do it and said ''Oui,
mademoiselle.'' I knew he was thinking that Americans are crazy, but it didn't
bother me. I had my peas. Now, to the pork store for some jarrets de cochon
fumes. Smoked ham hocks.

At the market in the Place Maubert I saw something that looked like a sweet
potato, except that it was the size of a small watermelon. An African woman
bought one, so I asked her how she planned to fix it.  She said maybe she would
make a tart or maybe she would bake it with some sugar and spices or boil and
mash it. I hollered that it was a sweet potato even if they called it a
Madagascar yam. This was my lucky day. Not only would I have candied yams with
my Hopping John, but I had discovered yet another culinary African link in
Afro-American cooking.

When I found the wild-looking cabbage leaves that could pass for collard greens,
I danced in the market. Greens, yams and Hopping John! I was home. The cornbread
was no problem. Even the French sold cornmeal.

The grapevine is a real thing. Before I got to St.-Germain des Pres all the
Southerners in the cafes nearby came running up to me asking what time dinner
would be on New Year's Day? I was tempted to be a little uppity myself to the
ones who had acted that way to me when I asked where to get the peas in the
first place. But I wasn't. I mean, here we all were thousands of miles from home
and I did have the fixings for the traditional New Year's feast and so I might
as well let them come. What's a feast with no feasters? It was a wonderful New
Year's.

There are various theories and many rumors about why this dish is called Hopping
John. Some claim it is named for a one-legged chef in a New Orleans restaurant.
Some say it is named after a root called High John the Conqueror, which was
often used for hoodoo potions.  Some say it's named after John Henry. It's hard
to say why Southerners name things and themselves what they do. Why are rice and
okra cooked together called Limping Susan? Is she kin to John?

It is a fact that black-eyed peas are used in certain ceremonies as foods for
the gods. So there is that spiritual connection. It is true that black-eyed peas
came to this country from Africa, probably during the slave trade days, but I
don't believe it was the slaves themselves who brought them. Where? In their
luggage? In the pockets of their traveling suits? I resent the attempt to make
us immigrants. Slave ships carried cargo, not passengers with mementos of the
motherland.

The traditional Hopping John is peas and rice cooked together and seasoned with
hog head. That's too traditional for me. I like them sans hog head and with the
rice separate. This summer in New Mexico I made a dish I called Hopping Juan:
black-eyed peas seasoned with green chilies and Mexican oregano.

Black-eyed peas were not served at the White House reception on Jan. 1, 1863,
but the events of that New Year's - which were recorded in such books as ''Lay
My Burden Down,'' a series of interviews conducted with former slaves in the
1930's -changed the lives of Southerners. ''My hand shook so violently I could
not write,'' said President Lincoln. Then, realizing that he had shaken several
hundred hands during a three-hour reception, the President took a firm grip on
the pen and signed the Emancipation Proclamation.

''I never seed Mr. Lincoln but he must be partly God,'' said one former slave in
Mississippi.  ''Abraham Lincoln habe shoot the gate, glory be to God,'' said
another.  ''I'll git y'all back again'' wailed one former master.  ''It's not
recorded, it's not recorded,'' wailed another.  But it was. Even though it would
take a war and an amendment before all the slaves would be free, the
Emancipation Proclamation had broken the yoke of slavery and Jan. 1 would become
jubilee day.

No more peck of corn. No more sun-up to sundown. No more waking to the
overseer's horn. When it finally came, they say, hallelujah broke out. There
were, they say, liberty leaps and freedom hollers. Tears of rejoicing for those
who lived to see it and tears for the many thousands gone. The four million who
had been in the storm so long shouted ''Free at last!'' And they strutted and
danced the Freedom Stomp: It's stomp down freedom today, stomp it down. No more
driver's lash for me. It's stomp down freedom today stomp it down. Stomp it
down.

At the Tremont Temple, the abolitionist and former slave Frederick Douglass and
friends of liberty including John Greenleaf Whittier, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
and Harriet Beecher Stowe waited for the news. When it came on the wire that the
President had signed the proclamation they sang ''Blow Ye Trumpets Blow, the
Year of Jubilee Has Come,'' with tears in their eyes.

It's stomp down freedom today. Stomp it down.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 31, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LIFE AS A GRIND NOW BEGINS IN FRESHMAN YEAR

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1189 words

DATELINE: PROVIDENCE, R.I.


Chris Kondo, a senior at Brown University, is worried about the freshmen who
live in the dormitory where she is a resident upperclassman. She has noticed
that many of the freshmen with scholarships are not turning up for work in the
school's cafeterias to earn money, preferring to spend their time studying.

She is also concerned that they are not holding parties on weekends, putting out
a keg of beer in the hallway as her class used to do.

When Miss Kondo was a freshman, college professors had already been observing
for a few years that undergraduates were becoming more grade-conscious and less
involved in the political activities that swept the nation's campuses with the
Vietnam War late in the 1960's. But this fall, many students, faculty members
and administrators say, the trend has intensified, producing new pressures on
the students and a more strait-laced, conservative freshman class.

''This has been happening gradually, but I would say there is a substantial
difference this fall,'' said Bruce Reitman, associate dean of students at Tufts
University in Medford, Mass.

Students Line Up Outside Library

''We've had fewer parties than in the past in the freshmen dorms,'' he
continued, ''there are more complaints from freshmen about noise at night and
there have been some requests to keep the library open 24 hours a day. We even
have students lining up on Sunday mornings outside the library to get the choice
seats.''

''It's sad,'' he said. '' The kids, especially the freshmen, are succumbing to
the pressure of the economy and to their parents' anxieties over the rising cost
of education.''

Mr. Reitman, a graduate of Tufts himself, said that a year at Tufts now costs
$11,200 each for the school's 4,000 undergraduates.  Alan Levy, director of a
dormitory at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, said, ''The most
pernicious aspect of this is that the pressure used to be a junior-senior
phenomenon. Now it's a four-year phenomenon.''

Claire Bruno, a freshman at Washington University in St. Louis, believes the
trend back to academics is a healthy, conservative movement. ''In the late
1960's students didn't seem to care much about what their parents said because
that was considered too materialistic and establishment oriented,'' said Miss
Bruno.

'More Concerned With Secure Life'

''My generation is far more pro-Establishment and more concerned with having a
secure and comfortable life,'' she continued. ''Just because your parents think
it's O.K. is no reason to discount it.''

Kenneth Lieberthal, an associate professor at Swarthmore College in Pennsylvania
who teaches an introductory course on political science, said: ''They will make
a well-educated and hard-working generation. There clearly is a much greater
respect for authority among freshmen than I have seen since I started teaching
in the early 1970's.''

Not all officials agree this year's freshman class is visibly different.
Ferdinand Jones, director of the counseling and Psychological consultation
service at Brown, believes that ''upperclassmen always say the freshmen are
different.''

But, Mr. Jones added, ''It is true, alarmingly true, that students are feeling a
great sense of pressure to get the best grades and get into law school, medical
school or business school.''

As an index of this pressure, Mr. Jones cited the decreasing popularity of
Brown's system of permitting undergraduates to take courses either for a
standard grade or on a ''satisfactory, no credit'' basis. The latter program,
introduced in 1969 at the height of student activism, was designed to allow
undergraduates to explore courses in fields outside their own without having to
worry about their marks. Even if they failed, it was not recorded.

In 1970, Mr. Jones recalled, 60 percent of all courses at Brown were taken in
this way. By the mid-1970's the proportion had dropped to 33 percent, and then
last year to 26 percent. ''Now they want that A or B to show in their record,''
Mr. Jones suggested.

Courses Dropped More Easily

These are some of the other signs of the heightened concern, especially among
freshmen, with grades and careers:

- At Tufts, according to the registrar, Mildred Eastwood, ''More and more kids
are dropping courses when there is even a remote chance they will get a C. We
had a girl drop out of an economics course this fall, with approval from her
parents, after she got a B-minus on a test.''

- An increasing number of students are seeking help from their schools'
psychological counseling services. James Whiteside, a staff psychologist at the
University of Michigan, reported that in the 1980-81 academic year, 1,512
students received help from the university's service, up from 986 in l977-78.

- Except for sports and some activities that look good on a student's resume,
such as student government, there has been a decline in undergraduate
extracurricular participation, officials at a number of universities say. At Ann
Arbor, The Michigan Daily, the student paper, is in danger of dying, according
to Charles Thomson, the executive editor. The paper's staff has decreased from
100 students 10 years ago to just 30 today, with only one freshman.

- The career guidance offices at many universities have expanded rapidly in the
past few years. At Smith College in Northampton, Mass., prospective applicants
from high school who tour the campus with their parents now often stop by to see
what the career development office has to offer, according to Nancy Steeper, an
administrator. At Brown, Victoria Ball, the director of career planning
services, said her office had quadrupled its activities in the last year alone
and she herself was booked up a month in advance for appointments with students.

- Although the cost of a year's education has jumped to over $10,000 at many of
the more selective private colleges, students on financial aid at some schools
are becoming reluctant to give up their study time to work at part-time jobs.
David Debelois, the director of student employment at Brown, said that the
university's food services, which normally hired 500 students, had been having
trouble filling its shifts.

A survey at Brown this fall disclosed that of the undergraduates with
scholarships, 60 to 70 fewer were working than last year.  ''When I was a
freshman, we studied hard too,'' said Alan Fruzzetti, a senior at Brown who
lives as a resident in a freshmen dorm. ''But when we came back from the library
late at night, we would talk about politics and important things.

''Now the freshmen just stay up late typing. I have't heard one political
discussion this year, except for the one I initiated myself, and then some
freshmen came and asked us to be quiet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 339 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 31, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Denounces Israel

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: KUWAIT, Dec. 30


Deputy Prime Minister Tran Quyhn of Vietnam today denounced Israel's annexation
of the Golan Heights as ''an act of expansion and another Israeli violation of
the Arab countries' sovereignty and United Nations principles.'' Mr. Quyhn was
talking to reporters after seeing the Emir of Kuwait, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed
al-Sabah.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
