
                               1 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PANEL WEIGHS PLAN TO INCLUDE MORE PEOPLE N F.B.I.'S FILE

BYLINE: By DAVID BURNHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1987 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 31


An advisory group for the Federal Bureau of Investigation is considering
recommending a major expansion of a national computerized file to distribute
information about people who are considered suspicious but are not wanted for
crimes.

The computer system is now used for the most part to advise police officers if
an individual has been named in an arrest warrant in another state. Under the
new proposal it would be expanded to include information on whether an
individual was thought to be involved in organized crime, terrorism or
narcotics, or was a ''known associate'' of a drug trafficker.

Virtually every United States law-enforcement agency has access to the bureau's
computer system.

A top F.B.I. official, who said the bureau was aware of civil rights questions
involved in establishing such a system, said a final decision on the matter
would not be made for some time.

Some law-enforcement officials say the proposed enlargement of the bureau's
system would improve their ability to fight crime, help protect police officers
against dangerous criminals and enable Federal law-enforcment officials to keep
track of wrongdoers.



Official Defends Program

''I don't see this as a change - I see it as consistent with the original
purpose of the system, to help law enforcement fight crime,'' said Dwight E.
Bee, a member of the Federal bureau's advisory group who is the administrator of
the Illinois Law Enforcement Agency Data System.

But others, including Representative Don Edwards, chairman of the House
Judiciary Committee's Subcommitee on Civil and Constitional Rights, view the
proposal as a threat to basic freedoms. Mr. Edwards, who is a California
Democrat, says he hopes to hold hearings on the matter in February.

''If this plan goes ahead, it would create a revolutionary surveillance system
that will permit the easy distribution of investigative information that has
almost always been carefully protected in the past,'' Mr. Edwards said.

Jerry J. Berman, national legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties
Union, said, ''Unless Congress intervenes, the United States will have a vast
police tracking and surveillance system.''

Mr. Berman noted that from 1971 to 1974 the F.B.I. established a procedure under
which its computer secretly was used to track people, some of whom were engaged
in lawful dissent against the Vietnam War and in behalf of civil rights. This
program, the Stop Index, was halted as soon as its existence became known to
Congress.

Terrorists Widely Active

The possible enlargement of the capacity of the bureau's National Crime
Information Center was first discussed by the Center's Policy Board at a meeting
in Denver in early October. The plan becomes known now at a time when a series
of unusually violent terrorist attacks in the Middle East and Britain and the
need to protect against terrorism at next summer's Olympic Games in Los Angeles
have made law- enforcement officials in the United States apprehensive.

According to the agenda of the meeting, the new ''investigative applications''
discussed by the board represented ''a logical progression of the N.C.I.C.
System in terms of service to the criminal justice community as well as the
safety of any officer conducting law-enforcement inquiries.''

But Lee Colwell, Executive Assistant Director of the F.B.I., said in an
interview that he was very much aware of the sensitive nature of the proposal to
enhance the computer system. He emphasized that the bureau's Director, William
H. Webster, would take no action on the matter without careful and systematic
review.

Assurances on Rights Expressed

''It would be inappropriate and incorrect to believe that we in the F.B.I., the
Director of the F.B.I., will take any unilateral action about any change in the
N.C.I.C,'' Mr. Colwell said. ''The Director is on record with Congress and the
Attorney General that they would be advised in advance of any changes in the
N.C.I.C and its procedures, including its files.''

The bureau's No. 2 official said, ''There is not going to be anything that I
think jeopardizes human rights or constitutional rights without a complete
airing, and I know that the Director feels as strongly about that as anyone.''

He added that the need for the system, its potential for abuse, the threat it
might pose for the constitutional rights of citizens and the integrity of its
managers all had to be taken into consideration before a new application for the
F.B.I. computer could be approved. But he said, too, that changes in technology
sometimes forced changes in policy.

Constitutional experts contend, for example, that in cases in which a police
officer or judge relies upon inaccurate or incomplete information to make an
arrest or set bail, the subject's right to due process, guaranteed by the Fifth
Amendment, may be violated.

Composition of Review Board

The center's policy board currently has 28 members, including 21 state, county
and local-law enforcement officials, three prosecutors, two judges, one prison
administrator and one probation officer. According to the agenda of the Board's
Denver meeting, the enlargement of the F.B.I.'s computer system was proposed on
Oct. 6 by its planning and evaluation subcommittee.

The subcommittee said some of the 15 new investigative applications it was
recommending ''would benefit Federal law-enforcement agencies only, while others
would benefit state and local law-enforcement agencies.''

Among the most controversial of the proposed applications was one to use the
F.B.I. computer to keep track of the ''known associates'' of those whose names
had been filed because they had been named in warrants for arrest.

A ''known associate'' could be a friend, relative or business partner; this
category was defined in another section of the agenda as anyone ''known to be,
believed to be, likely to be or may be associated with a wanted person.''

''The criteria,'' that section went on, ''should not be limited to those who are
traveling with the wanted person but should include those who are likely to be
in contact with such a person.''

On Privacy and Freedom

Fred H. Wynbrandt, chairman of the policy board, who is the assistant director
of California's Criminal Identification and Information Branch, said in a
telephone interview that the plan to list associates of wanted people was ''the
one item that offended me the most.'' He added, ''This one got rejected out of
hand and I think our decision in this matter shows the board has a deep concern
for privacy and freedom.''

Still under consideration by the board, however, are several other files that
would focus on individuals not suspected of committing a crime, according to Mr.
Bee, the Illinois official. Despite the decision against creating a file on the
associates of all wanted people, for example, the board did not reject a
proposal for a new file on those who law-enforcement officials believed were
associated with those who had been convicted of ''possession for sale, sale or
trafficking in narcotics.''

Also still under consideration are the creation of computerized files on
individuals thought to be engaged in organized crime, foreign
counterintelligence and terrorism.

Mr. Wynbrandt, the policy board chairman, said the proposals that were not
immediately rejected by the board now would be examined by F.B.I. specialists,
four regional groups' advisory panels and several other technical panels. Once
this review is completed, the proposals will again be reviewed by the policy
committee before being forwarded to Mr. Webster. The entire process is expected
to take several months.

Expansion by Statute Urged The legal authority of the Federal bureau to
institute the new files is a matter of dispute. Representative Edwards said he
believed that ''further expansion must be by statute.'' The Justice Department
and members of the policy committee, however, contend that the bureau's current
authority is sufficient.

The agenda did not spell out what police agencies would have the authority to
decide who was a known terrorist, a figure in organized crime or narcotics
trafficking, nor did it define who would fall into these three categories.
Finally, the agenda did not indicate whether such computerized intelligence
would be made available to patrol officers on the street or would be restricted
to top police officials.

Mr. Berman, the A.C.L.U. lawyer, explaining one of his major reasons for
concern. He said: ''Unlike public record information such as an arrest warrant
or arrest report, deciding who is an organized crime figure or terrorist depends
upon subjective criteria and judgments. Is a terrorist someone who was convicted
by a jury of an act of political violence 20 years ago? Or is it someone who the
police believe is tied to an current bombing incident by concrete evidence? Or
is a terrorist someone who meets with a suspected bomber? Or is a terrorist
someone who has talked about a possible bombing?''

Over the last decade, investigations by Congress, city councils and other such
bodies have determined that the intelligence files of the F.B.I. and the police
departments of such major cities as New York, Chicago and Los Angeles contained
a great deal of unsubstanitated, misleading and inaccurate information, some of
it amounting to no more than gossip about ten of thousands of indivduals who
were politically active in a variety of causes.

Secret Service Had a Hand

The recommendation to enlarge the current system to include more than 10 new
categories of individual suspects in the F.B.I. computer system was made only
six months after the bureau agreed with a recommendation by the Secret Service
to include the names of individuals whom the service decides might represent a
danger to the President or other people it guards.

Mr. Colwell said in a prepared address to the October meeting of the computer
advisory board that in the first six months of operation, the records of an
average of 88 potentially dangerous individuals were in the system at any one
time. Between April 27 and Oct. 1, he said, 39 of these individuals had been
identified when they were stopped by police officers on 88 different occasions.

''I am pleased with the way the file is operating,'' Mr. Colwell said, ''but it
will undoubtedly be a topic for discussion for months and maybe years to come.''

He said the Secret Service ''continues to emphasize the importance of our
helping them fulfill their protective function responsibilities in checking
these individuals' movements and localities.'' The bureau's No. 2 official
immediately added, however, that ''the adoption and approval of this file have
raised a number of privacy issues, such as 'Nineteen Eighty-Four' and 'Big
Brother,' and I think these are legitimate issues.''

47,000 Listed in 1970's

While the current F.B.I.-Secret Service list of ''dangerous persons'' is small,
only a decade ago the service created a list of people and groups it was worried
about; it contained 47,000 names, including Coretta Scott King, the rights
activist and widow of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther KIng Jr.; Dr. Benjamin Spock,
the rights activist and expert on child care, and Roy Wilkins of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People. It listed organizations such
as the Quaker Action Group and the N.A.A.C.P.

In a letter to the Justice Department before the Secret Service file was set up,
the A.C.L.U. said the department was acting beyond the scope of Federal law and
any individual subjected to arrest, denial of bail or denial of employment
because of information in the file might have grounds to bring a lawsuit against
the Government.

The Justice Department, however, has argued in a legal memorandum that the
exension of the F.B.I. file is lawful.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Miss Fuller Plans Feb. 25 Wedding

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 33, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 172 words


Susan Kathleen Fuller, daughter of Rear Adm. Robert Byron Fuller, U.S.N.,
retired, and Mrs. Fuller of Jacksonville Beach, Fla., plans to be married Feb.
25 to Lieut. Comdr. Matthew William Tuohy, U.S.N., son of Mr. and Mrs. D.
Vincent Tuohy of Brooklyn and Monroe, N.Y.

Miss Fuller, who graduated from the University of Florida, is a sales
representative with Joseph Imported Foods in Jacksonville. Her father retired
after 37 years as a Navy flier during which time he received 57 military awards
and decorations, including the Navy Cross. He was a prisoner in North Vietnam
for six years. He is presently vice president of Sun State Marine, a petroleum
transport company in Green Cove Springs, Fla.

Commander Tuohy, a flier stationed aboard the aircraft carrier Eisenhower,
graduated from the Brooklyn Preparatory School and Jacksonville University. His
father, a lawyer in private practice, was formerly executive assistant Brooklyn
district attorney and counsel for municipal affairs for the New York State
Comptroller.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW COMPLICATIONS IN AGENT ORANGE TRIAL

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 828 words


Seeming almost as convoluted as the Vietnam war itself, a landmark lawsuit by
Vietnam veterans against makers of the herbicide Agent Orange has survived more
than five years of legal battles to face a jury trial set to begin May 7.

But last week a new hurdle appeared. The Federal Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit, granting an infrequent mandamus or emergency review, agreed to hear
this Wednesday a defense challenge to the basic structure of the case, a class
action taking in not only those veterans who have filed suit but thousands of
others who might have been affected by the herbicide.

The development is the latest twist in a tangled case that Chief Judge Jack B.
Weinstein, who is hearing it in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, has called
''strange'' and ''unique,'' a case that some participants call America's biggest
lawsuit and that offers to stretch product liability law to new dimensions.

The lawsuit was brought in 1978 by Vietnam veterans who contended that they or
their children (through birth defects) and spouses (through miscarriages)
suffered injuries or genetic damage from a potent contaminant, dioxin. They said
the chemical companies knew dioxin was in the plant killer when they sold it to
the Government for anti-ambush and crop destruction missions.

The suit, in a novel departure in product liability litigation, has since been
turned into a class action taking in up to 100,000 Vietnam veterans who served
in American, Australian or New Zealand forces between 1961 and 1972 and who may
come forward in the future to claim injury. As now envisioned, however, the
trial will treat the cases of only a half-dozen or so representative veterans.

The seven defendants are the Dow Chemical Company; the Monsanto Company; the
Diamond Shamrock Corporation; Uniroyal Inc.; the T.H. Agriculture and Nutrition
Company; the Thompson Chemical Corporation, and Hercules, Inc. They contend that
the Government was informed about the product, a mixture of the herbicides 2,4-D
and 2,4,5-T, and that ''the trace amounts of dioxin in the Agent Orange sold to
the military were not the cause of plaintiffs' alleged injuries.''

Company documents obtained by the veterans indicate that the companies were more
knowledgable and concerned about the dangers of dioxin in their products than
they disclosed to the Government or the public.

The Government itself is shielded under a long- standing doctrine, born of
requirements of military discipline, that servicemen may not sue the military
for duty- related injuries.

Yet Judge Weinstein, patently unhappy about exempting from the case the party
that requisitioned and sprayed the Agent Orange, sees this as ''putting on
'Hamlet' without Hamlet,'' as he said from the bench. Accordingly, he has
ordered the Government to remain as a third-party defendant to possibly share
with the chemical companies any injury claims won by nonmilitary spouses and
children of the veterans.

Liability Potpourri

On Jan. 9, Judge Weinstein is scheduled to hear arguments on the chemical
companies' position that as Government contractors they are also shielded from
lawsuit by servicemen. Coming weeks will bring other crucial rulings. Judge
Weinstein must decide soon which of dozens of different product liability laws
to apply. He is likely to fashion some ''national principle'' of liability law.

Then there is the fundamental problem of a product liability case in which the
plaintiffs are unable to identify the defendant that made the product that
caused the alleged injury. For a traditional product liability action to
succeed, a plaintiff must prove such a relationship. But in the case of Agent
Orange, different company products containing varying dioxin levels were mixed
together in unmarked drums and airplane spraying tanks.

In response, the veterans' lawyers have offered three legal theories that would
shift the burden of proof, making it the companies' burden to prove that they
were not responsible for the claimed injuries.

'Toxicological Cocktail'

One of these theories, known as alternative liability, is based on a California
case in which a hunter was shot in the eye when his two hunting companions each
fired a shot in his direction. Because it was certain that one of the two had
fired the shot but it was impossible to prove which, the court ruled that rather
than require the victim to establish liability, the burden of proof would be
shifted to the two who fired and both would be held jointly liable.

But Dow and other defendants argue that these legal theories do not apply
because it was not one or the other company that definitely caused the veterans'
ailments. Vietnam, said Dow, exposed troops to a ''vast array'' of dangerous
man-made and natural substances that amounted to a ''toxicological cocktail.''

''Add to this each plaintiff's pre- and post-Vietnam history,'' said Dow, ''and
the list of potential alternate causes is staggering.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Big Brother's War

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 529 words


In a fitting inaugural for Orwell's year, Kabul Radio announced last Sunday that
100,000 Afghans were demonstrating against the invasion - of Grenada. If so,
doublethink really reigns in the capital trampled by Soviet legions four years
ago. The pretext, you may recall, was a plagiary from Orwell: an ''invitation''
from a Communist chieftain who was murdered as the invasion began.

But who knows what is happening in Afghanistan? Not the Soviet people, who are
fed a diet of lies. And the West must rely on fragmentary broadcasts, refugees
and an occasional reporter reaching insurgent camps. In that crucial respect,
Afghanistan is not a Vietnam daily revealing the hard truths.

But even Big Brother cannot conceal two truths about Afghanistan. After four
years of brutal occupation, that primitive society remains unpacified. Why else
has the Soviet garrison grown to 120,000 troops? Without those bayonets, Kabul's
regime would be dismembered overnight. Why else would the Russians shrink from a
deal to exchange their withdrawal for an end of all foreign military aid to the
insurgents?

That plan, shaped by a United Nations mediator and favored by Pakistan, offers
the only plausible formula for ending a miserable intervention. But it does
assume a Soviet desire to retreat, which can be encouraged only by continued aid
to the rebels.

Coldly calculated, the Soviet interest in hanging on may be unyielding. Moscow
has already paid a heavy price in casualties and propaganda. What keeps it
engaged is the desire to save face, to retain a new reach toward the Persian
Gulf and to rein- force the belief that every Communist takeover is
irreversible.  The wild card in this speculation is the Afghan resistance.
Neither imperial Britain nor czarist Russia was able to turn these tribesmen
into docile subjects. A marveling Churchill wrote in 1897: ''Every influence,
every motive, that provokes the spirit of murder among men, impels these
mountaineers to deeds of treachery and violence. . . . To the ferocity of the
Zulu are added the craft of the Redskin and the marksmanship of the Boer.''
Soviet experience has confirmed Churchill's grudging tribute. Despite their
helicopter gunships and land mines, the occupiers hold only cities and highways.
And their occupation has done nothing to endear Marxism to the Islamic subjects.
What value bases, or a Red flag, in a sea of hostility?  The Afghans need no
encouragement to resist. But they could use better weapons, especially against
warplanes. A nervous Pakistan, burdened by three million Afghan refugees and
fearing Soviet reprisals, has limited the flow of arms into Afghanistan.
Airdrops to the rebels that do not compromise Pakistan might be one way around
the problem.  America's assistance to rebels fighting a foreign occupier is at
least as defensible as Soviet aid to the Vietcong or assorted ''liberation
movements.'' All hope for a negotiated peace depends on a Soviet recognition
that Afghanistan's traditional neutrality is preferable to a costly and
interminable war. If nurturing that hope requires more clandestine help to
willing fighters, it should be given.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;
THE WALLS HAVE EARS

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 6, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1413 words


''As soon as there is a whiff,'' said Felix Rohatyn, the financial savior of New
York City, ''a whiff of anything remotely relating to money, everybody goes off
the wall.''

The financier was talking about the reaction to the happy news that New York's
Municipal Assistance Corporation, which he heads, may have as much as a
billion-dollar surplus. The unhappy news is that Mr. Rohatyn has misused the
expression off the wall.

From the context of his statement, it can be seen that he meant everybody ''goes
crazy'' or ''blows his cool'' or ''loses his perspective.'' The slang expression
he reached for, but did not quite grasp, was up the wall.

To be driven up the wall is to be driven mad; the term is taken from the action
of a drug addict, deprived of his drug, literally trying to climb the walls of a
cell to vent his frustration and panic. This should not be confused with over
the wall, a prison term for ''escape,'' or to the wall, a business term for
''bankrupt.'' British slanguist Eric Partridge tracked up the wall to 1944,
labeling it ''American serviceman use,'' and it probably began its climb in the
United States before World War II.

Off the wall, however, denotes craziness of a less frenetic sort and is a child
of the 1970's. It means ''zany, unconventional, unusual, offbeat, far-out''; the
connotation is of extreme originality, and the expression is most often spoken
in worried wonderment or amazed admiration. The first citation in Wentworth and
Flexner's Dictionary of American Slang is from a 1970 article by Jon Landau in
Rolling Stone: ''his off-the-wall sense of humor.''

Comparing dictionaries, one finds that American Heritage and Merriam-Webster's
Ninth both have up the wall (''into a state of extreme frustration or
distress,'' ''into a state of intense agitation, annoyance, or frustration'')
while Webster's New World has that and, in addition, off the wall , defined as
''1. unsound of mind; crazy; 2. very eccentric or unconventional.''

The latest up- or off-the- wall front is the compound adjective wall-to-wall ,
which began in the 1940's as a description of carpeting: covering a floor from
wall to wall, without a border of floor showing, which our British cousins call
''edge-to-edge'' or ''fitted carpeting.''

In the 1960's, this flat description was applied metaphorically to other objects
to give an encompassing or jammed-together connotation: Time described a car
with ''a wall-to-wall front grille that conceals the headlights''; The New
Yorker reviewed Bobby Hackett's ''series of wall-to-wall mood- music recordings
with Jackie Gleason''; in The Atlantic in 1970, Paul Warnke wrote of a sea
filled with ''enough ships that there wouldn't be room for theirs - wall-to-wall
ships,'' and Women's Wear Daily reported sighting a disco ''crammed with
wall-to- wall bodies.'' Merriam-Webster is on the ball here with a definition
that goes beyond floor covering to ''ubiquitous.''

M.A.C. chairman Rohatyn is a man accustomed to wall- to-wall critics; he will
have one fewer if he stops driving us up the wall with his misused off the wall
.

Pogey-Bait

In a recent piece drawn from the dinner-table talk at the home of John and Annie
Glenn, I reported that the Senator had used the word pogue to describe ''a
rascally politician''; Lexicographic Irregulars were invited to suggest
derivations.

We have a launch. ''The last time I heard the word pogue ,'' writes James
Stevenson of The New Yorker, ''was in the summer of 1951 at Parris Island, S.C.,
where, as part of the term pogey-bait , it was frequently snarled or shouted by
my platoon's drill instructor. He, and other Marine Corps regulars, used it to
refer contemptuously to candy, chewing gum, soda pop, ice cream and similar
treats favored by civilians.'' Mr. Stevenson adds ruefully: ''It did not occur
to me at the time to interrupt the sergeant and ask him the derivation of the
word. I'm sorry now.''

''Candy, cookies, cake and ice cream were known as pogey-bait ,'' agrees Don
Moran of Brooklyn, ''the fare of young boots. Saltier marines drank beer.''

If pogey-bait was candy, then logic suggests a pogue , or pogey was someone
attracted by the bait. ''A pogey- bait marine , or pogue ,'' writes Marine Corps
Capt. J. F. Collins, now stationed at Camp Lejeune, N.C., ''is someone who does
not share in the hard life of the grunts - clerical or supply personnel, for
example.'' This definition is supported by Joe Golden of East Berne, N.Y. - ''a
clerk or any person that works in an office'' - and by John Howley of Rockaway
Park, N.Y.: ''The company clerk in a rifle company was called an office pogue ,
and everybody in a rifle company called everybody in headquarters company pogues
.'' In the 1978 Vietnam War novel ''Fields of Fire,'' by James Webb, a glossary
entry deadpans: ''Pogue: a marine assigned to rear-area duties.'' ''No matter
how close to the front lines you were,'' writes former infantry officer James
Kirk of Rocky River, Ohio, ''unless you were the point man, there was always
someone else who considered you a pogue . As a platoon commander, I considered
the company commander and his headquarters personnel to be pogues and was in
turn considered a pogue by my squad leaders who, in turn, were considered pogues
by their subordinates.''

Although the term probably has a homosexual origin, that meaning seems to be
fading. A former naval person who was at the Glenn dinner party that night
recalls that ''pogey-, pogie-, or even pogy - bait was universally used to
describe candy, as in Hershey bars or Mars bars or Milky Ways. The candy was the
bait, and pogey (spelled however) referred to young persons of the opposite sex,
whose resistance presumably could be worn down by offers of candy.''

Jeremiah O'Leary, a reporter for The Washington Times - and, like Senator Glenn,
a former marine - offers this analysis: ''In the strictest sense, the word
refers to pederasty and seems to derive from the era of the China Marines
stationed in Shanghai in the years before World War II. But pogue - I'll use
your spelling because I doubt if anyone really knows how to spell a word that is
almost never written - can be either a deadly insult or a term of amiable
affection, depending entirely on who uses the word, the tone of voice and to
whom it is being applied. . . .

''A marine might say, 'Jones is a good old pogue,' of someone held in very high
regard. A more subtle meaning might be fuddy-duddy, which is how I deduced Glenn
was referring to the old pogue he used to know in Ohio. In short, the word has a
reverse meaning from the original simply because it was so commonplace an
expression.''

Mr. O'Leary, like many other Marine veterans who responded to the query, does
not believe the current meaning of the term is intended to cast aspersions on a
candy- loving recruit as a sissy or wimp: ''Marines of Glenn's generation and
mine use the word only as a term of affection or about someone who is mildly
incompetent.

''For etymologic derivation, if I cared enough,'' concludes Mr. O'Leary, ''I'd
look in a Cantonese or Mandarin dictionary, because the origin is clearly of
Chinese roots.''

That etymology does not come readily to hand, but many Irish Lex Irregs have
pointed out that pogue is a Gaelic word for kiss : ''There is an Irish play
called 'Arrah- na-Pogue ,' '' writes T. J. Moorehead of Norwich, N.Y., ''by Dion
Boucicault, set in County Wicklow in 1798. The heroine is known as Arrah-na-
Pogue (Arrah of the Kiss) because of the ingenious way by which she smuggled
escape plans to a rebel held in Wicklow jail.'' That is a charming story, far
better than the scatological Gaelic rhyming epithet put forward by other
correspondents, and contains the overtones of political chicanery alluded to by
Senator Glenn.

Before leaving the etymology of pogue, let us admit to the possibility of being
totally off base. James Anderson of the V F W Magazine tossed in this
disconcerting afterthought: ''I think it should be noted that the pogy is a
common fish on the Atlantic seaboard and dictionary references link it with
menhaden. No doubt pogey-bait, hence pogue , arose from the worthlessness of the
fish except as a source of oil or fertilizer. Combine this with the large number
of Marine Corps bases on either coast and you have its probable origin.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: cartoon

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS January 1, 1984Fiction1118

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1253 words


POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  229

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  3328

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  4418

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  577

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfilling a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  667

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A detective from Earth
investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  7917

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  8107

MORETA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  989

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
10530

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  11115

THE NEVERENDING STORY, by Michael Ende. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A lonely boy meets
challenges and finds his true self in a magical land.  12142

BERLIN GAME, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $15.95.) Espionage on both sides of the
Iron Curtain.  131222

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  141315

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  151515

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous1 13

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  2 1

WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY, SECOND COLLEGE EDITION.  (Simon & Schuster,
$14.95. Indexed, $15.95.) A standard reference work updated in 1982.  3 29

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  4 11

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide
for women prepared by the staff of a cosmetics firm.  5 1

TOTALLY TASTELESS, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $6.95.) Humor.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.


 Nonfiction 1115

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2216

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  3351

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  446

WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.  5518

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  6660

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

7711

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $22.50.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the recent PBS television series.  889

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.  993

THE HUMAN BODY, by Jonathan Miller. (Viking, $16.95.) A pop-up book illustrating
the workings of the human body.  10103

ONE BRIEF SHINING MOMENT, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $25.) A
profusely illustrated tribute to John F. Kennedy.  111337

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon. (Atlantic/Little, Brown, $17.50.) A
report on a trip through the back roads of America.  12 1

APPROACHING HOOFBEATS: HORSEMEN OF THE APOCALYPSE, by Billy Graham. (Word Books,
$11.95.) The evangelist's interpretation of the Book of Revelation.  131473

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  14117

A HERO FOR OUR TIME, by Ralph G. Martin. (Macmillan, $19.95.) An anecdotal
account of the Kennedy years.  15152

THE KINGDOM BY THE SEA, by Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) A
novelist's journey around Great Britain.  And Bear in Mind(Other recent books of
particular interest)

RAMES OF MIND: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences, by Howard

Gardner. (Basic Books, $23.50.) A psychologist argues that separate

faculties of intelligence come from different areas of the brain.

HISTORICAL ATLAS OF WORLD MYTHOLOGY: Volume One. The Way of

the Animal Powers, by Joseph Campbell. (Harper & Row, $75.) The start of

the most ambitious of all encyclopedias of mythology.

IN THE SHADOW OF FDR: From Harry Truman to Ronald Reagan, by

William E. Leuchtenburg. (Cornell, $19.95.) The challenge the eight

Presidents since Roosevelt have faced in competing with his image.

ISRAEL IN THE MIND OF AMERICA, by Peter Grose. (Knopf, $17.95.) The

developments that led to the present relationship between the United States

and Israel, dealing mostly with the story after 1940.

JOSEPH CONRAD: A Chronicle, by Zdzislaw Najder. (Rutgers. Cloth, $30;

paper, $14.95.) A major work of literary scholarship that avoids fanciful

theorizing, sticking to the facts of Conrad's life.

LIFE & TIMES OF MICHAEL K, by J. M. Coetzee. (Viking, $13.95.) A novel

by the South African writer about a repressive country at war in which an

unexpectedly intelligent simpleton nobly endures.

PITCH DARK, by Renata Adler. (Knopf, $12.95.) Like ''Speedboat,'' Miss

Adler's new novel reflects her analytical mind and ebullient style. It also

has an old-fashioned real story to tell, a love story.

THE SUCCESSION: A Novel of Elizabeth and James, by George Garrett.

(Doubleday, $17.95.) Not just the story of the transfer of power from

Elizabeth I to James I but a major achievement in fiction.

WINSTON S. CHURCHILL: Finest Hour 1939-1941, by Martin Gilbert.  (Houghton
Mifflin, $40.) The sixth volume of the official biography unfolds

on a scale appropriate to its heroic subject.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words


THE LAST JEWS IN BERLIN, by Leonard Gross. (Bantam, $3.95.)

Leonard Gross has fashioned an illuminating book from interviews with a handful
of Jews who managed to live through World War II in Berlin. ''No one should
dismiss (this) as a mere footnote to history,'' Thurston Clark said in his
review, which praised the author's ''skillful selection of detail and his
narrative drive'' and pointed out that, as the Jews who went underground tell
their miraculous stories, ''their survival is explained by certain shared
qualities.''

PRINCE OMBRA, by Roderick MacLeish. (For, $3.50.)

Eight-year-old Bentley Ellicott, ''born with memories of his soul's existence
before his birth,'' must once again fight Prince Ombra, the incarnation of evil,
over the fate of the world in a novel our critic, Eve Ottenberg, said was fun to
read. ''Full of mythological references and bits of heroic legends from
different ages and places,'' ''Prince Ombra'' is dominated by a character called
Dr. Kreistein, an 88-year-old Jungian psychiatrist who helps Bentley prepare for
his ordeal.

EMPIRE OF SIGNS, by Roland Barthes. (Hill and Wang, $5.95.)

In ''Empire of Signs,'' the founder of semiology analyzed a fictive nation
called Japan which, he said, provided him with ''a reserve of features whose
manipulation - whose invented interplay - allows me to 'entertain' the idea of
an unheard-of symbolic system.'' Barthes, who died in 1980, saw Japan as ''a
test, a challenge to think the unthinkable, a place where meaning is finally
banished,'' our critic, Edmund White, said. The translation is by Richard
Howard.

THE BOOK OF THE CITY OF LADIES, by Christine de Pizan. (Persea Books, $9.95.)

An astonishing, original work, this allegory written in 1405 constitutes ''an
eloquent defense of women against the assault of male authors,'' according to
our critic, Maureen Quilligan. ''Christine not only gives her readers a
remarkable revision of women's history but also anatomizes the nature of female
prophetic authority,'' she said, adding that Earl Jeffrey Richards has done a
''most readable'' translation, the first one in English since 1521.

GRACE ABOUNDING, by Maureen Howard. (Penguin, $4.95.)

''More nearly the story of one person than any of Mrs. Howard's other novels'' -
as Noel Perrin noted in his review - ''Grace Abounding'' centers on Maude Dowd,
an attractive Irish Catholic whom we meet when she is a widow with a teen-age
daughter and a senile mother. Mr. Perrin found the book ''a little too short for
its plot'' but said it conveyed ''a sense of lives as they are really lived such
as only a small minority of novelists in each generation can or even want to
manage.''

MOUNTAIN IN THE CLOUDS: A Search for the Wild Salmon, by Bruce Brown.
(S&S/Touchstone, $6.95.)

Just a few generations of human settlement sufficed to decimate the Pacific
salmon in the rivers of Washington State's Olympic Peninsula, and Bruce Brown's
thoughtful study shows that people conquered the fish with ''brute force,
ignorance and greed,'' as Frederika Randall's review noted. ''Mountain in the
Clouds'' is ''a model of ecological history'' that is sharply critical of
industrial practices and Government policies.

REGINA, by Leslie Epstein. (Avon/Bard, $3.95.) In his third novel, the author of
''The King of the Jews'' focuses on a middle-aged actress who has been working
as a critic but agrees to return to the stage in a revival of ''The Seagull.''
Through her story, George Stade observed in his review, Leslie Epstein subtly
and convincingly dramatizes ''the relations between art and life . . . the ways
in which we play parts that wind up playing us.'' This kind of novel is risky,
Mr. Stade said, ''but Mr. Epstein's control is equal to his daring.''

SLOPPY KISSES, by Elizabeth Winthrop. Pictures by Anne Burgess. (Penguin/Picture
Puffins, $3.50.) Elizabeth Winthrop's story for readers 3-5 tells what happens
when Emmy Lou, whose family loves to kiss, hears her friend Rosemary announce
that kissing is ''just for babies'' and decides to give it up. Anne Burgess
depicts the characters, who are elegantly attired pigs, in lively poses and soft
colors.

LIVING BY FICTION, by Annie Dillard. (Harper/ Colophon, $4.95.) The Pulitzer
Prize-winning author of ''Pilgrim at Tinker Creek'' believes literature by
Vladimir Nabokov, Samuel Beckett, Robert Coover and other ''contemporary
modernists'' may be a source of ideas that give meaning to life in an apparently
meaningless world, as Vance Bourjaily remarked in his review. This collection of
essays is ''a stimulating book . . . in which quality of thought and felicity of
prose seem consequences of one another.'' Miss Dillard's

TEACHING A STONE TO TALK is also available (Harper/Colophon, $5.95).

THE LAST AMBASSADOR, by Bernard Kalb and Marvin Kalb. (Charter, $3.95.) A novel
by two veteran diplomatic correspondents, ''The Last Ambassador'' is ''honorable
and, in its attempt to illustrate what they understand to be the truths of our
country's last days in Vietnam, deeply moral,'' our reviewer, Alan Cheuse, said,
but ''thrilling it is not.'' The cast features Hadden Walker, America's envoy to
South Vietnam, his beautiful daughter and her lover, a C.I.A. agent.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY. Volume I: 1907-1937, Journey East, Journey West, by Mircea
Eliade. (Harper, $9.95.) ''Much of the great interest in this book lies in the
fact that this one man's life is a microcosm of the pilgrimage of this century's
restless soul through extravagant hopes, dreams and terrors,'' according to our
reviewer, Robert S. Ellwood Jr., who called Mircea Eliade ''one of the greatest
scholars of religion in our times.'' Mac Linscott Ricketts' fine translation
''conveys beautfiully Mr. Eliade's clean, lucid, yet evocative style.''

MINOR CHARACTERS, by Joyce Johnson. (Pocket/ Washington Square, $3.95.) Joyce
Johnson, who was Jack Kerouac's girlfriend - more or less and on and off - for
two years, has written a compelling ''memoir of her childhood as well as of her
coming of age in the counterculture during the period of cold war and other-
directed gray flannel suits.'' Our reviewer, Helen Chasin, thought the book
graphically depicts the beat scene's ''underlying restlessness and movement that
come to seem . . . a servitude instead of liberation.''B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CLASS REUNION: MILESTONE OF ADULTHOOD

BYLINE: By GARY ROSENBERGER; Gary Rosenberger is on the staff of the
metropolitan desk of The Times.

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 16, Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words


THERE is no known cure for a deflated high school spirit. It is a degenerative
condition that persists beyond high school.  I found that out recently when
symptoms I hadn't known for 10 years recurred after an invitation came by mail
for my high school reunion: facial tiks, sweaty palms, rapid breathing. All
these years, I suddenly realized, I had only been in remission.

Why a reunion? I asked myself.

If those old Mamaroneck High School days hadn't been altogether terrible, I'm
certain that my friends and I would still be there, sitting in a classroom
poring over some trigonometry problem.

But Rick and Nuna got married to each other two years ago, and are content to be
ex-suburbanites living in Greenwich Village. Skipper, an engineer, moved to
Minnesota. Steve is a school bus driver in Oregon. Robert produces video in
California. Jon is an enterprising capitalist in Boston. Amy is a Harvard
professor. Niels is a chef in Colorado.

What a prospective reunion brought to mind were those endless waits for the 3
o'clock bell to ring. Tedious homework assignments. Asking for permission to go
to the bathroom. Staying after school on gum-chewing charges.

Worse yet, I thought, was the prospect of meeting people measuring their
accomplishments against mine.

Nina, another graduate who I met in the Village apartment of Rick and Nuna soon
after I got my invitation, made me especially anxious on this count.

She said, ''I'm so glad that I decided to get married and go to law school this
year. Otherwise I wouldn't have anything to talk about at the reunion. I
couldn't bear to see any of my old classmates, having accomplished nothing in 10
years.''

A high school reunion is a serious indication of having reached adulthood.

I can clearly remember a time when I defined an adult as anyone who had reached
the sixth grade. When I reached that point, I realized I was being hasty - that
''adult'' really meant being a senior in high school. There was always someone
who seemed more mature than me just around the bend.

The invitation to the reunion was a palpable reminder that my high school days
ended a tenth of a century ago. There was no use in further denying the truth.
''I am old,'' I said to my wife.

There was one final element in this equation. The M.H.S. class of '73 is perhaps
the only one in history that has nothing at all to reminisce about.

We missed Woodstock and the Vietnam War. My memories are incredibly tame
compared with those who graduated one or two years before me. I still shudder
when I think about our football team, the worst one in the county.

If memory serves, the Mamaroneck Tigers didn't win a single game in my junior
year. In my four years of high school, I think they barely won half a dozen.

Well, I thought, I might see Debbie once more.

Debbie was my high school crush. I never came around to telling her she was. I
was not one to take risks 10 years ago. I thought I had too much too lose. She
would only slight me for my total insignificance or, worse yet, for the pimple
that seemed permanently affixed to my nose.

I looked forward to seeing Debbie again. To say to her, ''See? Pimple gone.'' I
stepped into the banquet hall rented for the night by my class president and
didn't see Debbie. I was crushed. Even my wife was looking forward to meeting
Debbie - to gloat over every wrinkle on her face, over every pound she might
have gained.

Nina, the lawyer-to-be, as promised, came that night. She actually brought
wedding pictures to show to the unsuspecting. I looked up her name in the
reunion guide to see what she had written about herself. It read: ''Discovered
sex after graduation... Currently commuting to law school. Married Aug. 83 to
longtime roommate. Even my mother likes him.'' At midnight, Nina attempted to
lead a chorus of the school song. Her high school spirit had not withered one
bit in the decade. She was the only person there who could remember any of the
words.

Michael O'Keefe came also. Today, Michael O'Keefe is a Hollywood movie star
(''Caddyshack,'' ''The Great Santini''). In high school, his name was Ray
O'Keefe, and he must have been very quiet and unassuming because I don't
remember him. But Michael O'Keefe has single-handedly redeemed Mamaroneck High.
The only other celebrity to have gone there was Norman Rockwell - and he dropped
out.

''Where are all the greasers?'' one alumnus asked. I was flabbergasted. It
really was a very naive question. Twenty-eight-year-old greasers are something
of a rare commodity. As it happened, the former greasers were the best-dressed,
most clean-cut people at the reunion. They would have made any mother proud.

All night I was at a loss for things to say. I went up to one woman and said to
her with a proud inflection, ''Look at you. I remember you when we went to
Hebrew school together.''

She thanked me for the compliment and proceeded: ''But you ought to know that I
never went to Hebrew school.''

One person approached me and said, ''I'm working on my doctoral thesis at Yale.
It's on Genius.''

I approached one woman who, at 28, is still an aspiring actress. She never got
the breaks Michael O'Keefe got. I felt bad for her. She really had been in
Hebrew School: I was in a Hanukkah play with her that was widely panned. I joked
with her about it. I couldn't help realizing that going to a reunion meant
confronting a lot of dashed hopes and dreams.

But I'll tell you why I was glad I went. I was glad because of Ann. I always
liked her, though from a distance. She always said hello to everyone she passed
in the halls, even me. And her hellos were really sincere. She was very pretty
and, in the ninth grade, about six feet tall. I am now 6 feet 2, but in those
days I was about 5 feet 5 and intimidated by height, among the other sundry
things.

I guess I hadn't thought about her over the years, but when she told me that she
had moved to Nashville, introduced me to her good-looking husband and told me
she had just had a baby, well, I felt really good for her. She made my night.

I'm not going to my 20th-year class reunion. I'm going to follow Chris's
example. Chris wrote a letter from Talkeetna, Alaska, that was reprinted in the
guide.

He wrote, ''A dog sled just came in and delivered the mail. Sorry I can't make
it, but the rivers haven't frozen yet, making travel difficult.'' I have 10 more
years to think up an equally good excuse.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN TRUTHS-CRITICS' ERRORS-ON SOUTH AFRICA AND VIETNAM

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 172 words


To the Editor: One of President Reagan's ''docu

mented errors,'' according to Mark Green and Gail McColl's Op-Ed article, is the
reported statement that ''Vietnam was two countries for centuries.''

The standard works available to me indicate that for almost 50 years in the 16th
century Vietnam was divided between the Le dynasty and Mac Dang Dung. Then, from
1620 until 1786, the Le and the Nguyen divided effective rule of the country.
Unity was restored by the Emperor Gia Long (1802), but in 1862 Tu Duc signed
away Saigon and three southern provinces to the French. The country remained
divided until 1975.

The sum of all those divisions would seem, by most standards at least, to cover
the President from the charge of inaccuracy. In fact, Mr. Reagan seems to have
demonstrated a deeper knowledge of Vietnam than the great majority of
commentators, for whom the history of that unhappy people began in 1965, 1954 or
at best during the Second World War.

GERALD W. SCOTT New York, Dec. 21, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN TRUTHS-CRITICS' ERRORS-ON SOUTH AFRICA AND VIETNAM

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 318 words


To the Editor:


Whatever one's opinion of Ronald Reagan and the Government of South Africa, it
is wrong to distort historical fact in order to score points against either.

In their Dec. 20 Op-Ed article attacking the accuracy of Mr. Reagan's
statements, Mark Green and Gail McColl challenge the President's assertion that
''South Africa stood beside us in World War II,'' claiming that, in fact,
''nearly all its heads of state sympathized with the Nazis.''

While there were - and still are - Nazi sympathizers in South Africa, the facts
are clearly on the President's side. When war was declared between Great Britain
and Germany in September 1939, Jan Christiaan Smuts broke with the coalition
that governed South Africa and won a crucial resolution against neutrality. He
formed a government and concentrated its energies on the war.

About 200,000 whites (more than half of them Afrikaners) and 125,000
''nonwhites'' joined the forces, many serving in the Ethiopian and Mediterranean
theaters of war. Field Marshal Montgomery's memoirs tell of the role of the
First South African Division in the decisive battle at El Alamein and at Alam
Halfa before that.  The South African pilots I met in Tunisia were keen and
highly motivated, respected by the other elements of the Desert Air Force.  As
one historian sums it up, ''South Africa's achievements were impressive,
considering the strength of the opposition to the war.'' Nor should we forget
that it was Jan Smuts who drafted the preamble to the United Nations Charter.
Green and McColl are entitled to voice their opinion of Ronald Reagan, but not
by means of distorting the role of Jan Smuts, of those who gave him his
parliamentary majority and maintained it throughout the war and of the South
Africans who served, fought and died in our war against Hitler.

ROBERT A. RIESMAN Providence, R.I., Dec. 21,1983

*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnamese Guns Shell Cambodian Rebels

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 224 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 1


Vietnamese soldiers occupying Cambodia heavily shelled Cambodian guerrilla bases
along the Thai border today, Thai military sources said.

Thai Army officers patrolling the border said the shelling from Vietnamese
155-millimeter artillery began late Saturday night and could still be heard this
afternoon in the Thai border town of Aranyaprathet, 120 miles east of Bangkok.

Thai Army and border patrol police units were put on maximum alert shortly
before noon today as several stray shells from Vietnamese artillery batteries
burst into Thai border villages.

There were no reports of casualties on the Thai side of the border, but a Thai
officer said he expected many Cambodian civilians would get caught in crossfire
between the Vietnamese and forces fighting the Vietnamese- backed regime in
Phnom Penh.

Another field military source said the Vietnamese artillery attack, which
followed a week of relative quiet at the border, was the heaviest of the current
dry season.

Leaders of the three-party Cambodian coalition fighting Vietnam's 155,000-strong
occupation army were in Peking last week lobbying for increased Chinese military
support.

Military sources said the Vietnamese artillery attacks Saturday and today came
from a base near Ban Nimit, eight miles east of Aranyaprathet, and from several
other bases along Route 5.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SENATOR TOWER OFF TODAY TO THE MIDEAST

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 724 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 1


Senator John Tower, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, plans to leave
here Monday for the Middle East on a hastily arranged trip in which he intends
to see whether American marines should be withdrawn from Lebanon, Congressional
officials said today.

Mr. Tower, a key Republican, is one of the President's strongest supporters on
military issues. One Congressional official asserted that any recommendation
from Mr. Tower on what to do about the Marines could have a ''profound'' effect
on the President.

Mr. Tower was scheduled to meet with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, Prime
Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel, President Amin Gemayel of Lebanon, King
Hussein of Jordan and possibly President Hafez al-Assad of Syria, as well as
foreign and defense ministers in those nations.

The Senator from Texas was also scheduled to meet with Marine Corps and Navy
commanders in Beirut. He has already conferred with Mr. Reagan's special envoy
in the Middle East, Donald Rumsfeld, and plans to meet with Mr. Rumsfeld again
during the weeklong trip.

Focus on One Broad Issue

Congressional officials said Mr. Tower's trip would focus on one broadly defined
issue: whether President Reagan's strategic objectives in the Middle East can be
achieved and whether they are worth the risks involved.

The officials said Mr. Tower would try to determine whether a variety of
negotiations over peace in the region, over withdrawal of Syrian forces from
Lebanon and over conflicts among belligerent factions in Lebanon had any chance
of success.

Mr. Tower was said to have become increasingly worried about the advice that
President Reagan was getting from Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Robert
C. McFarlane, the national security adviser. Both men have advocated keeping the
Marines in Lebanon.

In contrast, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger and the special Defense Department commission headed by Adm. Robert
L. J. Long, retired, have urged that the Marines be pulled out as soon as
possible and that diplomatic solutions be sought.

Long Military Conflict Feared

Senior military officers, according to Defense Department officials, fear that
the United States could be dragged into a long conflict, like that in Vietnam,
in which political and military objectives would be vague and public support
lacking.

Mr. Tower will meet with President Reagan shortly after his return from the
Middle East, the officials said, to present his observations and make
recommendations. They said the White House had been informed of the Senator's
plans.

The officials said they doubted that Mr. Tower would make his views known
publicly because he usually seeks to influence policy by private persuasion.

3 Ex-Aides Urge Pullout

WASHINGTON, Jan. 1 (Reuters) - Three former Directors of Central Intelligence
called today for the withdrawal of United States Marines from Beirut, arguing
that their presence was worsening the Lebanese conflict.

In an interview on the NBC News program ''Meet The Press,'' two of the former
C.I.A. chiefs, Adm. Stansfield Turner and William E. Colby, both described the
presence of 1,800 marines in Beirut as ''inappropriate'' to a multinational
peacekeeping mission.

In another interview, on the ABC News program ''This Week,'' James R.
Schlesinger said a Marine pullout was the only option for Mr. Reagan unless the
President was willing to step up United States military involvement to change
the balance of power in Lebanon.

Mr. Colby, who headed the intelligence agency during the Nixon and Ford
Administrations, said: ''We should not be sending superpower forces to a
peacekeeping mission. The Marines are not a peacekeeping force.''

Admiral Turner, who was Director of Central Intelligence during the Carter
Administration, argued that the Marines could no longer be viewed as neutral
peacekeepers because they had, since September, ''clearly entered the Lebanese
conflict on the side of the Gemayel Government.''

Mr. Schlesinger, a Director of Central Intelligence under President Nixon and
later Defense Secretary during the Nixon and Ford Administrations, said that
under current conditions in Lebanon more and more marine casualties were likely.
''The worst of all policies is to hang in there,'' he declared.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET BLOC IS REPORTED TO INFLATE AID FIGURES

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Jan. 1


A British Government study of foreign aid contends that the aid given to
developing countries by the Soviet bloc is actually far smaller than the amounts
the Soviet Union and the Eastern European countries claim to give.

The Soviet Union, the study says, reported to the United Nations that it gave
$44 billion in aid between 1976 and 1980. The study asserts that the actual
amount of aid given was only $8 billion, which is a small part of the Soviet
gross national product.

''Soviet and East European aid generally compares unfavorably with that of
Western donors,'' the study says. The aid given, it adds, is a ''low proportion
of their G.N.P.'s and below the levels claimed recently by the U.S.S.R.'' and
East Germany.

A large group of aid recipients, moreover, receive ''negative aid'' from the
Soviet bloc countries, according to the study. The study says the repayments on
outstanding aid loans made by these countries are larger than the amount they
get in new aid from the Soviet bloc countries.

Evaluating Soviet Statements

The study was completed in May of this year by the British Economic Service of
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and circulated privately among Western
delegations to the United Nations. It was undertaken to evaluate Soviet
statements, made to the United Nations Economic and Social Council, that, in
essence, the East bloc gives proportionally more aid to the third world than the
Western countries do.

The United Nations has set 0.7 percent of the gross national product as a target
for the industrialized nations to give as aid to the developing countries.

The Soviet Union, in statements to the United Nations, has said that its aid
rose from 0.9 percent of the gross national product in 1976 to 1.3 percent of
G.N.P. in 1980.

The British study says that total Soviet aid to other countries amounted to 0.19
percent of the Soviet gross national product in 1980, compared with a composite
total of 0.35 percent for the leading 17 Western aid-giving countries in 1981.
There is no sign, the study adds, that the amount of Soviet aid has increased
during the past three years.

The aid programs of the six Eastern European countries most closely linked to
Moscow are extremely small, according to the study. ''In recent years,'' it
says, ''the combined East European disbursements were less than those of one
relatively small Western donor alone, Belgium.''

Data Insufficient

The figures and estimates cited in the study are those of the British Government
and the Secretariat of the Development Assistance Committee, which is a
subcommittee of the 17 largest aid donors of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development. The organization's 25 members are primarily Western
industrialized nations.

The study cites what it calls the ''best estimates'' available of the amounts
and the kind of aid disbursed by the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, the
nine-member Soviet-bloc economic cooperation and aid group. According to the
study, the data available suggest that ''the U.S.S.R.'s net aid disbursements
during 1976-80 were about $8 billion, not $44 billion as claimed.''

Most Goes to 6 Nations

The study says that in general Soviet aid is heavily concentrated on six
countries: Cuba, Mongolia, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Afghanistan. The study
refers to these six as the Group 1 countries.

All other developing countries make up Group 2, the study says, and it is this
group that has received what it calls ''negative aid.''

The Group 1 countries, all of which are Communist-ruled and closely linked
politically to the Soviet Union, received an average of 65 percent of all Soviet
aid between 1976 and 1982, the study says; the figure was 76 percent in 1982.

In Group 2, a large share of the aid disbursed is composed of ''a few large
commitments,'' the study says. It mentions Morocco, India, Turkey and Bangladesh
as Group 2 countries that have received large amounts of aid from the Soviet
Union or the Eastern European countries.

''With the exception of these isolated large amounts, commitments to Group 2
countries were much lower than those to Group 1,'' the study says.

''Soviet net aid to Group 2 has been negative since 1980, with the net flow to
Group 2 during 1976-82'' amounting to minus $82 million, the study says.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BYRON G. ROGERS DEAD AT 83; SERVED IN CONGRESS 20 YEARS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 43, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 329 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Jan. 1


Former Representative Byron G. Rogers, who served 10 terms in Congress and was
regarded by colleagues as a champion of civil rights, died at the Rose Medical
Center here Saturday. He was 83 years old.

The Democrat was hospitalized Friday when one of his major blood vessels burst,
and he died early Saturday after undergoing surgery at the center, said his
daughter, Shirley Ann Martin of Leawood, Kan.

''It's really sad,'' said Representative Pat Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado who
occupies Mr. Rogers's seat. ''I think he's how politicians should be. His ego
never got in the way of what he was supposed to do. Byron's reputation in
Washington was just for putting in endless hours on civil rights. He was known
as 'old civil-rights Rogers.' ''

A Native of Texas

Byron Giles Rogers was born Aug. 1, 1900, in Greenville, Tex. He graduated from
the University of Denver Law School in 1925, was elected to the Colorado House
of Representatives in 1931, and became the House's speaker two years later.

After periods as an assistant United States Attorney and as the Colorado
Attorney General, he was elected to represent the Denver area in Congress. He
served from 1950 to 1970.

Mr. Rogers was fond of describing how he had brought federally funded
institutions and projects to Colorado, including the Chatfield Dam and the
Colorado Big Thompson Transmountain Irrigation Project, which brought water to
much of northeast Colorado.

Member of Judiciary Panel

He was on the Judiciary Committee in the peak of civil rights debate in the
1960's. However, he began to lose ground in Colorado over the nation's
involvement in Vietnam, which he strongly supported and was ousted in the 1970
primary by an antiwar Democrat, who subsequently lost to a Republican.

He continued to live in Washington for 10 years, working for a law firm. He
returned to Colorado in 1980.

Besides his daughter, Mr. Rogers is also survived by his wife, Helen.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HART WILLINGLY TACKLES ISSUE OF 'CAN HE WIN?'

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 696 words


Senator Gary Hart is known for his public ''cool,'' but he warms up to the
subject of many politicians writing him off early as a serious Presidential
contender.

''I can't for the life of me figure out why,'' the Senator said as he rolled in
his fingers a large cigar he had lit as he sat down for an interview in his
Senate office.

The 46-year-old Colorado Democrat knows what it is like to be an underdog. He
was the campaign manager when George McGovern won the Democratic Presidential
nomination in 1972, then went on to be buried in the landslide that carried
Richard M. Nixon into his second term.

Mr. Hart noted that Mr. McGovern, now an unexpected rival for the nomination,
had not been taken seriously either until he started winning primaries. ''Jimmy
Carter was not anywhere near where I am,'' he said of Mr. Carter's uphill
Presidential race that began two years before the 1976 election. ''I do not know
of any dark- horse campaign that took off, if you will, in any measurable way,
financially, at the polls or public attention in the press until the primaries
began.''

His campaign will take off or crash- land in the Iowa Democratic caucuses Feb.
20 and the New Hampshire primary Feb. 28.

Fund-Raising Problem

The Senator's campaign manager and longtime friend, Oliver (Pudge) Henkel,
acknowledged that the early tests would be critical for Mr. Hart, who has had
serious fund-raising difficulties and could have little funds available for the
Iowa and New Hampshire efforts. The Senator has raised $1.3 million in the last
year, spent it and borrowed $570,000 more, which will be repaid with about
$600,000 in Federal matching funds that will be available tomorrow.

Money for Iowa and New Hampshire? ''We have to raise a lot in January,'' said
Kathy Bushkin, the campaign press secretary.

''We're positioned best in New Hampshire; we should run second or third there,''
said Mr. Henkel, who is on leave from his Cleveland law firm to run the Hart
campaign. One problem is that at least three rivals have staked out the same
second- and third-place finish. Walter F. Mondale is the widely acknowledged
front-runner in both Iowa and New Hampshire.

''My campaign has the most potential to break out,'' the Senator said, repeating
an argument that he has used in conversations with politicians and potential
contributors, ''to really capture people's imagination because of my age, my
generation, the ideas that I put forward.

''No one has said, 'This man isn't qualified for President.' No one said, 'His
ideas are screwy.' No one has said, 'He's too young,' which I frankly
anticipated a lot. The only thing people say is 'He can't win' or 'Can he win?'
''

Then, in a tone betraying exasperation, he added: ''And, I keep saying that the
only way I can show you I can win is when the primaries start.''

Old Causes, New Ideas

The Senator's close identification with the McGovern campaign and its anti-
Vietnam War cause gave him a distinct liberal cast, but he is certainly not
carrying the McGovern banner now - not even before the South Dakotan revived his
quest for the Presidency.

Mr. Hart describes himself as a liberal, but he does not make a point of it. He
calls himself a traditional Democrat with new ideas - a liberal on traditional
Democratic social legislation but one who emphasizes the economy and military
issues. To some, that makes him a neo-liberal or a Henry Jackson Democrat.

His constant refrain is that the economy must expand to provide ''equality and
justice'' and that Democrats must emphasize military strength because of a wide
perception that the party is ''soft on defense.''

Mr. Hart, a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee and a founder of the
Congressional Military Reform Caucus, does not talk of more military spending
but rather a shift in priorities.

That is consistent with his self-portrayal as a new face with new ideas, though
he has been in the Senate nine years. He was an old Washington hand even before
that, counting his time with the McGovern campaign and service in the Justice
and Interior departments in Lyndon B. Johnson's Administration.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SLAYING OF BOY STUNS REFUGEE FAMILY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Jan. 1


Chrysanthemums and red carnations lay frozen on the ground where the snow was
cleared last week in Ottawa, Ill., to bury 12- year-old Aly Thao. He had died
violently in the country to which the family had fled to leave a violent war
behind.

The Rev. Xuxu Thao, who had brought his 11-member family to the United States
from Laos in 1976, said he was sitting next to his son in their car when a
robber, seemingly almost as an afterthought, shot the boy in the head.

After the funeral, Mr. Thao spoke of how the horror of this killing seemed worse
than what he had seen in the Vietnam War.

Mr. Thao, 49, spoke in his native language, Hmong, as his eldest son, Paoze,
translated. ''When first I came to the United States,'' he said, ''I expected a
lot. We wanted a new life. But when this kind of thing happens, my son dies next
to me by men who didn't even know him, when we had no ammunition to protect
ourselves, it makes me scared. In a war, you know who your enemies are. Here,
you don't know if the person walking up to you will hurt you.''

Three St. Louis men have been charged with murder and are being held in
Montgomery County, Ill. The police say they are convinced that there were only
three attackers, but the Thao family said four men held guns to their heads. Mr.
Thao said the family remains frightened and nervous.

Like most Hmong people in the central Laotian province, the Thaos were loyal to
the United States and worked in the war for the Central Intelligence Agency,
helping to find American pilots shot down in the jungle and block Communist
ammunition shipments along the Ho Chi Minh trail. When United States troops
withdrew, the Hmong (pronounced mung) were especially persecuted by the
Communists.

Mr. Thao's family, accustomed to Communists ransacking homes for hidden guns,
kept weapons hidden in the farm's rice fields. ''But, here, we had no intention
to have guns,'' he said. ''I don't understand why they give them guns and why
they kill.''

A group of Ottawa churches sponsored their 1976 emigration from a Thai refugee
camp. Mr. Thao, leader of the Lao Evangelical Church, one of the first Christian
ministries in Laos, now heads a group of Laotian refugees who worship at the
Ottawa Wesleyan Church.

In the house Mr. Thao built next to a pleasant hill from his earnings at a
factory, his family grew silent as he recounted the night of Dec. 26.

He had been invited to deliver the Christmas sermon Dec. 25 to a Laotian group
in Fort Smith, Ark. The next day he packed to return to Illinois. He and Aly
climbed into the back of their turquoise 1977 Buick Opel, and his 22- year-old
son, Long, sat next to the driver, 17-year-old David.

The temperature was below zero when they neared Springfield on Interstate 55
that night. A car crept up and began to bump them from the rear.

Forced to Side of Road ''I told David to speed up, but they kept bumping,'' Mr.
Thao said. ''So I said possibly they are drunk, and to move into the left
lane.''

When David pulled over to the left lane to allow the car to pass, the car forced
them onto the shoulder. Mr. Thao said that three men had ''long guns, another
had a short gun.''

''They each pointed a gun at us,'' he said. ''They took David's keys, some tape
cassettes, jewelry, and my wallet, which had between $500 and $1,000 in it,''
including his travel expenses from the church collection.

Mr. Thao said that while three of the robbers grouped in front of the car to
examine the contents of the wallet, a fourth shot Aly. Not wanting to frighten
the other sons and further provoke the attackers, he did not tell them that Aly,
slumped next to him, was dead.

Before the men drove away, David wrote down a Missouri license number and then
managed to flag down a truck.

Another Car Was Attacked

Decatur Chief of Detectives Joseph M. Meyers said that the three men then
attacked the car of Robert and Anne Lloyd of Decatur, on Interstate 72, shooting
their tires and robbing them.

On Friday three St. Louis men were charged in Montgomery County Circuit Court
with murder and armed robbery. They are Direck D. Jones, 18; Claude Kilbert, 17,
and Roosevelt Pollard Jr., 19. All are being held in the county jail in
Hillsboro.

State's Attorney Barbara Adams of Montgomery County said, in contrast to Mr.
Thao's version of the evening, that ''we are convinced that we have the only
three individuals'' who terrorized the two automobiles that night, and that
there was not a fourth. Lieutenant Meyers attributed the Thaos' account to a
language barrier and ''the dark and the trauma from the gunshots.''

'Very Proud' to Be in U.S.

Aly's picture, showing him with his modish American haircut, is on a table
beneath a wall-hanging of American Presidents and a painting of The Last Supper.
His father said Aly ''had the most patience of all my children,'' in that he
spoke English well and always offered to translate for him.

Nanfred Sand, who taught English to several Laotian families in Ottawa, said Aly
learned English quickly in his first year in the United States. ''Aly was very
proud to be part of the United States,'' she said.

She said most Ottawa families welcomed the Laotian refugees, but some resented
them. ''People would say, 'They're taking our jobs,' '' she said. ''But they
were doing jobs no American would do.''

She said the Laotian children seemed timid at first. ''American children would
tell them 'You're in America now, you don't have to be frightened.' ''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Aly Thao; photo of murder suspects

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 3, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PAGODA IN BERKSHIRE HAMLET BURNS AFTER ANTI-VIETNAM PHONECALLS

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 602 words

DATELINE: HAWLEY, Mass., Jan. 2


An anonymous caller said he and other angry veterans of the Vietnam War were
responsible for a suspicious fire that razed a small Buddhist temple in this
rural Berkshire town.

A man who telephoned The Morning Union newspaper in Springfield three times
Sunday said he was a member of a group of Vietnam veterans who set fire to the
isolated Mahasiddhi Nyingmapa Center late Saturday night. The police said they
were investigating.

There were no Vietnamese in the congregation of the seven-year-old temple, which
was founded by followers of a Tibetan lama.

A small shrine near the once- ornate 30-by-25-foot Tibetan temple was written
upon, in what appeared to be charcoal, ''Vietnam Vets-Tet 1983.''

Reporter Gets Three Calls

Gary Randall, a reporter who spoke three times with an unidentified caller, said
the man asserted he was now 35 years old and had been a lieutenant in Vietnam.
The man said he represented a group of Vietnam veterans who ''lived off the
land'' and were upset that benefits were given to Vietnamese refugees while many
Vietnam veterans' needs were unheeded.

Mr. Randall reported the man told him: ''Our enemies, the ones who killed our
friends, they are brought back here and given businesses and a new start but
they treat us like a piece of garbage. We can't get jobs. We can't even afford
to feed our families.''

Linda Albright, who lives next to the temple on Browser Road here in
northwestern Massachusetts, said she was the caretaker of the shrine. It was
built in 1976 by 20 Buddhists living in Massachusetts who followed Guru
Rinpoche, who escaped from Tibet in 1959 and settled here.

They Doubt His Veracity

Mr. Randall and other reporters said they doubted the veracity of the telephone
caller because he had made errors in the geography of Vietnam and in identifying
military units.

He said the caller said he represented ''Tet 1984,'' which the caller described
as a heavily armed organization that planned to conduct seven other attacks on
Vietnamese communities, mostly in Massachusetts. ''There will be a total of
eight because the last one is too big and we're bound to be taken out with it,''
the caller told Mr. Randall.

The state police at the Shelburne Falls barracks said they became suspicious
late Saturday night after reporters for television stations in Springfield and
Hartford telephoned asking if a Vietnamese pagoda had been burned.

In nearby Charlemont, Deputy Fire Chief Douglas Annear said he received a call
about 10 P.M. New Year's Eve from a man who said he was a Vietnam veteran and
was going to destroy a ''Vietnamese pagoda'' in Charlemont.

Calls to TV Reporters

A few minutes later, a television producer, Gale King of Channel 3 in Hartford,
received a telephone call from a man who made similar statements.  About 10:15
P.M., a call was made to Kathy Tobin, a reporter for Channel 40 in Springfield.
She said the man said he was a member of a Vietnam veterans combat group that
had planted a bomb in a Vietnamese pagoda in Charlemont. Deputy Chief Annear
said the Charlemont Fire Department received a call at 10:55 P.M. from a
motorist on Route 2, who reported there was a house on fire on a hillside.

Despite the efforts of volunteer firefighters from surrounding communities, the
temple burned for three hours and was destroyed.

A light dusting of snow covered the debris of the wooden structure today. A
statue of Buddha rested at a tilt amid the burned floor joists. Miss Albright,
who is a member of the sect, said rare paintings, prayer wheels, flags and
statues were destroyed.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Massachusetts

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 3, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION;
CENSORSHIP RISES IN THE NATION'S PUBLIC SCHOOLS

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1641 words


MANY Americans who condemn the burning of books as a virulent form of
totalitarian thought control close their eyes to the evil of banning books.
Censorship, many people believe, is something that happens in faraway,
undemocratic countries.

In fact, it is happening more and more often in American public schools.
Censorship of textbooks and school libraries has increased dramatically in the
last five years. It is, in the words of one expert observer, ''pervasive and
widespread.''

This warning was issued last week at the annual convention of the Modern
Language Association. Since the 1980 Presidential election, reported Charles B.
Harris of Illinois State University, moderator of a panel on ''Censorship and
the English Department,'' attacks on school libraries have increased
substantially.

Even the American Heritage Dictionary has been removed in a number of places
because, according to self-appointed censors, it contains what they describe as
36 ''dirty words.'' Objections have been raised against some 600 book titles
found in school libraries. In one instance, the guardians of teen-age morality
struck at a book titled ''Make It With Mademoiselle,'' which turned out to be,
not a manual for seducing young women, but a sewing guide published by
Mademoiselle magazine.

Diane P. Shugert, editor of The Connecticut English Journal, a publication of
the Connecticut Council of Teachers of English, reported that in surveys by the
Committee Against Censorship of the National Council of Teachers of English, 34
percent of the schools responding received challenges to material in their
libraries in 1977. By 1982, that figure had risen to 56 percent, with comparable
increases in all regions. In about half of these instances, some form of
restriction was placed on the challenged materials. More than 17 percent of
those who responded to the survey reported the activities of an organized local
watchdog group, compared with fewer than 1 percent in 1966.

''It's not bad books that are challenged; it's good books,'' Mrs. Shugert said.
They range from ''To Kill a Mockingbird'' by Harper Lee and ''The Diary of a
Young Girl'' by Anne Frank to Nathaniel Hawthorne's ''The Scarlet Letter'' and
Mark Twain's ''Huckleberry Finn.''

Mrs. Shugert believes that censors are making headway with the following
assertions, which often go unchallenged: The schools need more outside controls;
literature is radical; a book has just one meaning that is either moral or
immoral, and should be accepted or rejected on that basis; part of a book is
enough, and any undesirable part should be kept from the student.


Roz Udow, a member of People for the American Way, a civil liberties group, said
the political right and left have in common an authoritarian attitude toward
books and a determination ''not to let readers draw their own conclusions.''

She cited as typical for such an attitude a statement she attributed to Mel and
Norma Gabler: ''An idea will never do anyone as much good as a fact.'' The
Gablers, a couple in Texas, are known nationally for their campaign to cleanse
the schools of books they consider improper. Through an extensive mailing list,
they alert school board members and others to what they consider harmful in
texts and other books. They oppose textbooks that, in their view, overemphasize
Watergate and Vietnam. They see Robin Hood as a dangerous advocate of income
redistribution, and they oppose books that, in their view, erode absolute values
by asking questions to which there are no absolute answers.

In general, Miss Udow says, many censorship groups want to eliminate books
dealing with civil rights and liberties, women's rights and the evils of
slavery. Other censorship groups would take ''The Merchant of Venice'' off the
shelves, or ban books they consider unfair to minority groups.

Some large states, such as Texas, have had a considerable impact on the content
of textbooks because loss of their market would seriously reduce publishers'
profits. This is aggravated by the fact that Texas centrally approves all books
used in the state's public schools. Publishers therefore often quietly purge
books of references that might risk the ire of local censorship groups. For
example, according to Miss Udow, references to evolution in some social studies
texts have been reduced by anywhere from 30 percent to 80 percent because of
pressure from groups opposed to Darwin's theories.


To make it easier for English teachers to defend the use of books that
frequently come under attack, the fall 1983 issue of The Connecticut English
Journal has published a list of 25 books along with detailed ''rationales,''
written by experienced English teachers. These comments explain why these books
are essential to effective English teaching. The issue, writes Mrs. Shugert in
an introduction, ''is dedicated to the countless teachers and librarians who
have been courageous enough - and professional enough - to resist the censors.
(It is available for $5.75 from the Connecticut Council of Teachers of English,
P.O. Box 2211, Enfield, Conn. 06082.)

For example, Winifred E. Sanders, who has taught English in New Hampshire and
Massachusetts, writing on ''To Kill a Mockingbird,'' says, ''The main objections
to the book seem to come from those who question the wisdom of the civil rights
movement and disapprove of having Negroes presented in a favorable light.''

Students, the ''rationale'' concludes, ''need to read this book, a kind of
social history, to help them understand, through the eyes of one family, at one
time, in one town in the United States, some of the problems of justice.''

Of ''The Grapes of Wrath,'' Paul Cervoni, chairman of the English department at
Trumbull High School in Connecticut, says, ''It forcefully presents the issues
of a time in our history we must not forget'' and it stimulates students to
think about what is right and wrong. Moreover, the book teaches students certain
historic parallels. For example, he points out, on Aug. 19, 1983, The New York
Times reported growing unrest over conditions on West Coast farms.


It is, of course, because good books often make students think about society's
unsolved problems that many right-wing censors object. At the same time,
left-wing censors object to books that give young people too favorable a view of
America as a free society. In either case, the effect of censorship is to
deprive students of a realistic view of the world and of an opportunity to
pursue and test ideas of how to improve that world. Censors think that by
putting blinders on young people, they can make them do their bidding, without
asking uncomfortable questions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 3, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STRONG DOLLAR STIRS NEW CONCERNS

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words


Economic

 Analysis




PARIS, Jan. 2 - Two conflicting views among economists about the dollar's future
are raising doubts about the durability of the world recovery as it enters its
second year.  Right now, the dollar is showing phenomenal strength. But some
economists fear that international confidence will eventually snap, forcing
United States officials to push up interest rates again to halt an inflationary
plunge in the dollar's value as foreign capital flees the country. If this were
to happen, this view maintains, economic growth in the United States would grind
to a halt, and with it, the single most powerful engine propelling the rest of
the world toward recovery.

Others, however, fear that without a radical change in United States economic
policy, the dollar will remain overly strong, gradually bankrupting a big slice
of American industry as it attracts cheap imports and prices United States goods
out of foreign markets. According to this scenario, it is support for free trade
that would then snap as the United States retreats behind tough protectionist
measures.

Both analyses start from the perception that President Reagan is following the
same monetary path taken by Presidents Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon. Like them, he
is trying to finance an expansionary domestic policy - with tax cuts and
increased military spending - by persuading foreigners to buy more dollars.

During the 1960's, as dollars flowed out of the United States through spending
on the Great Society programs and the Vietnam War, sucessive administrations
strove to make foreign governments hold dollars in their reserves instead of
turning them in for American gold. Effectively, the rest of the world was
financing United States policy.

But confidence in the dollar finally cracked on Aug. 15, 1971, when President
Nixon was forced to end dollar- gold convertibility and destroy the
fixed-exchange-rate monetary order that it supported.

Today, the United States, by keeping its interest rates high, is again
encouraging foreigners to hold dollars. The high rates draw in overseas funds
needed to finance a ballooning payments deficit caused by the widening gap
between America's fast rate of recovery and Europe's slower one.

Last year, America's reviving economy spent $43 billion more on foreign goods
and services than it sold abroad, nearly four times the 1982 deficit. This year,
according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the
deficit will double, to more than $80 billion.

Some authoritative voices now warn that continuing deficits of this magnitude
are unsustainable because eventually the market will refuse to finance them.
''At some point nerves will crack and the dollar will fall,'' says Stephen
Marris, former economic adviser to the O.E.C.D. and now at the Institute for
International Economics in Washington.

A weaker dollar would eventually correct the United States payments deficit,
cheapening exports and shutting out imports. But initially, the dollar might
''overshoot,'' falling too far, too fast. Inflation would start to rise in the
United States at a time when the budget were still high, forcing the Federal
Reserve to raise interest rates again and abort the recovery.

The O.E.C.D. appears to share these fears. Although it does not usually forecast
currency movements, it made an exception in its December economic report,
calling its assumption that the dollar's value would not change next year ''at
odds with the unbalanced pattern of current accounts which results.''



Previous Plunge for the Dollar

In 1977-78, the last time the United States current account moved into the red,
the O.E.C.D. recalls that the dollar plunged, even though the cumulative deficit
was ''less than $30 billion.''

No one knows when confidence might break. But David D. Hale, chief economist at
Kemper Finance Services, the Chiacgo-based asset management concern, speculates
that a poor showing by President Reagan in the opinion polls as the election
approaches might trigger a dollar crisis, as might signs the Federal Reserve is
loosening monetary policy during the campaign.

The alternative view, that an overstrong dollar is the real threat to recovery,
is summarized in the current issue of ''Foreign Policy'' by Lawrence A. Fox and
Stephan Cooney of the National Association of Manufacturers. The difficulty of
cutting the United States budget deficit in an election year and America's role
as a safe haven for foreign funds are likely to keep interest rates up and the
dollar overvalued, they say.

Another reason why the dollar may stay strong, some European economists argue,
is that any cut in United States interest rates risks being matched by others,
leaving a differential in favor of the dollar.

Morgan Guaranty Trust estimates the dollar is currently overvalued by between 14
percent and 18 percent. In a recent International Institute of Economics study,
John Williamson put the overvaluation at 24 percent. George Liney of the
Ingersoll Rand Corporation has told Congress that American capital goods makers
are being underpriced 20 percent to 40 percent by foreign rivals.

For Mr. Fox and Mr. Cooney of the manufacturers' association, such currency
misalignments are ''driving previous staunch defenders of free trade to consider
protectionism the only alternative.'' Mr. Williamson agrees.

Both camps believe credible steps to reduce the Federal budget deficit are
essential. Less budgetary red ink means less growth and smaller payment
deficits, allowing interest rates to fall and the dollar to weaken gradually.
''They would give markets confidence'' Mr. Marris says.

Mr. Fox and Mr. Cooney say budget cuts are not enough. The United States and its
allies must fix ''target zones'' for their currencies and intervene to defend
them, they believe. Thus, the United States would be moving back toward the
fixed-exchange-rate monetary system it destroyed the last time foreign
confidence in the dollar cracked.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE THAT COMPELS RESPECT

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 330 words


To the Editor:


The total misunderstanding of civil disobedience reflected in the Dec. 21 letter
by Prof. L. Pearce Williams of Cornell can only confuse the debate on this
issue. Professor Williams foolishly speaks of running a red light as an example
of civil disobedience - which he apparently defines as meaning breaking any law
with which one ''disagrees'' or which one merely finds inconvenient.

In fact, Gandhian civil disobedience, as it was practiced by Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. and by some of the draft resisters during the Vietnam War, requires
that the civil disobedient respect, and adhere to, all laws to which he or she
does not claim a profound, principal moral objection, and, most important, that
the civil disobedient be willing and prepared (unlike red-light runners or
ordinary tax cheats) to suffer the consequences of open, principled
disobedience. It is through such disobedience that a law's validity is tested
and the public conscience challenged - and the society thereby morally
strengthened.  Such disobedience also compels respect, and moral attention,
whether or not the law of the land is at the time commonly understood as
supporting the civil disobedient's position. Professor Williams's implied
position to the contrary, Dr. King's movement would have been equally valid even
if the Constitution upheld slavery and discrimination, as it once did.  Majority
rule, though a standard worthy of respect and usually of adherence, is obviously
not an absolute standard - or it would have exempted citizens of Nazi Germany
from the moral obligation to disobey, and resist, German parliamentary statutes
providing for persecution of Jews. On a totally different level, if the New York
State Legislature passes a law forbidding history of science teachers to discuss
evolution in a partly state-supported school like Cornell, will Professor
Williams feel obliged to obey that law?

ROBERT L. COHEN Brooklyn, Dec. 26, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR THE FLIER'S FAMILY, HECTIC DAY IN SPOTLIGHT

BYLINE: By WILLIAM R. GREER

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 765 words


''Oh God, it's unbelievable,'' Marilyn Goodman said early yesterday on learning
that her son, Lieut. Robert O. Goodman Jr., was being released in Syria. ''I
just need more details.''

By yesterday afternoon, Mrs. Goodman, a bank teller who lives in Queens, had
received more details, and she and her other two sons, Martin, 19 years old, and
Tyron, 24, were on their way to Washington.

Lieutenant Goodman, 27, a Navy flier held by Syria for a month after having been
shot down over Lebanon, had boarded an Air Force jet bound for West Germany,
where he was to catch another flight to Andrews Air Force Base near Washington.

A Navy spokesman said that Lieutenant Goodman would arrive in Washington at 6:30
A.M. Wednesday and that the lieutenant's wife, Terry Lynn, and two daughters,
Tina, 7, and Morgan, 2 1/2, would be there to meet him. The lieutenant will then
be taken to the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md., to be examined.

Family in National Spotlight

During a hectic morning that focused national attention on the Goodman family,
Mrs. Goodman appeared on CBS News and NBC News programs and on the Cable News
Network. Lieutenant Goodman's father, Robert O. Goodman Sr. of York, Pa., was
interviewed by ABC News.

In an interview with CBS News, Mrs. Goodman said she was ''very proud'' of the
Rev. Jesse Jackson for meeting with Syria's President, Hafez al- Assad, and
pressing for her son's release. Mr. Jackson arrived in Damascus last Friday and
met with President Assad on Sunday.

Mrs. Goodman, reached by telephone yesterday afternoon, said her telephone had
not stopped ringing since the morning with calls from family members, friends,
neighbors and news organizations. She said she was trying to keep the line free
to get more information about her son's return.

'He's Kind of Low-Key'

In an interview with the Cable News Network, Mrs. Goodman's youngest son,
Martin, said he did not think of his brother as a hero because his brother would
not think of himself that way.

''I'm very, very proud of him,'' Martin Goodman said. ''I really can't look at
him as a hero. I know the type of person he is. He's kind of low-key, and the
way he would react to that is, 'I'm not a hero, I'm just doing my job.' ''

Since Lieutenant Goodman was a young boy, Mrs. Goodman has said in interviews,
he has been interested in flying. His father was an Air Force lieutenant
colonel.

Lieutenant Goodman was born in San Juan, P. R.  on Nov. 30, 1956; his father was
stationed at an Air Force base in Puerto Rico.

Until he was 10 years old, when his family settled in Portsmouth, N.H., he moved
with his family from base to base and occasionally flew with his father. The
flights, Mrs. Goodman has said, sparked his interest in flying.

Mrs. Goodman said her son, who is 5 feet 8 inches tall and slightly built, was a
running back on the Portsmouth High School football team.

''He was never a starter,'' Mrs. Goodman said, ''but he always made the team.''

'You Couldn't Change His Mind'

In high school, Mrs. Goodman said, her son was not been an outstandig student
but was determined and strong-willed.

''He doesn't expound much, and you would think he didn't care,'' she said. ''But
if you tested him you'd find he'd made up his mind. That was one thing I always
admired him for. You couldn't change his mind easily.''

In June 1974, he enrolled in the United States Naval Academy. He graduated in
1978, worked for seven months as a Navy recruiter while waiting for an opening
in the Navy's flight school and then began his training at the Naval Aviation
Schools Command in Pensacola, Fla.

Lieutenant Goodman became a navigator-bombardier, and in May 1982 he was
assigned to Attack Squadron 85 stationed at the Oceana Naval Air Station in
Virginia Beach, Va.

Last September, Lieutenant Goodman's squadron sailed for Lebanon aboard the
aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy.

Shot Down Dec. 4

On Dec. 4, during an attack on Syrian positions east of Beirut in reprisal for
an attack two days earlier on United States reconnaissance aircraft, Lieutenant
Goodman's two- seat A-6E Intruder was shot down by a surface-to-air missile.

The pilot, Lieut. Mark A. Lange, 26, of Fraser, Mich., died of injuries from the
crash. Lieutenant Goodman parachuted out of the plane and was captured by the
Syrians.

The downing of Lieutenant Goodman's aircraft and of another American
fighter-bomber during the raid by 28 American planes was the first time American
aircraft had been lost in combat since the Vietnam War.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Q.&A.: GEN. MAXWELL D. TAYLOR;
'THERE ARE PLENTY OF DARK CLOUDS AHEAD OF US'

BYLINE: By David Shribman

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1187 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 3


Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, former soldier and diplomat, has been involved in
military and foreign-policy questions for nearly half a century. A former
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Ambassador to South Vietnam and
Presidential counselor, the 82-year- old general still retains a voice in
Washington, testifying from time to time on Capitol Hill and writing occasional
pieces on military and foreign affairs. This morning, in a conversation in the
living room of his home on the capital's Embassy Row, he talked about some of
the military and diplomatic initiatives the United States has under way around
the world, discussed command responsibility and took a strong stand on the way
the press should be handled in wartime.


Q. The United States is completing its role in Grenada, has marines and sailors
in Lebanon and faces continuing differences with the Soviet Union. How do you
evaluate the American position as this new year opens?

A. There are several factors that will affect us in our foreign policy.  The
first is the increased tension between Moscow and Washington, the second is the
question of the stability or instability of the economic situation. We have,
indeed, unfinished business in the Middle East and in Central America. The
former is far more complex, but it would be very hard to pull out without
suggesting our run-out in Vietnam. And overriding is the problem that gets
bigger every year: the population growth of the world itself. There are plenty
of dark clouds ahead of us.


Q. You have written that American goals in Central America should be aimed at
''relatively modest'' objectives, such as the ''restoration of order in war
areas.'' Should the United States be involved in that region?

A. The proximity of that part of the world makes it very important to us. We
have a great interest in all areas of the Caribbean. The stability of Central
America is very important to us. We will not make it a Vietnam unless we are
looking for a Vietnam kind of war.


Q. In recent days, President Reagan has received a report that was critical of
the American military preparations in Lebanon. However, he has also announced
that the responsibility for the tragedy in Beirut should be placed at his door,
not at the door of military personnel. How do you view that?

A. The President's statement accepting responsibility certainly showed good
intentions. But it was no news because, had he said nothing, he was responsible
as Commander in Chief. ''Responsible'' does not mean responsibility for minor
matters that take place far beyond his knowledge, but it does mean that he is
responsible for the last soldier.


Q. Would there have been any value in the conduct of courts-martial in this
affair or further inquiries to place the blame for the deaths of American men
overseas?

A. I have seen nothing that to me justifies a court-martial. Certainly mistakes
were made. Some of those who made mistakes might be withdrawn from their jobs,
or should be. But a court-martial suggests a gross negligence, even intentional
negligence, or something criminal.


Q. Toward the end of his second term, President Eisenhower accepted
responsibility for the U-2 incident over the Soviet Union. Was this a useful
precedent?

A. He didn't accept it as much as he volunteered it. I thought it was
unfortunate, though admirable, because when the head of state says something, it
necessarily raises the issue up to the highest plane, whereas you'd like to
settle something as small as that at a lower level.


Q. There are other precedents for a President taking the blame for a miliary
fiasco. President Kennedy, after the Bay of Pigs, took responsibility but
quickly established a group headed by you to examine the incident. What lessons
can we learn from that?

A. His action was exactly right.  There were Cubans involved for whom he felt
deeply responsible. The main thing was that President Kennedy insisted on
studying why we failed and taking steps to prevent it from happening again.


Q. In recent months and years there has been a new look at what happened in
Vietnam and at our role in Vietnam. What do you think are the lessons of
Vietnam?

A. That would take a week, but if you want to mention some of the very top
lessons, I could give you three. The first is that before we ally ourselves to
another country, we must ascertain to what extent they can exploit our help. We
know the great effort we expended on South Vietnam. The large percentage of the
effort was unusable.

Second, we should declare war. President Johnson thought the Tonkin Gulf
Resolution ample, but it was not. Many of the opponents of the war were noisy
and felt that they were being patriotic by complaining about the policies of
President Johnson. In case of war, we would have said that they had to rally
around the flag, which they did not do.

Third, you should never let TV on the battlefield.


Q. What role do you think television played in Vietnam?

A. It brought the war into the living rooms, highly damaging the national morale
and the support for the war.


Q. Was the Pentagon correct in keeping reporters away from Grenada in the
initial days of the fighting there?

A. Since I wasn't there, I can't speak for the authorities. But I must say, I
did not regret that action.


Q. Do you think that the interests of the press and the interests of the
military collide?

A. In World War II, the press was admirable because they felt they were American
citizens and that their country was sacred. In Vietnam there was the feeling on
the part of some of the press that their task was to destroy the American
command and to work against what was being done. That kind of thing should not
be tolerated.


Q. What do you think should be the role of the press during a military conflict?

A. Reporting what they see. And in most cases, it should take some clearance
from senior people that that information was not damaging to the waging of the
war in that theater.

I believe strongly that people have a right to know what their forces are doing,
but not today, not tomorrow, but at the appropriate time. When they get the
information in a block, they might well know what to do with it, but when they
get it piecemeal, there's just confusion.


Q. That would leave unresolved who, precisely, decides the right time for the
press to make its reports.

A. It should be the President of the United States, directly or indirectly. He
is paid for that. If he has acted wrong, the voters are certainly going to get
after him. The press certainly ought to be willing to delay getting his throat
until it's done by the people, and not try to cut his throat themselves.


Q. You were born in the beginning of the century, when the United States was
just becoming an important factor on the world scene. Now, with the nation
playing a major role internationally, are you optimistic or pessimistic about
the future?

A: A soldier cannot afford to be pessimistic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CUOMO TO SEEK EQUAL RIGHTS AMENDMENT; WILL ORDER ATTICA POPULATION CUT

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 767 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Jan. 3


Governor Cuomo will propose an amendment to the New York State Constitution
designed to guarantee equal rights for women, the Governor's chief spokesman
said today.

The spokesman, Timothy J. Russert, said that Mr. Cuomo believed that the
attitudes of New Yorkers toward the issue had changed since 1975, when voters
overwhelmingly rejected such an amendment.

''It's something long overdue,'' Mr. Russert said. ''It will be a catalyst to
bring about large-scale change. The time is right. Our chances for success are
large.''

An Advance Look

Mr. Russert announced the plan at a briefing designed to give reporters an
advance look at some of the initiatives Mr. Cuomo will offer in the State of the
State Message he is to deliver to the Legislature Wednesday.

The message will include a call to give Vietnam veterans free tuition at senior
colleges and graduate schools of the State and City Universities. It will also
ask that all Social Security benefits given to elderly people be made exempt
from state income taxes, as they were until recently. Because of a change in
Federal law, the benefits of some elderly people have automatically become
subject to state taxes.

In the spirit of the election-year session that convenes Wednesday, Mr. Cuomo
was already facing criticism from Republicans. ''None of this is new,'' Charles
Dumas, a spokesman for the Republicans who control the Senate, said of the three
proposals outlined by Mr. Russert today. ''They are just retreads. Somebody must
have been sifting through our bills.''

Anderson Criticizes Cuomo

Senator Warren M. Anderson, Republican of Binghamton, the majority leader,
issued a statement criticizing Mr. Cuomo for ''overreacting'' to fiscal problems
last year by pushing through more tax increases and staff cuts than were
necessary.

He added, ''This year we hope that the Governor is not so distracted by his
'national campaigning' that he has been kept from doing his homework, because we
have a right to expect some initiatives from him on this year's problems.''

The Governor's proposed equal rights amendment would have to be passed by two
successive Legislatures in order to be placed on the ballot. If it is approved
this year and next, it will be on the ballot in November 1985.

It's Been Repudiated'

The Legislature in 1972 was one of the first to ratify the Federal equal rights
amendment, but that amendment failed to win approval from the necessary 38
states and did not become part of the Constitution.

In 1974 and 1975, the state's proposed equal rights amendment was approved by
wide margins in both houses of the Legislature. It was sent to the voters in
November 1975 and was defeated by a vote of 1,950,000 to 1,470,000. Most top
elected officials supported it at the time. The major grass-roots opposition was
from conservatives.

''It's been repudiated,'' Serphin R. Maltese, executive director of the
Conservative Party, said today. Mr. Maltese was a leader of the coalition that
defeated the amendment in 1975. ''As a device,'' he said, ''the amendment itself
does not achieve what its proponents allege it achieves.'' He suggested that
''Governor Cuomo should accept the will of the people.''

Senator Anderson said he would have ''no problem putting the E.R.A. to a vote
again.''

Other States' Actions

The language of the amendment Mr. Cuomo will propose is: ''Equality of rights
under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the state or any subdivision
thereof on account of sex.''

Mr. Russert said that 16 other states had already adopted similar amendments and
that those amendments had considerably strengthened the legal hand of women
seeking equal pay and other rights in court cases.

Several proposals were offered in the last session of the Legislature to extend
free higher education to veterans, but no agreement was reached. Mr. Russert
said he expected that if approved, the Governor's proposal would draw about 600
veterans to the senior colleges. He said he could not at this time estimate the
cost. Community colleges would not be required to offer free tuition, Mr.
Russert said.

Mary Ann McLean-Austen, counsel to the Senate Higher Education Committee, said,
''I don't see in today's fiscal picture that there's going to be enough money
for it.''

A Federal law that just took effect taxes some of the Social Security benefits
given to higher-income elderly people. State taxes automatically follow Federal
law, and thus the same tax will remain in effect in New York unless the state
acts to change its regulations.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of State Assembly chamber

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE;

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 611 words


SAMPLING The Riverside Dance Festival is one of Terpsichore's more enduring New
York operations, housed in the Theater of the Riverside Church, 120th Street and
Riverside Drive (864- 2929). It aims to present a broad spectrum of what is
going on in that world, a goal summarized in its third annual ''Sampler''
program that starts tonight at 7:30 with a half-dozen examples.

Among the dances to be offered tonight are ''Snow Maiden,'' choreographed and
narrated by Michael Maule, danced by Nancy Shainberg and Jerry Kokich of the
Joffrey Ballet (original narration written by Walter Terry); ''Magnificat,''
choreographed by Ricky Schussel and performed with live music by the composer
Sherron Adrian, sung by Shelley Bransford, with Elizabeth Roxas of the Joyce
Trisler Danscompany; ''Chansons'' a world premiere by Luk de Layress (with music
of Edith Piaf and Jacques Brel); ''From the Beginning,'' Chiang Ching's piece,
with Ju Ming's sculptures of tree stumps transformed into figures.

The program is dedicated to Walter Sorrell, an author of books about dance, who
is now in his 80's.

Tonight's gala opening admission: $15, which includes reception. Also at 8 P.M.
tomorrow through Saturday and 2 P.M. Sunday. Admission: $6; students, $4.

PIANOS There are not many establishments that can boast two premier jazz
pianists playing simultaneously, more or less, in two separate rooms, next to
each other but acoustically isolated. That's the situation at the elegant Hotel
Carlyle, 76th Street and Madison Avenue (744-1600), where George Shearing is at
the keyboard in the Cafe Carlyle and Barbara Carroll is at same in the more
intimate Bemelmans Bar. Tuesdays through Saturdays at 10 P.M. and midnight.
Cover: $12.50.

Mr. Shearing is sitting in here for another winter season here through March 10
while Bobby Short, the franchise-holder in this room, takes time off. Mr.
Shearing, with more than 30 years of jazz-making behind him, plays and sings,
accompanied by Don Thomas on bass. In reviewing in The New York Times one of the
pianist's last stints at the cafe, John S. Wilson wrote, ''He is, in effect,
emphasizing the contrast between the two - the smoothness of his own control at
the keyboard and the rough-hewn quality of his voice.''

Miss Carroll, who recently began her sixth year as a Bemelmans regular, also
sings as she plays, and she too received an approving notice from Mr. Wilson,
who noted that she ''takes advantage of jazz-style phrasing to quiet the more
talkative tables.'' She's at work Mondays through Saturdays from 9 P.M. Cover
charge: $4.50.

In both rooms, drinks cost from $4.50 up. No dining in Bemelmans, but main
courses in the Cafe, $19.75 to $23.75.

MOVIES Journey Across 3 Continents Film Festival,'' a series of three feature
films about the lives of black people in various parts of the world, starts
today at the American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West and 79th
Street, in the first-floor main auditorium (873-1300, extension 514).

The opener of the series, presented by the museum and Third World Newsreel, is
''Gouma,'' a 1976 film made by Asrat Getahun, the first made in color in
Ethiopia. It is the story of a fatal hunting trip. On Thursday, Jan. 12, the
1982 English film ''Burning an Illusion,'' by Menelik Shabass, a Barbadian,
tells of love and struggle by blacks in England. On Wednesday, Jan. 18, a recent
film about a black Vietnam veteran, ''Ashes and Embers,'' by Haile Gerima, will
have Mr. Gerima on hand to tell about it.

All showings at 7 P.M. Suggested admission to museum (no charge for films), $3;
under-12's, $1.50.


Wednesday Sports is on page B10.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Barbara Carroll

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DISPUTED PAROLE KINDLES ANGER IN SAN FRANCISCO

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 4


This week San Francisco is reliving a page out of its recent past, the 1978
murders of Mayor George Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk.

Dan White, a former Supervisor who admitted killing them, is to be released
Friday after less than five years and two months in prison. And so local
newspapers and news broadcasts are filled with recollections of the killings
that took place in San Francisco's baroque, domed City Hall on Nov. 27, 1978.

From the modern office buildings in the city's financial district, to the
neighborhoods of Victorian houses that have been restored by members of San
Francisco's large homosexual community, there is anger and bitterness that Mr.
White is being released so soon. And there are renewed predictions that he will
be in danger after he leaves prison.

''I've heard people who are normally peaceful and sensible and rational, who
would never jaywalk, who say they would be glad to knock him off if they
could,'' said James Rivalo, a friend of Mr. Milk.

Depth of Anger Noted

As the first acknowledged homosexual to be elected to a major office here at a
time when homosexuals were beginning to battle for greater social acceptence and
political power, Mr. Milk is still revered by many here. ''It's frightening the
depth of the anger that people feel,'' Mr. Rivalo said.

Mr. White, who is 37 years old, has been scheduled to be released from the
Soledad State Prison, about 120 miles south of here, at 12:01 A.M. Friday.

Because of death threats against him and a request from Mr. White that reporters
not be present when he leaves prison, state officials say they plan to release
him in secrecy. ''Nobody's going to know where or how he's being released or
where he's going,'' Helen Krogh, an official of the California Department of
Corrections, said.

For one year after his release, Mr. White must report weekly to a state parole
officer. Because of a widespread perception that supporters of Mr. Milk bent on
revenge will attempt to kill him, there has been speculation for months over
where he would be sent to serve his parole.

Problem With Parole

San Francisco, where he would normally be paroled, as well as San Diego and
nearby Richmond have notified the state that they do not want him, and police
officials in Los Angeles say they believe Mr. Milk would be in danger because of
that city's large population of homosexuals.

While Mr. White's destination after his release remains a mystery, the judicial
process that allowed him to go free after serving a little more than five years
in prison for killing two public officials continues to arouse high emotions
here.

A native of San Francisco, the second of nine children, Mr. White was often
referred to as ''an All- American Boy'' in news accounts after the City Hall
shootings. A star athlete in high school, he spent a year in the Vietnam War as
a paratrooper, then returned home to work first as a policeman and then as a
fireman.

In 1977, with strong backing from the city's police union, whose leaders were
angry over what they perceived as growing official tolerance of crime in
general, prostitution and overt homosexuality, Mr. White was elected to the
Board of Supervisors on a conservative platform.

Steps Leading to Murders

But, impulsively, a year later, on Nov. 10, 1978, he resigned, saying that his
salary of $9,600 was too low to support his family and that he was disgusted
with the ethics he found in the political world. His backers in the Police
Department quickly persuaded him to change his mind and ask Mr. Moscone to let
him rescind the resignation. But on Nov. 28 the Mayor turned him down.

According to evidence at the trial, Mr. White on that day crawled in a basement
window at the City Hall to avoid a guard and metal detector and shot Mr. Moscone
to death and then killed Mr. Milk, then 48 years old, who had endorsed Mr.
Moscone's plan to replace Mr. White with a supervisor holding more liberal
views. In his confession admitting the murders, Mr. White said, ''I saw the city
as going kind of downhill.''

At his trial, his attorneys argued that Mr. White had killed the men as a result
of ''diminished capacity,'' contending that he lost control because of political
pressures. One psychiatrist attributed his behavior partly to the effects of
eating too much junk food.

Critics later assailed police investigators and prosecutors as being too easy on
Mr. White at the trial. It was contended that as a former policeman, he was
''one of them,'' a charge angrily denied again this week by the officials
involved.

Diminished Capacity Defense

Jurors accepted the diminished capacity defense and on May 21, 1979, they
convicted Mr. White of voluntary manslaughter rather than murder. The conviction
carried a penalty of seven years and eight months, instead of a possible life
sentence on the murder charge; Mr. White can be released now because of time off
for good behavior in prison.

Many saw that verdict as a reflection of disdain for homosexuals, and thousands
of people rioted, overturning cars, smashing windows and causing more than
$250,000 in damage.

Last month, after reviewing strong appeals from local officials to do so, the
Justice Department said it had no jurisdiction to try Mr. White on Federal
charges.

While arguments go on about the White case, almost every one agrees that San
Francisco is a different place now than when the assassinations occurred.

How Picture Has Changed

Homosexuals, who regard Mr. Milk as a martyr whose death helped their cause, now
have substantial political strength and have been much more open about their
style of living. There is no longer much effort to resist the kind of social
changes that had made Mr. White unhappy.

Charles Gain, the city's liberal police chief then, is now running a trailer
park in the San Joaquin Valley.

Mr. Moscone was succeeded as Mayor by Dianne Feinstein, whose lackluster
political career was energized indirectly by his assassination. The
up-and-coming career of Joseph Freitas, the District Attorney, was ended by
voters angry over the verdict. What has not changed is the anger over the early
release of Mr. White.

On Friday, leaders of the homosexual community have scheduled two rallies and
asked all San Franciscans to stop working for 15 minutes at 1 P.M.

Largely as a result of Mr. Milk's death, said Scott Smith, who lived with him
before he died, ''the gay community, as a minority community, has probably moved
farther in a shorter period of time than any minority community in history.''

There was a sense of resignation, Mr. Smith said, that Mr. White would be
paroled now, but he said people here could never forget ''what a great
miscarriage of justice this has been,'' adding, ''What people are saying is that
'He got away with murder.' ''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dan White

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RICHARD HUGHES, 77, IS DEAD; AUSTRALIAN COVERED THE WARS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM G. BLAIR

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 622 words


Richard Hughes, a Far East expert and flamboyant foreign and war correspondent
for Australian and British publications for more than 40 years, died yesterday
of a liver ailment in Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Hong Kong. He was 77 years old
and lived in Hong Kong.

Mr. Hughes, an Australian, covered the North African campaigns in World War II,
the Korean War and the Vietnam War and was one of two Western journalists first
summoned to meet the fugitive British spies, Donald Maclean and Guy Burgess,
when they turned up in Moscow in 1956. The other journalist was from Reuters.

Based in Hong Kong since 1948, first for The Sunday Times of London and then,
since 1973, for The Times of London, Mr. Hughes covered China and Southeast Asia
for those publications and others, including The Economist, The Herald and Sun
of Melbourne, The Far Eastern Economic Review and The New York Times, for which
he wrote many Sunday magazine articles.

A Model for Novels

John le Carre used Mr. Hughes as the model for the fictional character Old Craw
in his 1977 novel ''The Honourable Schoolboy,'' much of which is set in Hong
Kong. The late Ian Fleming, at one time Mr. Hughes's foreign editor on The
Sunday Times, portrayed Mr. Hughes as the fictional character Dikko Henderson in
the 1964 James Bond novel ''You Only Live Twice.''

In ''The Honourable Schoolboy,'' Mr. le Carre wrote that Old Craw was ''the
ancient mariner'' to other journalists. ''Craw had shaken more sand out of his
shorts, they told each other, than most of them would walk over, and they were
right,'' he wrote.

Robert M. Shaplen of The New Yorker, a former Hong Kong-based Far East
correspondent for that magazine, recalled Mr. Hughes yesterday as a big, robust
man with a dry wit. Mr. Hughes was ''a terrific storyteller, a raconteur with a
raconteur's big laugh, a tremendous fund of knowledge and an incredible
memory,'' Mr. Shaplen said.

Mr. Hughes's round, beneficent face and manner of quoting from the Bible won him
the nicknames of ''monk,'' ''bishop'' and ''your grace'' among friends and
colleagues.

Entertaining was his forte. He had an immense fund of stories frequently
prefaced by the admonition, ''My son, you will take this little jest as an
expression of my worldly experience.''

He Knew the Far East

Beneath his ribald jokes and careless, sometimes slovenly exterior was an
intelligent and industrious reporter. He knew the Far East, as he would say,
''like the back of me hand.''

Richard Hughes was born in Melbourne on March 6, 1906. He left school there at
the age of 14, trying his hand successively as a poster artist, shunter of
railroad cars and public relations officer before joining The Star of Melbourne
as a reporter in 1934.

He shifted to The Daily and Sunday Telegraph of Sydney in 1935 and quickly rose
to principal assignment editor for both papers by 1939. He returned to reporting
the next year as a foreign correspondent for the papers in Tokyo and Shanghai.
After covering the war in North Africa in 1942-43, he returned to Sydney to
serve first as acting editor of The Sunday Telegraph and then as a foreign
correspondent again in Tokyo in 1945. He remained there for three years before
moving to Hong Kong.

Mr. Hughes was the author or editor of four books, the best known of which was
''Hong Kong: Borrowed Place, Borrowed Time,'' published in 1968.

In 1980, as the widely respected dean of Asia's foreign press corps and its most
colorful personality, Mr. Hughes was honored by Queen Elizabeth II, who named
him a Commander of the British Empire.

Mr. Hughes is survived by his wife, Ann, daughter of a Chinese general, and a
son by a previous marriage, Richard, of Sydney.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWSWEEK'S EDITOR IN CHIEF RESIGNS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 994 words


William D. Broyles Jr. resigned yesterday after only 16 months as editor in
chief of Newsweek magazine. He was replaced by Richard M. Smith, the executive
editor, who has supervised the magazine's international coverage for the last
six years.

Mr. Broyles was the fifth editor of the magazine in 10 years. His tenure was
marked by controversy over a number of his decisions - including the publication
of two major cover articles on purported Hitler diaries that proved to be
forgeries - and by internal battles with staff members who wanted to maintain a
traditional emphasis on immediacy in news coverage instead of feature articles
about trends and ideas, which many felt Mr. Broyles preferred.

The 39-year-old Mr. Broyles, whose previous journalistic experience was as
editor of Texas Monthly and California magazines, said he intended to stay in
New York and write a book or a play, possibly about the war in Vietnam, where he
served in the Marines.

Second to Time in Circulation

Newsweek, which is owned by The Washington Post Company, runs second to Time in
circulation and advertising revenue. Katharine Graham, the chairman of the
company, recruited Mr. Broyles to provide the magazine with ideas that might
close some of that gap.

Mr. Smith, who is 37 years old, indicated that he would put journalistic
priority on immediate news articles, the kind on which he has worked the most.

''There is no better news organization in the business and no better news
magazine than Newsweek about being on a story quickly and reporting
intelligently about the news,'' he said.

Mrs. Graham declined to discuss the shift. In a prepared statement she said she
was ''greatly saddened that Bill Broyles reached this decision.''

''Bill brought new life to the magazine,'' her statement said. ''He hired
several talented new people and effectively reorganized the staff, created new
graphics and enhanced Newsweek's tradition of excellence.''

'Capable and Seasoned'

She said Mr. Smith was ''a most capable and seasoned news executive.'' Mr. Smith
was summoned back from a vacation in Vermont over the weekend.

He will command a staff of 400 reporters, writers, photographers, graphic
designers, editors and researchers, most of whom work in the Newsweek building
at 444 Madison Avenue. The magazine, which celebrated its 50th anniversary last
year, has correspondents in 18 cities abroad and 11 in the United States.

Under Mr. Broyles, the magazine has gained circulation - it averages 3 million
in weekly domestic sales and nearly 600,000 in its international editions - and
advertising, which totaled 2,958 pages as opposed to 2,863 the year before.

But it trails Time's 5.9 million in weekly sales worldwide. Time has fewer pages
of advertising, but charges more for each one and its $392 million in
advertising revenues is nearly double the total of Newsweek.

Assailed Over 'Hitler Diaries'

Newsweek was widely criticized last spring for its decision to devote its cover
and more than a dozen inside pages to articles about the ''Hitler diaries''
supposedly unearthed by a West German magazine. Newsweek, particularly in its
promotional efforts, stressed the historical importance of the documents, which
turned out to be crude forgeries.

Mr. Broyles stood behind the coverage, even when Mrs. Graham said she was
''bothered'' by the morality of ''selling Hitler.''

Lacking a background in immediate news coverage, Mr. Broyles did not take an
active role in the day-to-day decisions about which articles the magazine would
carry and which it would omit each week.

He described his job as one of providing long-range direction for the
institution and of assembling a staff of editors who could translate those plans
into weekly reality.

Among many on his staff he gained a reputation - undeserved, he said - for
pushing the magazine somewhat away from immediate news events and toward feature
coverage.

Although Newsweek covered some stories quickly, most notably one about American
support for Nicaraguan rebels in Honduras, it also gave prominent display to
trends, such as the runaway sales of Cabbage Patch dolls, and ideas, such as
whether the movie ''The Right Stuff'' could propel John Glenn to the Presidency.

It devoted tens of thousands of words to a Texas killer who had been sentenced
to death, a project that lost some of its timeliness when the execution was
stayed.

Mr. Broyles, a native of Houston, was the subject of constant - and, to him,
surprising - rumors and sometimes seemed uncomfortable about his work.

''It was hard for me to finally admit that a job which is so prestigious and so
important was not one that I wanted,'' he said yesterday.

The turnover in editors began in 1972, when Osborn Elliott, now dean of the
Columbia Graduate School of Journalism, succeeded Kermit Lansner. Mr. Elliott
was succeeded in June 1975 by Edward Kosner. Lester Bernstein took Mr. Kosner's
job in June 1979, but was moved out in favor of Mr. Broyles.



'An Enviable Position'

Mr. Smith said yesterday that he was in ''an enviable position'' because recent
staff additions and the initiatives Mr. Broyles began meant that ''we are not in
a period where Newsweek needs to be radically redefined.''

Mr. Smith was born in Detroit and graduated from Albion College. He received a
master's degree from the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia University
before joining Newsweek in 1970 as a writer on foreign affairs.

He was Asian editor and Hong Kong bureau chief for three years before coming to
New York as assistant editor of the international editions. He was later as
assistant managing editor and then executive editor, the fourth highest
position.

He was promoted to editor in chief over Maynard Parker, the editor, and Kenneth
Auchincloss, the managing editor. Mr. Parker said last night that he intended to
stay with Newsweek ''for the foreseeable future.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Smith; photo of William Broyles Jr.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ROME OR ROMA? CHINA OR ZHONGGUO?

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 4


To a small band of Federal workers, name- calling is serious business.

Rome or Roma? China or Zhongguo? Jakarta or Djakarta? Peking or Beijing? Munich
or M"unchen? Hardwick Well or Suicide Well? Nicolet Bay or Shanty Bay?

Shakespeare to the contrary, there is much in a name.

''When you go to a cocktail party, the first thing a stranger is sure to ask you
is, 'Where are you from?' '' said Richard B. Randall, executive secretary of
United States Board on Geographic Names. ''Just suppose you couldn't tell him.''

Putting places on the map is the job of Mr. Randall's agency, established 94
years ago by President Benjamin Harrison to clear up confusion over conflicting
names of settlements, rivers, mountains and other geographic features in the
rapidly opening Western frontier.

As the years passed, the board's mandate was extended to include standarizing
all foreign and domestic names for use by Federal agencies and on maps and
various periodicals; approval of new names and name changes; the naming of
features in Antarctica, and the naming of features along the ocean depths, on
the moon and other planets.

Many Departments Represented

All this adds up to a heavy workload for a body that has no employees or
facilities of its own. It has no separate budget. Instead, it is made up of
representatives and their deputies from the Departments of Agriculture,
Commerce, Defense, Interior and State and from the Library of Congress, the
Government Printing Office, the Postal Service and the Central Intelligence
Agency.

The staff for the board's committee on foreign geographic names is provided by
the Defense Mapping Agency, a part of the Defense Department. The United States
Geological Survey, an agency of the Interior Department, provides the staff for
the committee on domestic geographic names. The cost to the Government is about
$300,000 a year.

Over the years, the board has made millions of decisions, some of worldwide
import, some of interest only to tiny communities.

Shortly after President Kennedy's assassination, President Johnson proposed that
the name of Cape Canaveral, Fla. be changed to Cape Kennedy, and the board
agreed. But 10 years later, at the urging primarily of Florida citizens, the
board changed the name back to Cape Canaveral, the name first listed on a 1564
map.

In 1977 the board approved official Federal use of the name Ho Chi Minh City
instead of Saigon.

China's Switch to Pinyin

Attempting to standardize foreign names for Federal use has always been a
difficult problem, particularly names in countries using a non- Roman alphabet.
In these cases, names must be converted to Roman letters through
transliteration. The board has officially approved transliteration systems for
some 20 non- Roman scripts, ranging from Amharic, the main language of Ethiopia,
to Russian.

But of all the problems facing the American linguists, cartographers,
geographers and other Government specialists, the most difficult revolved around
China's introduction several years ago of Pinyin, meaning phonetic sound, a new
system of rendering Chinese words into the Roman alphabet. Previously there was
no uniform system and each country used its own spellings for Chinese names.

The Board on Geographic Names has accepted the converted names such as Sichuan,
instead of Szechwan, the province best known for spicy cuisine. Hunan Province,
known also for its distinctive cuisine, is the same in the old and new systems.

However, to avoid total confusion, the board also permits the use of so- called
conventional names, those that have become established in English even though
they differ from foreign official names. Thus, maps, gazetteers and other
official United States publications list the word Peking, which is now Beijing
in Pinyin, and Canton, which is Guangzhou in Chinese.

This does not mark the first use of ''conventional names'' by the board. For
years, Munich has been recognized as the conventional name for the city known by
Germans as M"unchen. Among the other conventional names are Cologne for K"oln,
Vienna for Wien, Rome for Roma and Venice for Venezia.

Committees in Other Countries

In seeking to stardardize foreign names, the board works closely with similar
committees in Britain, Canada and elsewhere. Every five years, too, the board
takes part in conferences sponsored by the United Nations to reconcile
differences in place names.

While the work of the foreign names committee of the board is perhaps the most
difficult, the domestic names panel has its problems, too, in the naming of
America.

The domestic committee does not initiate names; it considers only new names and
name changes. It seldom gets involved in names of cities or towns, since these
are generally incorporated through the states. But there are occasional changes
in town names to deal with, as well as numerous cases involving names of rivers,
mountains and other geographic features.

The committee has several hard and fast rules: No domestic names honoring living
persons; naming a feature for a deceased person only when it is in the public
interest; no use of a name derogatory to a person, race or religion.

One constant controversy centers on the name of Mount McKinley in Alaska. The
Alaskan Legislature has voted to change the name of the soaring range to Denali,
meaning The Big One. Ohio officials have opposed any such change in the name of
the mountain named for one of its most prominent native sons, President
McKinley. So far, the board is staying with Mount McKinley.

Some years ago, the board provided a less salacious name for an Oregon site
known as Whorehouse Meadow by renaming it Naughty Girl Meadow. But now, a move
is afoot in that community to regain the old name.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 694 words


Shultz and Dobrynin Meet

Secretary of State George P.

Shultz and the Soviet Ambassador

to the United States, Anatoly F. Dobrynin, met in Washington Tuesday to discuss
the possibility of improving channels of communication between their
Governments, according to State Department officials.

They said the purpose of the meeting was also to resume a dialogue on
Soviet-American relations in preparation for the meeting scheduled for Jan. 18
in Stockholm between Mr. Shultz and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei A.
Gromyko.

The meeting at the State Department was given no advance publicity and
department officials said that Mr. Shultz and Mr. Dobrynin had reached no
conclusions.

They pointed out that Mr. Dobrynin, who is dean of the Washington diplomatic
corps, had returned here 10 days ago after spending nearly a month in Moscow.

A Vietnamese on Vietnam

Aformer South Vietnamese Ambassador to the United States is working on a book
about the American role in the Vietnam War.

The author is Bui Diem, who was a ranking official of the South Vietnamese
Government in the 1960's, and was based in Washington from 1967 to 1972 as
Ambassador to the United States. Mr. Diem then became his country's Ambassador
at large, and was based in Saigon until 1975. He left his country two days
before Saigon fell to the Communists in April, 1975 and came here to make a new
life.

He wrote articles and did some work for the Rand Corporation, then borrowed
money and was a part- owner of Goldberg's Delly in downtown Washington until two
years ago.

Mr. Diem admitted at the time that while he was learning such things as what a
Dr. Brown's soda was, his mind was on Vietnam. ''I must confess,'' he said, ''I
keep thinking about the country. Where did we go wrong?''

Then Goldberg's changed names and owners, and Mr. Diem seemed to drop out of
sight. Now he has been named a visiting scholar by the American Enterprise
Institute for Public Policy Research, a conservative organization based here.
The institute's president, William J. Baroody Jr., announced the appointment and
the institute said that Mr. Diem ''will be working on a book detailing American
involvement in the Vietnam War.''

Near Miss for Jackson

While the Rev. Jesse Jackson was in Syria attempting to gain the release of a
Navy pilot, his Presidential campaign staff back home nearly made a potential
political blunder.

The staff members thought they still had several weeks to get the Jackson slate
on the ballot for the New Hampshire primary. But they learned on Tuesday that
the deadline for filing was midnight Tuesday. Working with members of the New
Hampshire Democratic Party, they met the deadline.

The confusion was only partly a result of the candidate's absence. The Jackson
campaign organization said it had been told by the Democratic National Committee
in Washington that the primary would be on March 6, and that there was plenty of
time to file.

But the New Hampshire Democrats, insisting that the primary will be held Feb.
28, set the deadline for filing delegate slates at midnight Tuesday. The state
and national party are still disputing the date of the primary, but now Mr.
Jackson will be on the ballot whenever it is.

On Target?

On Dec. 14, off the coast of Lebanon, the battleship New Jersey fired its
16-inch guns for the first time in combat since the Vietnam War.

The firing of the 1,900- pound projectiles at Syrian missile emplacements
received ample publicity. But where the shots actually landed, and what damage
they did, if any, has not been made public.

In response to questions about what the shells hit, or whether they might have
missed their targets, Defense Department spokesmen say only that they are unable
to say.

Reporters covering the Pentagon say this is unusual. They point out that the
Navy, before the Lebanon mission, frequently boasted about the great accuracy
and lethality of 16-inch guns.

And they note, by way of contrast, that within three days after American bombers
attacked Syrian positions on Dec. 4, the department issued a detailed report of
the damage done to Syrian antiaircraft positions east of Beirut.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THREE VIETNAM VETERANS ARRESTED IN BURNING OF A BUDDHIST TEMPLE

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 664 words

DATELINE: NORTHAMPTON, Mass., Jan. 4


Three Vietnam veterans, patients at a Veterans Administration hospital here,
surrendered today and were charged with burning a small Buddhist temple in the
remote Berkshire hamlet of Hawley.

Telephone calls made by an anonymous caller before the fire on New Year's Eve
had warned fire officials and reporters that a ''Vietnamese pagoda'' would be
destroyed as an act of revenge against Vietnamese refugees. The caller said the
refugees received better treatment than veterans of the Vietnam War.

The surrender of the men, who were on weekend leave from the hospital when the
arson occurred, was arranged by William F. Martin, president of the
Massachusetts Council of Vietnam Veterans of America, a national organization
that has lobbied for better treatment of Vietnam veterans. One of the suspects
had called him seeking help, the authorities said.

Destruction of Property Charges

State troopers took the men into custody at the hospital and booked each on a
charge of willful and malicious destruction of property. Conviction could result
in a maximum sentence of 10 years in jail.  The three, Richard A. Papineau, 35
years old, of Hartford; Roland F. Voudren, 33, of Turners Falls, Mass., and
Donald E. Taylor, 37, of Charlemont, Mass., pleaded not guilty to the charges in
Hampshire County District Court in Greenfield. Judge Allan McGuane ordered them
released on personal bonds pending a pretrial conference Jan. 27.

The men are being represented by Robert Carlsen, a lawyer who is president of
the Pioneer Valley Chapter of the Vietnam Veterans of America. ''I don't want to
identify the backgrounds of my clients,'' said Mr. Carlsen, who saw action in
Vietnam as a medic in the Fourth Infantry Division. He added that, ''but from
what I have been told, each has seen a period of service'' in Vietnam. He would
not elaborate.

The authorities said gasoline was used to burn the Mahasiddhi Nyingmapa Center,
a small but ornate 25-by- 30-foot curved-roof Buddhist temple, which was
situated on a hillside along Route 2 in Hawley.

Linda Albright, who described herself as the caretaker of the temple, said the
temple was built in 1976 by American students of Guru Rimpoche, a lama who left
Tibet in 1959 after the Chinese occupation, and that it had no Vietnamese
members.

''We are all Americans,'' Miss Albright said. ''I think it may have been a case
of mistaken identity.''

District Attorney W. Michael Ryan said those charged became suspects because of
their status as Vietnam veterans and because they had been released from the
Veterans Hospital on Friday on weekend passes and had been expected to return
Monday.

The veterans facility in the Leeds section of Northampton is one of eight in the
country that specialize in treating veterans suffering from post-traumatic
stress disorder, a problem that many veterans and some psychologists link to
readjustment difficulties faced by veterans of that war.

James W. Como, chief of medical administration services, said the men had been
admitted in the last year but were not in the stress treatment ward. He refused
to say what type of treatment the men were receiving.

Gary Randall, a reporter for The Morning Union in Springfield, spoke with an
anonymous caller four times in the two days following the fire.

''Flashbacks and nightmares are one of the reasons for these missions,'' Mr.
Randall said he was told. ''Vietnam veterans ought to be recognized for the hell
they went through and the hell we are still going through.''

Mr. Martin said that in his conversations he was told one of the men was
desperate to get treatment for war-related emotional problems.

''He was frustrated and hasn't received treatment for 14 years,'' Mr. Martin
said he was told. ''He indicated he's been in and out of hospitals and is in a
very confused state and that he knows he needs treatment. Not being able to
receive it right away, he has taken this particular symbolic act to bring about
immediate treatment.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A dispatch Wednesday from Northampton, Mass., on three arrests arising from the
burning of a small Buddhist temple incorrectly reported the temple's origins. It
was built in 1976 by followers of the teachings of Guru Rimpoche, a leader
active in Tibet centuries ago.

GRAPHIC: photo of Donald Taylor

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

War Hero Gives Away His Medal of Honor

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 119 words

DATELINE: BRAWLEY, Calif., Jan. 4


A hero who lost an eye in the Vietnam War has rejected his Medal of Honor as a
''form of idolatry because it has a false god on it.''

For years John McGinty 3d, one of 259 living recipients of the medal, wore his
citation proudly and spoke on lecture tours. But now describing himself as a
Christian and saying he was placing the Ten Commandments first, the 43- year-old
veteran says he rejects the award, which bears an image of the Roman goddess
Minerva. The medal, awarded March 12, 1968, has been donated to a collector, he
said.

''If the Marine Corps taught me anything,'' Mr. McGinty said, ''it was how to
follow orders, and now that I'm a Christian I follow God's orders, the Ten
Commandments.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and Maurice Carroll

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 193 words


A Show for Men's Shelters

Last winter the Veterans' Ensemble

Theater Company toured men's shelters with ''The Medal of Honor Rag,'' a drama
of the Vietnam War. ''There are a lot of Vietnam vets in the shelters,'' said
Bill Conner, a writer with the company, ''and they really identified with it.''

Last month the company was back with a revue called ''The R & R Show'' (for rest
and relaxation) which included singing, ghetto humor and a woman who
impersonates Dolly Parton, Marilyn Monroe and Carmen Miranda. That show was so
successful, according to Tom Bird, the director, that an expanded edition is
being put together Next month, it is to make another tour of the shelters.

Mr. Bird said it was warming to see the change in the audience as the show
unfolded.

''When they come in, they're all sadness, like Depression City,'' he said, ''but
in a few minutes we have most of them laughing and singing and carrying on.''

Myra Payne, director of volunteer services for the city's Human Resources
Administration, which runs the shelters, agreed. ''But there are some,'' she
said, ''who just sit and stare, who have other things on their minds.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ART: A JOYOUS MEMORIAL TO RICHARD STANKIEWICZ

BYLINE: By GRACE GLUECK

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1547 words


IT is always a shock to see a memorial show of an artist whose

work we admire. It makes us

realize that his special view of the world, the odd, individual vision he was
driven to share, will no longer have expression. And the interest - even
excitement - with which we followed his art cannot be fed by new developments.
We can still admire the work, but without further expectation. For better or
worse, it's consigned to the fickle custody of history.

The sculptor Richard Stankiewicz, who died last March at the age of 60, is
certainly one for whose work no regrets need be felt. Over a period of more than
30 years, the witty, pungent assemblages that he pioneered in welding from bits
of junk metal, and his later sculpture of more formal elegance, have retained
their power and vitality. And the current memorial show for him at the Zabriskie
Gallery, 724 Fifth Avenue, at 57th Street, through Feb. 4, is more a rejoicing
than a requiem. His career is summed up in 17 selected pieces - borrowed from
well-known museums and collectors - that reveal an artist of steadily growing
powers whose early promise was resoundingly fulfilled.

We are first beguiled by a small, lyrical presence - bird, insect or plant -
dating from 1951, after Stankiewicz's return to New York from study in Paris
with the painter Fernand Leger and the sculptor Ossip Zadkine. A straight wire
shoot studded with buttons, which grows from a tangle of wiry roots (or legs?)
and branches out in an ebullience of bent metallic strands, it clearly shows
Stankiewicz's special gift for ''drawing in space.'' But he soon turned to
welded metal as a more robust medium for his concepts. In the larger-than-life
''Kabuki Dancer'' of 1954, he explores what was to become a masterly talent for
combining rusted metal oddments - in this case, a grille, a pot, a spoke wheel
for a head and, for feet, two metal shoe plates connected by a steplike
arrangement of metal strips - in a far wittier whole than the sum of its
improbable parts.

Ideas - partly sparked by the metal scraps themselves, but disciplined by
Stankiewicz's rigorous sense of formal design - tumble over ideas in this show.
In the early 1960's, he made a series of double-faced heads, in one of which -
on view here - links from a heavy chain are used to form a march of curly hair
both uniting and separating the two ''faces,'' as well as to create a beard for
one. In a couple of totally abstract pieces from the same period, he plays off
flat and curved planes against volumetric cylinders, closely evoking the
two-dimensional machine abstractions of Leger. In a humorous, totally abstract
work of 1975, he poises a piece of a cylinder on the edge of a cube. Most
formally oriented sculptors would have let it go at that, but Stankiewicz treats
the opening that occurs between the two as a hungry maw, shoving into it a
bundle of cylindrical sticks.  Actually, in 1965, Stankiewicz had his last show
of the ''junk'' sculpture that has influenced artists as discrete as Anthony
Caro and Jean Tinguely. He left the New York art world to settle in
Massachusetts, then went to Australia to work for a while. The availability of
mill materials - I-beams, angle irons, steel tubing and so forth - at a factory
there brought a much more formal geometry to his sculpture (although it kept its
coatings of rust). And when he returned to the exhibition scene in the early
70's, the work had a new look. Where it had been witty and intense, it was now
of a classic serenity, composed of big, sawed-off cylindrical forms arranged in
a fine balance. An example is ''Untitled'' of 1975, a human-scale piece finshed
in reddish rust, in which tilted drum shapes are joined to a leaning cylinder
with magnificent craftsmanship.

Stankiewicz later went back to what he called ''rougher, scruffier'' materials,
and something of the junk- sculpture esthetic can be seen in his last works -
for instance, an untitled piece from 1981, in which scraps of metal are deployed
in various ways over the surface of an empty, rectangular steel frame set on a
plinth. But this - part of a series - seems fussy and contrived, lacking
entirely the exuberant improvisation of the sculptor's early forms. It's a small
misstep in the triumphant career that this show makes evident.


Also of interest this week:

Grace Hartigan (Gruenebaum, 38 East 57th Street): ''Great Queens and Empresses''
is the title of Grace Hartigan's new show of paintings, taken - like many of its
images - from a book of paper dolls. Thus - in a double rendition - the
Byzantine Theodora, supposedly an actress and prostitute before her marriage to
Emperor Justinian I, prances onto the canvas in the nude, and then, in a second
image, piously holds a golden orb as she stands in a gown of regal splendor.
Among others, there are also Elizabeth I, a travesty of the Faerie Queene in an
insectlike costume that sprouts wings; Josephine, looking coy in a yellow Empire
gown, Mariana of Austria (after Velazquez), big of eyes and mouth and hairdo in
a close-up portrait, Eleanor of Aquitaine and Liliuokalani of Hawaii, each in a
double rendition.

Miss Hartigan's style is a compound of Matissean figuration and coloring
(including a wonderful sharp green), with forms and paint handling - diluted
washes allowed to drip freely on sized canvas - that give hints of her Abstract
Expressionist antecedence. There's some fun in her caricaturing, but aside from
the lively coloration, these brash, carefully slapdash paintings are not
persuasive. (Through Feb. 4.)



Altoon Sultan (Marlborough, 40 West 57th Street): ''Nothing ever possibly in the
least ever happens,'' says 15-year-old Dinah in ''The Philadelphia Story,'' and
that's the feeling this viewer gets from Altoon Sultan's incidentless landscapes
and still lifes in oils, gouaches and watercolors. The cleanest, evenest of
painters, Miss Sultan depicts houses, barns, figures, cows, placid fields and
even stormy skies in lighting and colors that in no way tax the perception. What
appeals, if anything, is the scale of the artist's canvases, which for their
compositional scope are surprisingly small; even tiny - at the most, 27 inches
by 15 inches. Her still lifes, too, are cliches, as in ''Afternoon Tea,'' a
close-up view of a cup and saucer on a table near a window, beyond which we see
Manhattan buildings; but her style seems more suited to them. The best things
here, however, are a group of tiny, black and white etchings - landscapes and
fragments of architectural details - that escape the banality of Miss Sultan's
color. (Through Feb. 1.)



Mary Ann Currier (Alexander F. Milliken, 98 Prince Street): At the other end of
the size scale are Mary Ann Currier's still lifes of fruits and flowers in
pastel, also in sharp-focus realism, but blown up bigger than life. Peaches,
plums, persimmons, pomegranates, avocados and lilies are depicted individually
at glowing prime, sometimes attended by dining props. In one of the most
striking works, for example, four black-purple plums pose on or near a white
saucer, in the company of a white napkin, a white cup and part of a Japanese
print, which hangs on a wall of deep, suave tan. ''Peaches'' puts three knockout
specimens of the fruit together with a fat white sugar bowl, a pitcher of milk,
a dish and a handsome silver spoon. In this, Miss Currier's first New York solo
show, she exhibits great skill in her tricky medium, which doesn't quite redeem
the slick conventionality of her images. (Through Feb. 1.)



''Up With People'' (Concord Gallery, 451 Broome Street): Collaborative Projects,
the group endeavor that brought us the scruffy, streetwise ''Times Square Show''
a couple of years ago, shows a collection of 50 ''photo graphics'' by 50 of its
members, including Mike Glier, Jenny Holzer, Joseph Nechvatal, Walter Robinson,
Christy Rupp, Tom Otterness and Anton van Dalen. They are photographic blowups,
poster-size, of smaller drawings or what-have-you made by the artists. The
themes are random - sex, politics, violence, drugs, television and more placid
divertissements, in what might be called a medley of styles. Among the
highlights - you should pardon the expression - of this aimless melange are Jody
Culkin's drawing of a city street beset with all manner of flying boomerangs;
Walter Robinson's takeoff of an Expressionist print with two smug female nudes
and an anguished male one, and Debbie Davis's photo ( a la Cindy Sherman) of a
wickedly made-up woman lying in bed. Those who buy art for speculation will be
crushed that the photographic blowups - and not the original drawings - are for
sale.

In another room is an ''interactive video installation,'' titled ''The Jungle''
also made by CoLab members. An environment intended to suggest a cafe in Vietnam
looking out to the jungle, its painted flats and props include foliage, vines,
swinging monkeys and a jungle-rotted boat that moves - like some of the foliage
- when the viewer deposits a quarter in a slot. When viewers sit next to the
rocking boat, they see themselves among it all on a television monitor. As the
satirical ''funhouse'' it's supposed to be, it's awfully bland, and it doesn't
work well technically. Both shows run through Jan. 28.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of sculpture by richard Stankiewicz

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: ANATOLE BROYARD

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


THE TRUE ADVENTURES OF JOHN STEINBECK, WRITER. By Jackson J. Benson.
Illustrated. 1,116 pages. Viking Press. $35.  JOHN STEINBECK was one of those
unclassifiable American novelists that our century seems to have turned up in
surprising numbers. As Jackson J. Benson pictures him in his interminable
biography, ''The True Adventures of John Steinbeck, Writer,'' Steinbeck appears
to have been awkward, half-educated, sentimental and naive, a man who wrested an
insecure fame for himself out of his determination, his unalloyed sincerity, his
belief in himself and his immersion in time and place. In other words, he had
all the virtues traditionally associated with the term American by those
critics, like Mary McCarthy, for example, who disliked his work.

Born in Salinas, Calif., in 1902, Steinbeck was a ne'er-do-well, drifting from
job to job and trying to find his natural voice in a fog of grandiloquence until
''Tortilla Flat,'' his first success, came out in 1933. A series of loosely
strung sketches of the ''paisanos'' or outcasts on the fringes of Monterey, it
was just the sort of book he needed. He had stumbled on a cause, a colorful one,
and the book became a best seller.

In 1936, he was successful again with ''In Dubious Battle,'' the story of a
grape pickers' strike. ''Of Mice and Men'' appeared in 1937, and in 1939
Steinbeck published his best book, ''The Grapes of Wrath.'' Here again was a
perfect cause: the mindless migration to California of ruined farmers from the
South and Middle West had a built-in pathos. After this, there were a number of
less successful novels, including ''East of Eden'' in 1952.

On the face of this, it's natural to wonder whether Steinbeck deserves, or
requires, the 1,116 pages devoted to him by Mr. Benson, a teacher of American
literature at San Diego State University and the author of a book on Ernest
Hemingway. Neither Mr. Benson nor Steinbeck is a beguiling writer, and the size
of the book may strike some readers as an indication of the author's inability
to come to the point. It may be evidence, too, of the American public's apparent
willingness to read huge biographies of writers whose works they have not opened
since college.

Steinbeck was vain about his ability as a lover and modest about his writing. He
nourished the convention that critics, because of their intellectual approach to
his work, often missed his point. After he shook off a few romantic authors who
had impressed him early in life, Steinbeck was not appreciably influenced by
other writers. Rather, he listened to his first wife, Carol, and to his friends,
agents and editors. Carol, especially, seemed invaluable in keeping up his
spirits and helping to clean up his work, even after he had rewritten it several
times.

Mr. Benson offers some murky generalizations about the ''nonteleological''
nature of Steinbeck's books. He observes, too, that the novelist struggled to
balance realism and romanticism. There are mysterious references to Steinbeck's
''philosophical'' concerns, which helped to antagonize a certain class of
readers, who label the author communist, fascist, obscene and a number of other
stock epithets. When Steinbeck won the Nobel Prize in 1962, more than one critic
questioned the wisdom of the choice.


Through all this, Steinbeck sounds like a third-rate Hollywood movie's image of
the writer as a regular guy, who is touched with the magic of words and a
passion for truth. According to Mr. Benson, Steinbeck was generous to his
friends, difficult but adoring with his three wives, shy, private and hard
working - in other words, not very different from other people. Like many
American authors, he was Everyman with a bit more imagination and a stubborn
desire to be a writer. Despite his advanced age, he was a brave war
correspondent in Vietnam, but his ''hawklike'' articles exposed him to enemy
fire at home, as well as in the front lines. He died in 1968, at the age of 66,
of a heart attack that had been more or less expected for some time.

After reading ''The True Adventures of John Steinbeck, Writer,'' we are dazed
with facts, with comings and goings, with praises and attacks, but still we
wonder what to think of the man who was, at his best, one of America's favorite
authors. Like his books, Steinbeck's life seems scattered and undeveloped, yet
suffused with a raw, even noble energy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John Steinbeck

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC SCENE;
BEHIND THE LAG IN PRODUCTIVITY

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 845 words


I S the long downtrend in the rate of productivity

growth in the United States at last turning

around?

The decline started somewhere between 1965 and 1968 - by no coincidence during
the buildup for the Vietnam War. From 1950 to 1965, the rate of growth of labor
productivity in the private business sector averaged 3 percent a year, but from
1965 to 1973, it slipped to 2.13 percent a year, and from 1973 to 1981 it
collapsed to 0.64 percent annually.

In terms of ''multifactor productivity'' - increases in real output divided by
inputs of both labor and capital - productivity growth virtually stopped in the
1973-81 period. Calculations by Martin Neil Baily, an economist at the Brookings
Institution, show that multifactor productivity fell to 0.06 percent in that
period.



The cumulative costs of that fall in productivity were huge. Mr. Baily
calculates that the extra value of national output, if productivity had not
fallen, would have been three times the size of the defense budget in 1981 or
more than 20 percent of total personal consumption.

What caused the decline? The answers are important in deciding whether it is
likely to be reversed. There are some reasons to think the decline was partly
due to a slowdown in innovations and technical change.

Mr. Baily cites two pieces of evidence: The number of patents granted to United
States citizens fell to 37,000 in 1980 from a peak of 56,000 in 1971, and the
ratio of research and development expenditures to gross national product fell to
a low of 2.2 percent in 1978 from 2.9 percent in the 1960's. But he finds this
evidence ''far from definitive'' in fixing the blame for declining productivity
on a depletion of possibilities for innovation.

The most obvious culprit was the oil price explosions of 1973 and 1979. Up to
1973, energy use was rising at 1.92 percent a year relative to all the other
factors that go into increasing output, and falling at 1.87 percent a year
thereafter. Various econometric studies have suggested that, once energy prices
stabilize, above-normal productivity growth should begin. The stabilization of
oil prices in the last few years looks as though it is feeding the productivity
recovery.

Similarly, the stabilization of other raw material prices also points to a
revival of productivity gains, as does the general decline in inflation. Mr.
Baily thinks that if inflation is conquered the economy should go back to the
old trend-level of productivity and not just to its old growth rate; this jump
could produce very rapid growth for a while.

Other explanations of the slowdown in United States productivity growth in the
years 1965-81 include these: The rise in Government regulation, a decline in
work effort, a declining ratio of capital to labor, the instability of the
economy as a whole, and the entrance of more women, youths and minorities into
the labor force.

At a recent American Economic Association meeting, Prof. Shirley P. Burggraf of
Florida A. & M. University attacked the last of these theses in a paper titled
''Women, Youth and Minorities and the Case of the Missing Productivity.'' Her
argument was that the apparent slowdown in productivity resulting from female,
youth and minority entrants to the labor force is highly dubious, a result of
mismeasurement.

In earlier years, many of these people either had not been working at all or had
been doing work (such as housework) not measured in the G.N.P. She suggested
that they had really augmented, not slowed, productivity and output growth for
the economy as a whole.

The productivity slowdown was doubtless caused by a variety of factors, but Mr.
Baily thinks the post-1973 fall was chiefly due to temporary shocks, such as the
oil-price explosion and worldwide monetary responses to inflation that resulted
in cyclical instability.


If such shocks are over, productivity is likely to advance much more rapidly in
the years ahead. Indeed, Mr. Baily cites evidence that the turnaround is already
under way; in the last three and a half years, productivity in manufacturing has
grown much more than it did over the six and a half years after 1973. In fact,
it has been climbing as fast as it did in the earlier high-growth period, 1957
to 1963.

This lends credibility to the ''temporary shocks'' explanation of what went
wrong in the 1970's, rather than to some fundamental long-term decay of
productivity.

But the United States may not yet be entirely out of danger on the productivity
front. Persistently high real rates of interest, supported by big budget
deficits and inadequate savings rates, could put a drag on capital investment in
new plant and equipment, and on research and development.

Investment in ''human capital'' through educational outlays may also falter, due
to budgetary constraints. Inflation and cyclical instability also remain
threats. And there is enough trouble militarily, politically and economically
around the world to keep the nation from relaxing and assuming that the era of
shocks and productivity disruption is over.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


FRIDAY, JANUARY 6, 1984



The Economy



The S.E.C. charged that Paul Thayer illegally helped eight people to make $1.9
million in the stock market by giving them ''insider'' information in 1981 and
1982, before he became Deputy Secretary of Defense. Mr. Thayer said the
complaint was based on ''a distorted view of selected facts.'' The eight people
included a Dallas stockbroker who is a longtime acquaintance and a woman with
whom Mr. Thayer had a ''personal relationship,'' the commission said. (Page A1.)
Top Administration officials were unaware until two weeks ago of the questions
concerning Mr. Thayer's conduct that led to the filing of a complaint, according
to a White House aide. (D3.) The S.E.C. suit describes a pattern of illegal
trading by a group of people with social and professional ties. (D3.)



Auto sales rose 17.9 percent in 1983, making it the best year since 1979. Thus
the industry, while ending rebates and sharply cutting costs, continued to
rebound from its worst slump since World War II. For the year, analysts said,
the combined profit for the Big Three auto makers should be more than $6
billion. (D1.)



Major retailers across the country reported strong sales gains of more than 10
percent in December. Sales rose 17.5 percent for Sears, 11.3 percent for K Mart
and 11.6 percent for J. C. Penney. Analysts said that the year-long consumer
spending surge continued strong past Christmas. (D1.)



Markets



The stock market had one of its best days ever.  Record trading volume of 160
million shares, buoyed by heavy institutional demand, pushed the Dow Jones
industrial average up 13.19 points, to 1,282.24, a near-record close. (D1.)
Overseas, a comparable rush of buy orders lifted stock indexes to records in
four countries. (D4.)



The dollar continued its record-breaking surge on foreign exchange markets,
setting new highs against the currencies of Britain, France, Italy, Spain and
Denmark. Gold prices fell $1.50 an ounce in New York, to $375.50. (D1.)
Livestock futures prices rallied strongly, while heating oil futures declined.
(D8.)



The insurance industry bought up $425 million in 10-year bonds issued by three
leading financially oriented companies. Most short- and long-term interest rates
on Government issues edged downward. (D7.) Assets of money market mutual funds
declined, but short-term yields on the funds rose sharply. (D2.)



Investors who were heavily committed in high-technology mutual funds suffered
big losses if they had not bailed out before the third quarter, according to the
first full analysis of the funds' performance last year. (D1.)



Companies



A former Pepsico vice president pleaded guilty to a criminal charge involving
the filing of false financial data with the S.E.C. The defendant, Richard I.
Ahern, admitted he told executives at a subsidiary in Mexico to inflate profit
reports. (D1.)



Air Florida said it has been placed in default by one of its major creditors,
but will continue normal operations. (D3.)



A member of the Getty family is challenging in court the Getty Oil Company's
agreement to go private. (D3.)



International



The leader of Nigeria's new military Government asked for help in reviving the
country's economy. Nigeria, which owes some $14 billion abroad, will continue to
seek concessions from the I.M.F., the World Bank and international lenders, he
said. (A3.)



France said it would start reducing its huge foreign debt within the next two
years. Since the Socialists took office, the debt has almost doubled, to $53
billion. This makes France one of the world's most heavily indebted nations.
(D8.)



Today's Columns



What caused the downtrend in productivity growth that started during the buildup
for the Vietnam War? The oil price explosion is one reason, but there is also
evidence implicating a slowdown in technical change. Leonard Silk. Economic
Scene. (D2.)



Short-interest figures on the Big Board have been sending out strongly bullish
signals. Experts say the current combination of low specialist ratios and high
public ratios has in the past proved a reliable precursor of rising stock
prices. Market Place. (D4.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

JOBLESS RATE IN U.S. FELL TO 8.1% IN DECEMBER AS ECONOMY GAINED

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1078 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


The nation's unemployment rate dropped last month to 8.1 percent from 8.3
percent in November, the Government reported today.

It attributed the decline primarily to widespread success of men in either
regaining factory jobs they lost in the long recession or finding work in other
industries.

Most parts of the labor force shared in 335,000 jobs that were filled last
month, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said, but some stubborn soft spots
remained. These included black workers, especially black teen-agers, who have
benefited little from the economy's recovery, and former employees of declining
basic industries, notably steel and heavy machinery.

Still, the bureau's report struck another note in a tide of favorable news for
the economy that began last spring, when the Government's data began showing a
far livelier economic recovery than nearly all economists, in and out of the
Government, had expected.

The Government reported sharp drops in the unemployment rates in New York State
and New Jersey over the last year. The rate in New York State fell to 7.4
percent last month, while the rate in New Jersey fell to 6.8 percent. (Page 15.)

The nation's unemployment rate, one of the most politically sensitive economic
indicators, has declined in nine of the last 13 months, from a recession high of
10.6 percent in December 1982.

''There are now about four million more American men and women at work today
than there were at this time last year,'' Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan
said today. ''That has got to be good news for everybody.''

''That's about as good news as we could ever hope for,'' Representative Dan
Lungren, Republican of Calfornia, told Janet Norwood, Commissioner of the Bureau
of Labor Statistics. Mrs. Norwood testified on the job report before the Joint
Economic Committee of Congress, as she does each month, but with Congress in
recess, Mr. Lungren was the only panel member there.

''The overall labor market continues to show marked improvement,'' Mrs. Norwood
said. ''Employment has risen sharply, and the unemployment rate has continued
its steadfy decline. Improvement has been widespread, affecting almost all
worker groups.''

Democrats, however interpreted the report differently. ''The problem is - I
think most economists and businessmen would agree with me - that we are in a
recovery coming out of a deep recession,'' said Walter F. Mondale in Florida,
where he is campaigning for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
''Unemployment is still very high by historical standards.''

The unemployment rate is now 2.5 percentage points below its 10.6 percent peak
in December 1982, just as the recession was ending. The decline was the sharpest
in more than 30 years, since the recovery from a recession in 1949-50, but the
rise in the rate in 1982 was also the sharpest since the Depression.

The rate represents the fraction of the labor force out of work and looking for
a job, the Federal definition of unemployed. The labor force includes the
unemployed and those with jobs, including the armed forces.

The rate was 5.5 percent in May 1979, and in the Vietnam War in the late 1960's,
it was as low as 3.3 percent.

Changes in Labor Force

With the recovery continuing, the December employment report appeared to confirm
some significant shifts in the character of the labor force, including these: :


- Jobs among service workers, from hamburger servers to physicians and computer
programmers, are taking an ever larger share of total employment, while the role
of manufacturing is diminishing. ''The bulk of the job growth during the
recovery has been in the service-producing sector, although one million of the
increase was in factory jobs,'' Mrs. Norwood said.


- The children born in the post-World War II ''baby boom'' aggravated
unemployment in the 1970's. They are now adults, and last year, the number of
teen-agers in the labor force actually declined, by 558,000, to slightly more
than 15 million in December.


- The sharp growth in the numbers of working women in the 1970's has also eased,
and officials suspect most of those who wanted to leave the home for paid jobs
have already done so.


- Wages, seen by many economists as an agent of inflation, have been rising far
more slowly than they have in other recent recoveries, suggesting that pressure
of rising inflation this year remains subdued. Workers' average hourly earnings
rose five-tenths of 1 percent in December and 3.7 percent in all of 1983,
approximately the same as the inflation rate last year.

The new unemployment statistics reflected revisions of some of the figures for
last year. The overall rate for November was revised to 8.3 percent from the 8.2
percent originally reported last month. The figure for December 1982, first
reported to be 10.7 percent, was reduced to 10.6 percent.

Employment recovery was uneven around the country. Of 10 large states on which
the labor statistics bureau reported unemployment in December, Massachusetts,
once heavily dependent on basic industries but now dominated by services and new
technology industries, recorded the lowest civilian unemployment, 6.4 percent.

Michigan, still with many heavy industries, had the highest unemployment rate,
11.6 percent.

The sharpest job gains occurred among men over the age of 20. The unemployment
rate for that group declined over the month to 7.4 percent from 7.8 percent.

Of all civilian workers, only blacks experienced a decline in jobs from November
to December. The unemployment rate for blacks rose one-tenth of 1 percent to
17.8 percent, but the figure was down from its level of a year earlier, 20.6
percent.

Blacks accounted for 31 percent of 1.5 million discouraged workers, those who
have given up looking for work and do not appear in the unemployment rate.
Unemployment among black teen-agers last month remained locked close to the 50
percent level where it has stood for years.

The recovery of manufacturing jobs masked substantial losses in some industries.
For example, the steel industry employed 515,000 workers at the start of the
recession, 323,000 at its trough and only 344,000 in December.

In her testimony today, Mrs. Norwood minimized discrepancies in the bureau's
data that some economists questioned last month. The bureau uses two methods to
monitor employment and unemployment. One is a survey of households; the other is
based on payroll reports filed by employers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of unemployment in U.S. (Page 15)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Letter: On Docudramas What 'Silkwood' Is - and Is Not

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 466 words


To the Editor:


In view of your longstanding commitment to free expression, your Dec. 25
editorial ''The Chicanery of 'Silkwood' '' comes as serious disappointment. The
attack upon the writers and producers of this important motion picture, indeed
upon the very concept of a docudrama, misconceives the nature of the medium.

The gist of your error is in the assumption that there was a decision ''to
select data and present them as the whole truth.'' No portion of the film
asserts or suggests that it presented the ''whole'' story, nor did it purport to
be a ''documentary'' account.

No dramatization or docudrama can ever be a documentary, since most dialogue
must be fictionalized (save for dramatizations of trials or hearings that have
been transcribed). No reasonable viewer of ''Silkwood'' could believe that the
film was anything more than a dramatization of events of historical
significance.  It is troubling to read that you draw a line between
''contemporary events'' and ''history'' in terms of appropriate expression. The
tragic death of Karen Silkwood is now a decade old. Are docudramas based on the
Vietnam War or Watergate also to be barred because real names and places are
used? If the very genre is a ''perversion,'' why would not ''The Adams
Chronicles'' or ''Sunrise at Campobello'' warrant similar protest?  Moreover,
there is no basis for the charge that ''Silkwood'' distorts this unhappy episode
in the history of nuclear energy in the United States. Detailed accounts that
implicate Kerr- McGee to a far greater degree have been published (''Who Killed
Karen Silkwood?'' by Howard Kohn, ''The Killing of Karen Silkwood,'' by Richard
Rashke, as well as numerous articles in Rolling Stone) without significant
response from Kerr-McGee. The film does not even mention that an Oklahoma jury
returned a $10.5 million verdict against the company in favor of Miss Silkwood's
estate based upon the discovery of radioactive material in Miss Silkwood's home.
Though the Court of Appeals modified the judgment on pre-emption grounds (which
did not exculpate Kerr- McGee), the U.S. Supreme Court accepted the case, and a
decision by our highest court is expected soon.

Lastly, your editorial was disappointing in its narrow assumption that the
purpose of the film was limited to its criticism of Kerr-McGee. The life and
death of Karen Silkwood raise serious issues well beyond those of safety in the
nuclear industry, including questions about the labor movement, feminism and
alternative life styles today. For capturing so many themes about contemporary
life while avoiding sensationalization of the underlying events, we should be
indebted to the screenwriters of ''Silkwood,'' Nora Ephron and Alice Arlen.

VICTOR A. KOVNER New York, Dec. 27, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

CLASSROOM DRAMA: STORIES OF HUMOR AND PAIN

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 812 words


Fifteen sophomores sat in a classroom at Martin Luther King Jr. High School
yesterday, ready to write a play for the first time in their lives. Only a few
had even seen a play before, and most had never created anything more literary
than a book report. But like the greatest dramatists, they had stories to tell.

''The name of my play is 'The Battlefield of Love,' '' announced Stephanie
Simmons, who went on to describe a romantic triangle among high school
classmates. Derrick Darby told of intrigue in the Kremlin. Robert Mesa read a
two-act drama about a boy who returns home from a basketball game to find his
stepfather shot.

When another student said a few of the details seemed unlikely, Mr. Mesa said,
softly but firmly: ''This is based on a true story. Some guy blew my stepfather
away.'' The classroom grew silent for a little while.

Such moments are not unfamiliar to Gerald Chapman, a theatrical director who has
traveled to 40 public schools in New York City in the last two months,
introducing students from the 4th through 12th grades to playwriting. The four-
year-old program is sponsored by the Dramatists Guild Foundation, and this year
is being financed with grants from the Exxon Educational Foundation and the Bay
Foundation.

On each school visit, a different playwright accompanies Mr. Chapman - Jules
Feiffer and Arthur Laurents are among past participants; yesterday it was
Terrence McNally. Their intent is less to discover incipient O'Neills or Millers
than to share the joy of creation and expression.

'A Story to Tell'

''We just want to reach the kids' imaginations,'' said Mr. McNally, who wrote
the book for the upcoming Broadway musical ''The Act.''

''Maybe they'll go home and want to paint a painting or write a song.'' he said.
''Just to hear them say at the end of the day, 'Maybe I'll write a play' -
that's important. Even if they never write that play, we've opened up the
possibility, and we've left them with the feeling 'I have a story to tell.' ''

At almost every school, Mr. Chapman said, those stories tend to be realistic,
personal and, not infrequently, painful. A 12-year-old described his parents,
newly divorced, fighting over his custody. A 15-year-old girl wrote a scene
about being pregnant and not knowing who the child's father was.

''You get plays, even from fifth graders, about drugs and drinking and street
fights,'' Mr. Chapman said. ''In a way, it's depressing. I've read hundreds of
plays by now, and the overriding theme is undoubtedly death, often self-
inflicted. But then you see the kids who wrote them, and they smile, they seem
happy.''

Humor and a severe sort of realism mixed throughout the day at Martin Luther
King Jr. High School, 65th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.

In the morning, Mr. Chapman asked the students to improvise a scene about a
family at breakfast. ''The father doesn't live at home,'' one student suggested.
Another scene centered on a student coming to class late and without a written
excuse.

''Do you have a note?'' said Vanessa Jackson, who was playing the teacher.

''The train was late,'' answered Nelson Garcia, as the student.

''Well, I'm not the conductor,'' Miss Jackson said. ''Go get a note.''

As their argument gathered fury, a real guidance counselor, Barry Liebman,
entered the room.

''Senor,'' he shouted at Mr. Garcia, ''if you're giving her a hard time,
leave.'' Mr. Garcia shot back, ''No.''

Only when the class burst into laughter did Mr. Liebman realize he had walked in
on an act.

''I will never,'' he said, fleeing the room, ''hear the end of this.''

From the improvisations, Mr. Chapman and Mr. McNally taught the students the
basic precepts of plot, action and character. Then they gave the students an
hour to write. Some managed only a few lines. Robert Mesa wrote so much that he
announced an ''intermission'' during his reading.

A Fraternal Fued

Derrick Darby's play dealt with a feud between two brothers, one a Green Beret
who served in Vietnam and the other a Communist who had moved to the Soviet
Union and taken the name ''Comrade Blatzkov.''

''That's not so far-fetched,'' Mr. Chapman assured him. ''There was an American
named John Reed. He went to the Kremlin and became great mates with Lenin and
Trotsky.''

There is a tangible reward for the students' efforts. The Dramatists Guild
Foundation this year is holding a playwriting contest for the city's public
school students. The winning entries will be given staged readings by
professional actors in May at the Public Theater.

But there are personal rewards as well. ''I used to hate writing,'' Mr. Mesa
said. ''When I had to do a book report, I would speak it instead of write it.
And if I got 20 words written on a composition, I was doing good. But now I'm
into writing. If I could do this, history and computers all day, I'd have it
made.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 10, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article in Metropolitan Report on Saturday about visits by playwrights to
city schools misidentified a coming Broadway musical for which Terrence McNally
wrote the book. It is ''The Rink.''

GRAPHIC: photo of Terrence McNally speaking about his craft ; photo of Coretta
Smith and Derrick Darby acting out a scee; photo of Gerald Chapman helping
Nelson Garcia with a part

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Smoke Bombs Ignited, Forcing Evacuations

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 116 words

DATELINE: NORTH ATTLEBORO, Mass., Jan. 6


Someone ''playing a very deadly game'' detonated an Army surplus smoke bomb and
a Vietnam era rocket, creating a dense, noxious cloud that drove 100 people from
their homes, the authorities said today.

Ronald Meyer, a deputy fire chief, said investigators found fragments of two
military weapons, an M-18 bomb and an illumination rocket, in a gravel pit 600
feet from a house. They said the devices were detonated simultaneously Thursday
night.

''Somebody is playing a very deadly game,'' Mr. Meyer said. ''Somebody could
have been hurt. This aerial device - the rocket - is unbelievable.''

He added that the rocket created the explosion that one witness likened to
dynamite going off.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Veterans Collect Funds To Build Ruined Temple

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 106 words

DATELINE: GREENFIELD, Mass., Jan. 6


Vietnam veterans nationwide began donating money today to help veterans in
Massachusetts rebuild a Buddhist temple. Other Vietnam veterans had been accused
of destroying the temple with a firebomb.

William Martin, chairman of the state council of the Vietnam Veterans of
America, said his group and the Vietnam Veterans Leadership Program in Honolulu
would appeal to other veterans to donate money, labor or materials to rebuild
the Mahasiddha Nyingmapa Center shrine in Hawley.

''This is a demonstration of the solidarity of Vietnam veterans nationwide -
We'reconcerned about helping all the victims of this,'' Mr. Martin said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GLENN SAYS HIS RIVAL HAS 'SECRET PLANS'

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: LACONIA, N.H., Jan. 6


Senator John Glenn, stepping up his attacks on former Vice President Walter F.
Mondale in their race for the Democratic Presidential nomination, said today
that Mr. Mondale had ''secret plans'' to address economic and environmental
issues and challenged him to ''tell the voters where he stands.''

The Ohio Senator, stopping in this central New Hampshire industrial city in a
three-day campaign tour of the state, accused Mr. Mondale of trying to husband
his lead in the opinion polls by refusing to make specific proposals on reducing
the budget deficit and curbing acid rain, which has threatened fish and plant
life in scores of lakes here.

''It's one thing to be cautious, and I understand that, as the front-runner for
the nomination, Fritz Mondale doesn't want to rock the boat,'' Senator Glenn
said at a news conference in a shoe factory here. ''But to be so cautious that
you only make promises and not choices, to be so cautious that your platform
consists of secret plans to be revealed after the elections - to be that
cautious is not leadership, it's politics.''

Mr. Glenn's attack against Mr. Mondale came as the Glenn campaign reduced its
Washington staff and moved to bolster its efforts in the chief primary and
caucus states.

Headquarters Staff Is Cut

Campaign officials acknowledged that the $1.6 million they raised in the final
quarter of 1983 fell nearly $400,000 short of their goal, but they said the
layoff of 18 of the 78 staff members at the Glenn headquarters in Washington
would be coupled by staff additions elsewhere.

''We don't have all the money we'd like to have,'' said Greg Schneiders, the
campaign communications director. ''We're in a position now where the field is
all-important to us. We have to make choices. Right now the choice is the
field.''

The accusation that Mr. Mondale had offered ''secret plans'' to address critical
issues grows out of a major element of the Glenn strategy, which is to paint the
former Vice President as so ensnarled by his promises to ''special interests''
that he is unable to make specific proposals.

Senator Glenn was asked by reporters whether his use of the term ''secret plan''
was a conscious allusion to the 1968 Presidential campaign, when Richard M.
Nixon said he would end the Vietnam War but never said how he would do it.
Shortly thereafter he was widely referred to as having a ''secret plan.''

''That phrase has been used in the past, and properly looked at by most people
in this country as unfair,'' Mr. Glenn replied. Deploring what he termed
''unclear promises,'' the Senator said, ''I think Mr. Mondale is doing exactly
the same thing in these other areas.''

Mr. Glenn said Mr. Mondale ''made elaborate promises and offered virtually no
specifics'' in his pledge, made Thursday in Jackson, Miss., to ''cut Reagan's
deficits in half'' by the end of his first term.

Acid Rain Plan Assailed ''But he can't say how he would do it,'' Mr. Glenn said.
''In short, Fritz Mondale has a secret plan to end the deficits. Well, I don't
believe we can replace Ronald Reagan's bad economic policy with a secret
economic policy.''

Then Mr. Glenn, addressing an issue of considerable importance in New Hampshire,
where the nation's first Presidential primary will be held, said Mr. Mondale
''refuses to say how'' he would reduce acid rain, which is produced primarily
when emissions of sulfur dioxide from power plants combined with water in the
atmosphere.

''Fritz Mondale has a secret plan to end acid rain,'' Mr. Glenn continued. ''And
at the same time he's promising to reduce acid rain, according to news reports,
he's also telling coal miners in the Midwest that he's going to protect their
high sulfur coal jobs. I do not believe that this is the kind of leadership
America wants or needs.''

Mr. Mondale has said he wants to reduce emissions of sulfur dioxide by half by
the end of the decade and has stressed the importance of reaching an agreement
with Canada, where acid rain is a major issue.

Senator Glenn's staff is preparing legislation to assess a fee on electric power
generated by fossil fuels and to use the revenue to make adjustments in the
plants that are contributing to acid rain.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KISSINGER PANEL, IN A DRAFT, SAYS SOVIET IS A THREAT IN LATIN AFFAIRS

BYLINE: By SEYMOUR M. HERSH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4761 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7


President Reagan's commission on Central America warns in a draft of its report
that the Soviet Union and Cuba are threatening to upset the strategic balance of
power in Central America.

The draft calls for a ''new alliance for democracy and prosperity'' in Central
America at a cost of $8 billion in American aid over the next five years.
Otherwise, it warned, a ''strategic coup of major proportions'' by the Soviet
Union may occur.

The commission, led by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, recommends,
in the draft, ''significantly increased'' military aid to El Salvador - as much
as $400 million in additional funds in 1984 and 1985 - to counter what it
depicts as a ''direct threat to U.S. security interests.''

Commission members and aides, in interviews, confirmed that much of the language
in the draft, which was still open to revision as of today, would be in the
final report scheduled for delivery to President Reagan on Wednesday.



Suggests More Aid to Honduras

The draft also proposes increased military aid to Honduras ''to build a credible
deterrent'' and the resumption of military aid and direct arms sales to
Guatemala that were cut off during the Carter Administration in response to
human rights violations.

The commission's draft further calls for the repeal of 1974 legislation in the
Foreign Assistance Act barring the use of American aid for the training or
support of police forces and also prohibiting United States support for internal
surveillance activity. It depicts the legislation as being ''counterproductive''
in American efforts to promote human rights in El Salvador as well as preventing
American aid to other nations, such as Costa Rica, which it says have heightened
need for police protection and border patrols.

The recommendations are in the draft of two complete chapters of the report
obtained by The New York Times. The chapters comprise more than 130 pages of
text dealing with security issues in Central America and economic recovery
programs for the area. Additional chapters are said to deal with diplomatic
initatives and possible means of neutralizing what the draft calls ''external
support for the insurgency.'' The total report is said to cover about 200 pages.

The Kissinger commission was appointed last July, at a time of growing public
and Congressional concern over the intent and scope of Reagan Administration
policies in El Salvador and Nicaragua. In El Salvador, the Administration
supports the Government against a rebel force, and in Nicaragua, through the
Central Intelligence Agency, it covertly supports a rebel force in an attempt to
overthrow the Sandinista regime.

The commission, although bipartisan, was subsequently criticized as being too
conservative in makeup. White House aides acknowledged to reporters last summer
that one obvious goal in setting up the commission was to gain time for public
acceptance of the President's policies.  The final report, according to the
draft chapters, primarily will call for increased military and economic aid as
well as a new ''national consensus'' on foreign policy as the fundamental means
of combating what is depicted as the global nature of the Communist threat in
Central America.

'A Crisis for the United States'

In its draft chapter on security issues, the commission acknowledged that the
revolutions and pressures for change in Central America were indigenous in
nature and not - as many critics of the Administration's policy have argued -
''themselves a security concern of the United States.''

''But,'' the report adds, ''the concerting of Soviet and Cuban power to extend
the influence and expand the presence of those nations in vulnerable areas of
the Western hemisphere is a direct threat to U.S. security interests. This is
happening in Central America today, and it makes the crisis there a crisis for
the United States.''

The report, in language that some commission members acknowledged will cause
controversy when made public, emphatically argues that the issue is strategic
for the United States because ''a critical factor in the ability of the United
States to sustain a tolerable balance of power on the global scene at a
manageable cost has been the inherent security of its land borders, which have
not required frontier defenses.''

''The advance of Soviet and Cuban power on the American mainland threatens this
balance,'' it says.

''From the standpoint of the Soviet Union, it would be a strategic coup of major
proportions to impose on the United States the burden of landward defenses,''
the report says. ''If they succeeded in doing so, they would have outmanuevered
us on a global scale.''

Nicaragua a 'Stepping Stone'

The draft depicted the successful revolution in Nicaragua in 1979 as a
''decisive event,'' in terms of Communist expansion, matched only by the
accession of Fidel Castro to power in Cuba in 1959.

''Nicaragua is an indispensable stepping stone for the Cuban and Soviet effort
to promote armed insurgency in Central America,'' it says. ''With both an
Atlantic and a Pacific coast, Nicaragua is uniquely well-placed'' to become a
new base for the Russians in Central America, giving them the ability to subvert
the entire region, including Panama.

''This means,'' the report adds, ''that any threat to the political security of
Panama and to the maintenance of friendly relations between Panama and the
United States automatically constitutes a strategic threat to the United States
of very great importance.''

Linked to these concerns is a question of American credibility, evoked by the
commission report in terms seldom stated since the Vietnam War. ''The triumph of
hostile forces in what the Soviets call the 'strategic rear' of the United
States would be read as a sign of U.S. impotence,'' the report says. ''It would
signify our inability to manage our policy or exercise our power.''

'With Stakes So High'

What is ultimately being tested by the Russians in Central America, the report
continues, ''is not so much the ability of the United States to provide large
resources but rather the realism of our political attitudes, the harmony of
Congressional and Administration priorities, and the adaptability of the
military and civil departments of the executive.''

''With stakes so high it is extraordinary how polarized the debate over Central
America has been in the United States.''

American power ''to influence events worldwide'' would be significantly eroded,
the report asserts, ''from the perception that we were unable even to influence
events close at home, when we ourselves had a vital interest in those events.''

In calling for sharp increases in military aid to El Salvador and a new national
attitude toward that war, the draft also evokes the debate over Vietnam. It
argues that American policymakers cannot be content with a military stalemate,
the situation that it says now exists.

PICKUP FIRST ADD AND THEN LAST ADD SUB LATIN

''In a guerrilla war,'' the report says, ''a stalemate is not the same as a
balance of power. It is in the nature of such a war that the insurgency is
winning if it is not losing, and the government is losing if it is not
winning.'' Success in the war against the rebels ''is not a substitute for
negotiations,'' the report says. ''But it is a necessary condition for political
action.''

'A Collapse Is Not Inconceivable'

The commission warns that the current levels of military aid ''are not
sufficient to preserve even the existing military stalemate over a period of
time.'' Without drastic action, the draft report says, ''a sudden collapse is
not inconceivable.''

To prevent this, the commission draft outlines what it says are basic
requirements. These include:


- More soldiers and training to create units capable of more flexibility and
greater firepower.


- Increased air and ground mobility to reinforce ambushed troops and otherwise
counter widespread guerrilla activity.


- A ''much larger'' stock of equipment and supplies to make possible a
consistent war effort.


- Improved medical evacuation ability to reduce the fatality rate.


- Funds to permit the Salvadoran Army to retain trained personnel for additional
tours of duty.

''There might be an argument for doing nothing to help the Government of El
Salvador,'' the commission argues. ''There might be an argument for doing a
great deal more. But what there is no logical argument for is giving some aid
but not enough. The worst possible thing for El Salvador would be to provide
just enough aid to keep the war going, but too little to wage it successfully.''


Rapid-Reaction Force Sought

As a short-term measure, the draft recommends an immediate infusion of funds and
materiel to create an elite rapid-reaction force of 1,000 men with an additional
1,000 soldiers in training and reserve. ''To be truly mobile and effective for
U.S.-style counterinsurgency, such a force should combine heliborne troops,
parachute troops, attack aircraft and ground scouts,'' the draft says.

United States helicopters could be leased to the Salvadoran Government, the
draft adds, and maintained and supplied by American forces in Panama. No budget
estimate was provided for this recommendation.

The basic assumption of the commission's draft chapter on security issues is
that social, political and economic changes, no matter how thoroughly financed,
would not be effective until the security situation improves throughout Central
America. Such programs, the report says explicitly at one point, ''do not by
themselves defeat these insurgencies.''

''If the reforms are to be effective,'' it says, ''the violence must be checked
- which means that the security situation must be improved dramatically.''

Linking Aid to Human Rights

Because of that, the commission, in its draft chapter on security, deals
cautiously with the linkage between increased military aid and human rights. In
late November, President Reagan provoked a Congressional outcry by vetoing
legislation that would have made continued American military aid to El Salvador
conditional on a certification of progress there in human rights,
democratization and land redistribution.

Respect for human rights was described by the draft as ''also of vital
importance to improved security in Central America, as well as to the self-
respect of the United States.'' But it adds: ''We recognize, however, that how
the problem is addressed in this regard is vital. If Central America is as
crucial to our national security as the commission believes, conditionality must
take a form that does not prove self-defeating.''

Without enough military aid, the draft argues, the Salvadoran military would be
unable to ''use the modern counterinsurgency tactics which would keep civilian
losses to a minimum. At the same time, the threat to terminate such aid if the
human rights situation does not improve lacks credibility in that it clearly
conflicts with U.S. security objectives.''

In its draft, the commission proposes two options for dealing with the linkage
of human rights to increased military aid. Both include as a basic requirement
the necessity for the Salvadoran military to be able to ''carry out U.S.- style
counterinsurgency.''

Once the army reaches that level of competence, with United States aid, the
first option calls for the monitoring of human rights compliance through
individual Salvadoran Army units, cutting off violating units from access to
American arms. ''Targeting cutoffs in this manner,'' the commission draft says,
''would increase the incentives for a unit commander to insure respect on the
part of his troops by threatening his career.''

The second, more stringent, option, proposed by William P. Clements Jr., a
commission member who is a former Republican Governor of Texas, calls for
''strict conditions'' to be enforced on American aid - but not until the aid
reaches recommended levels. Under this option, the United States would be
obligated to commit itself to a fixed period of uninterrupted aid - two years,
for example, the draft suggests - with the Government of El Salvador obligated
within the same period ''to put an end to human rights abuses.''

As a further measure, the Clements option proposes the creation of an
independent organization, to be called the Central American Development
Organization, that would be charged with monitoring the progress of El
Salvador's human rights programs.

It was in this area, dealing with the linkage of human rights to military aid
increases, that Democratic members of the commission were able to achieve what
they called significant improvements in the draft chapter on security, which was
dated Dec. 29.

In interviews Friday and today, commission members and others familiar with the
intense deliberations over the commission report said that Mr. Kissinger had
acceded to demands that the final document be far more specific in linking aid
to progress in human rights, democratization and land redistribution.

This view was said to have been successfully advanced by two commission members:
Robert S. Strauss, former chairman of the Demoratic Party, and Lane Kirkland,
president of the A.F.L.- C.I.O.

''He's going to have to eat that pocket veto,'' a commission member said,
referring to President Reagan's rejection Nov. 30 of the legislation on aid to
El Salvador. ''Conditionality is just what he vetoed.''

Mr. Strauss and Mr. Kirkland were described as being fully satisfied with that
aspect of the commission report.

Of 'Garbage' and Policy

Officials with firsthand knowledge of the draft chapter on security
acknowledged, however, that as of early today much of what some Democrats termed
the ''rhetoric'' of the report - dealing with possible Soviet strategic gains in
Central America - was still in the document. Representative Thomas P. O'Neill
Jr., the Speaker of the House, is known to have expressed grave reservations
over the tone of the report, which Democrats anticipate will provide obvious
political benefits for President Reagan.

One Democratic member of the commission, acknowledging that the White House
would find much to its pleasure in the draft chapter's discussion of the
purported Soviet and Cuban threats in Central America, shrugged it off as a
necessary price for negotiating improvement in the linking of human rights to
increased military aid. ''You give him the garbage and we change the policy,''
he said.

In its discussion of aid for Honduras and Guatemala, the commission's draft
chapter on security cites no immediate threats, but future worries.

In Honduras, the draft says, the commission ''found a deep anxiety with respect
to the extraordinary military buildup in Nicaragua.''

''The aging Honduran Air Force has an advantage that would quickly disappear if
the Sandinistas acquired a few high performance aircraft,'' it says, adding that
more arms would help Honduras ''build a credible deterrent and to meet renewed
efforts at insurgency.''

Aid to Guatemala

To justify the renewal of military aid and arms sales to Guatemala, another
highly charged issue in the Congress, the draft report takes special note of
what it calls the ''brutal behavior'' of the Guatemalean security forces.

''In the cities they have murdered to eliminate those even suspected of dissent;
and in the countryside, they have at times killed indiscriminately to repress
any sign of support for the guerrillas,'' it says. ''As long as these practices
persist,'' the report continues, ''the conditions in which insurgency can appear
and reappear will continue.''

But if Guatemala were to accept membership in the Central American Development
Organization and agree to its human rights obligations, the draft says, military
aid and arms sales should be permitted.

P.U. LAST ADD LATIN

''U.S. assistance will be required if the Guatemalans are to be able to continue
successful counterinsurgency,'' the draft warns. ''In terms of regional and U.S.
security interests, Guatemala, with its strategic position on the Mexican
border, the largest population in the area and the most important economy, is
obviously a pivotal country.''

Aid to Foreign Police Forces

The draft repeatedly advances the thesis that a revocation of legislation
barring American aid to foreign police forces would be of immense benefit to
human rights in Central America.

In El Salvador, for example, the report says, ''the fact that no assistance can
be given to police organizations reduces the incentives and influence for
improved human rights performance that such assistance could create.''

''In the police organization there is no such incentive - and no training to
professionalize and humanize operations,'' it says. ''However laudable its
intentions, the legal prohibition against the provisions of training and
materiel aid to police organization is now very clearly counterproductive.''

In interviews, a number of House and Senate committee aides expressed extreme
doubt that Congress would be willing to remove the restriction, which stemmed,
in part, from published reports of police brutality in Latin America.

The draft chapter makes no mention of specific amounts in proposed United States
aid for Honduras and Guatemala. Similarly, in discussing El Salvador, whose
problems dominate much of the chapter's 58 pages, the report says nothing
specific.

It does cite, with obvious approval, however, a Pentagon estimate ''that it
would take approximately $400 million in additional U.S. military assistance
over the calendar years 1984 and 1985 to break the military stalemate and allow
the National Campaign Plan to be carried out.'' The commission report further
recommends multiyear financing for the Salvadoran Army, as a means of achieving
''greater predictability.''

Draft Chapter on Economic Aid

Commission officials, in interviews, spoke with enthusiasm about the 77- page
draft chapter on economic aid in Central America, titled ''Opportunities for
Democracy, Human Development and Economic Recovery.''

That chapter, which the officials said received very little revision in
preliminary commission discussions, called for both a short-term and long-term
program of abundant economic support for the region.

The commission estimates Central America's long-term economic needs through 1990
to be ''as much as $24 billion,'' with half of that total being supplied by the
World Bank International Monetary Fund and the Inter-American Development Bank
as well as by private investors and commercial banks.

''The balance,'' the draft chapter says, ''as much as $12 billion, would have to
be supplied by the United States, either through bilateral or multilateral
programs. At an annual rate, this would represent more than a doubling of the
current levels of economic assistance; this means that over the next five years
that region would require some $8 billion in U.S. assistance in various forms.''

It was not clear from the draft report whether the $8 billion to be provided by
1990 would include military aid as well as economic support.

Long-Term Economic Program

Without a long and large commitment, the report says, ''We firmly believe that
economic recovery, social progress and the development of democratic
institutions will be retarded.'' The long-term economic program calls for, among
other things, insurance guarantees for private concerns and investment
companies; extensive credits for agricultural development, including financial
aid for land redistribution; improvements in health care and food support;
population growth programs, and a revitalized commitment to university education
and public service, including the expansion of Peace Corps activity.

No line-by-line budget and cost analysis was provided in the draft report, but
the commission did suggest that all financial aid aimed at achieving economic,
social and political goals could be channeled through the Central American
Development Organization. It said that that organization, along with having the
potential to monitor human rights compliance, could serve as a vehicle for
insuring that the development of Central America would be ''a shared effort.''

The organization would also be charged with promoting economic recovery ''in
tandem with social change, political modernization and peace.'' Countries
seeking membership in it, obviously including Nicuragua, would have to make a
''firm commitment to the exercise of personal liberties, political pluralism and
an electoral process.''

Skepticism on Aid Program

Congressional aides, told some of the details of the commission's draft chapter
on economic recovery, insisted that Congress would not approve any such
expenditures. ''No way,'' said one official familiar with the foreign aid budget
process. ''With the deficits we're going to have, who's going to provide $8
billion?''

Senior White House officials also were reported today to have expressed
skepticism upon hearing reports that the commission was expected to recommend a
huge aid program.

Along with the multibillion-dollar long-range proposal, the draft chapter calls
for an immediate $400 million additional appropriation in short-term financial
assistance, to be funneled through the Agency for International Development.
Even in the short term, the draft says, ''the provision of economic assistance
must be used to encourage the development of democratic institutions and
processes.''

Commission members were high in praise of Mr. Kissinger for his willingness to
compromise on various aspects of the economic programs, which one member
enthusiastically described as ''a combination of the Marshall Plan and the
Alliance for Progress.'' Others, however, depicted such concessions by Mr.
Kissinger as essentially meaningless, since very few of the economic goals
proposed by the commission are likely to be financed by Congress.

In the draft chapter, the commission, while repeatedly emphasizing the necessity
of joining with Central America ''in a new alliance for democracy and
prosperity,'' also makes clear its awareness of the political liabilities:
''Such an ambitious program would, of course, require wide bipartisan support in
this country to succeed. But we believe there is an emerging consensus in the
United States today which will provide a strong basis for fashioning a true and
lasting bipartisan policy toward Central America.''

''We explicitly reject the notion that the United States can do nothing to
assist the development of democracy throughout the region,'' the report says.
''While democracy may not be an exportable commodity, it can be nurtured,
encouraged and strengthened - and it must be if the dreams of a better economic
future for the region are to become reality.

''Attempts to spread Communism and totalitarianism in this hemisphere must be
defeated in part by eliminating poverty: democratic institutions are unlikely to
flourish in an environment of hunger, inadequate housing, illiteracy or poor
health conditions.''


Central America

 Guatemala

Guatemala has the largest population in Central America, with 7.5 million
inhabitants in an area of 42,042 square miles. It is the only Central American
nation with significant oil resources.

Military dictatorships have ruled Guatemala since a coup supported by the
Central Intelligence Agency toppled the elected Government in 1954.

Amnesty International says widespread killings of Indian villagers have occurred
during army campaigns against leftist guerrillas in the countryside. United
States military aid was cut off in 1977, and in the last month United States
officials have criticized continuing violations of human rights.

El Salvador

El Salvador, with 8,260 square miles of territory and 617 inhabitants per square
mile, is the smallest and most densely populated country in Central America. The
total population is 5.1 million, but with a civil war in its fourth year, it is
estimated that 750,000 people have fled the country as refugees.

A reformist military coup in 1979 led to a series of Government changes and
growing political unrest that erupted into open war in 1980, pitting leftist
guerrilla groups against the army. Government forces are considered responsible
for the majority of over 35,000 civilian deaths in the ensuing years of
conflict.

A provisional Government was elected in 1982 and a presidential election is
scheduled this March. The United States gave El Salvador $247.5 million in
economic aid and $81.3 million in military aid in 1983.

Honduras

Honduras is the poorest country in Central America, with per capita income of
$600. It has a population of 4.1 million in an area of 43,277 square miles. The
country has few natural resources and the economy is dependent on exports of
bananas, coffee and beef. Despite its poverty, Honduras has a more equitable
distribution of income than many of its neighbors and has not suffered the
political turmoil that has swept El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua.

A civilian Government was elected in 1981, but the military, led by Gen. Gustavo
Alvarez, remains an important force in national affairs. In 1983 the United
States gave Honduras $102.7 million in economic aid and $37.3 in military aid.

Nicaragua

Nicaragua is the only Central American country controlled by a leftist
Government. In 1979 the Sandinista revolution overthrew the 40-year family
dictatorship of Anastasio Somoza Debayle. In the succeeding years the
Sandinistas established a Marxist military junta increasingly allied with Cuba.
Nicaragua has a population of 2.5 million and a territory of 50,193 square
miles.

Although the Sandinistas have nationalized a substantial sector of the economy,
many key industries and much farmland remain privately owned. The United States
cut off aid in 1981 and there is a growing war in the countryside against two
main United States-backed rebel groups opposed to Sandinista rule. The
Government has begun a program of economic rationing.

Costa Rica

Costa Rica has the longest- standing democratic Government in Central America
and is the only country in the region without a standing army. It has a
population of 2.5 million and a territory of 19,575 square miles. Rising oil
prices have strained the Costa Rican economy.

Worried by anti-Sandinista guerrillas operating along its isolated border with
Nicaragua, Costa Rica has repeatedly declared its intention to remain neutral in
the developing conflict around Nicaragua. The United States gave Costa Rica
$184.2 in economic aid in 1983. It also gave $2.6 million in military aid, most
of it to train Costa Rican security officials.

Panama

1.9 million and 29,762 square miles Panama is the only Central American member
of the Contadora group of four Latin countries seeking a negotiated settlement
to conflicts in the region. It has 1.9 million people in its 29,762 square
miles, and since it contains both the Panama Canal and the United States
military command and training facilities for Latin America, it has historically
been considered of vital security interest to the United States.

High unemployment and growing foreign indebtedness have contributed to rising
political tension. Although a civilian Government is now in power, the national
guard commander, Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, is widely considered the most
influential authority in the country.


 WASHINGTON, Jan. 7 - These are the members of the Presidential commission on
Central America, which is headed by Henry A. Kissinger: Nicholas F. Brady,
former Republican

Senator from New Jersey, now

chairman of Purolator Inc. and

managing director of Dillon Read &

Company Henry G. Cisneros, Mayor of San Antonio William P. Clements Jr., former
Governor of Texas Carlos F. Diaz-Alejandro, professor of

economics at Yale University Wilson S. Johnson, president of the National
Federation of Independent

Business Lane Kirkland, president of the

A.F.L.-C.I.O. Richard M. Scammon, a political

scientist John Silber, president of Boston University Potter Stewart, retired
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court Robert S. Strauss, chairman of President
Carter's re-election campaign

and former chairman of the Democratic Party Dr. William B. Walsh, founder and

president of Project Hope, the international medical care and education

organization

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan and Henry Kissinger (page 16)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GROUP SAYS U.N. NUCLEAR ARSENAL WILL EXPAND TO 29,000 WARHEADS

BYLINE: By Richard Halloran

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 514 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7


A new, private study of the United States nuclear arsenal estimates that the
present stockpile of 26,000 warheads will grow to 29,000 by 1990, with most of
the current warheads being replaced by new ones.

The study, in a booklet entitled 'U.S. Nuclear Forces and Capabilities,' says
2,000 warheads are produced each year byy thhe Department of Energy. At full
capacity, the department turns out eight new warheads each working day and
retires five obsolete warheads, the study says.

The report asserts that the proportion of smaller, shorter-range tactical
weapons has dropped while that of larger, longer-range arms has risen. The
stockpile is split about evenly between the two types, the report says.

The United States has 25 different warhead models. Eight are for long-range
missiles including Minuteman missiles and Trident submarine-launched missiles.
Nine are for shorter-range weapons, such as Pershing missiles and 155-milimeter
artillery. Five are bombs, two are atomic land mines and one is an air defense
missile.

Following a longstanding policy on most nuclear matters, Government spokesmen
neither confirmed nor denied the accuracy of the information in the booklet.

It is the first of eight being published by the Natural Resources Defense
Council, a nonprofit group that says it seeks to protect endangered natural
resources and the human environment. Soviet nuclear weapons will be covered in a
later volume, the council says.

The report was compiled by two physicists, Thomas B. Cochran and Milton M.
Hoening, and WilliamM. Arkin, an analysts of nuclear weapons. The authors culled
their information from public sources, including Government publications,
transcripts of Congressional hearings, documents obtained under the Freedom of
Information Act and the general and technical press.

The authors assert that nothing in their report would be useful to a foreign
power or to anyone seeking to build a nuclear device privately. They say the
booklet was intended to present basic information on nuclear weapons to the
public.

It says that the United States nuclear arsenal grew slowly after the atomic
bombings in 1945 of Hiroshima and Nagasaki until 1955, when President Eisenhower
and his Secretaryy of State, John Foster Dulles, put heavy reliance on nuclear
arms.

From then until 1967, the arsenal grew to a peak of 32,000 warheads. then it
declined as emphasis was put on developing smaller, more acurate warheads, as
older warheads were retired and as the war in Vietnam consumed much of the
military budget.

The stockpile leveled off at 25,000 from 1978 to 1982, then began creeping up
again last year. That was a consequence of nuclear weapons stockpile memoandums
signed by President Carter in 1980 and by President Reagan in 1982 increasing
warhead production.

From now until the mid-1990's, the authors estimate, the United States may
develop and produce 15 new types of warheads.

The Natural Resources Defense Council has offices at 1725 I Street N.W. in
Washington and in New York and San Francisco.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RECOVERING FROM THE ERA OF SHOCKS

BYLINE: By LEONARD SILK

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2702 words


THE two decades after World War II have been

called a ''golden age'' of growth and stability for

the United States and the rest of the industrial world. ''In the 'Golden Age' of
the 1950's and 1960's,'' said Angus Maddison, a British economist, ''economic
growth in the advanced capitalist countries surpassed virtually all historical
records.''

But, starting in the late 1960's, the United States economy was battered by a
series of economic and political shocks that turned the golden age into an age
of tin. First came President Johnson's ''guns and butter'' policy that bred
inflation during the Vietnam war; then came President Nixon's surprise of Aug.
15, 1971, when he suspended convertibility of the dollar into gold, imposed
wage-price controls and embarked on a highly stimulative fiscal and monetary
policy. International financial chaos and the end of the Bretton Woods monetary
system of fixed exchange rates hit the world economy in 1973, and the OPEC
nations twice in that decade tipped the world into economic shock with
monumental increases in oil prices.

As the United States economy careened from one shock to the next, inflation
soared, productivity foundered, real growth slowed, several deep recessions
battered industry and unemployment rose to the highest rates since the Great
Depression. Internationally, mountains of debt, spawned by the explosion in oil
prices, threatened to produce a world banking crisis.

But with the dawning of 1983, the darkness began to lift. The United States
swung into a strong recovery, spurring weaker recoveries in other industrial
countries. And now, a year later, some economists have begun to speculate that
the nation - with inflation still low, unemployment high and industrial capacity
ample - may even have an opportunity once again for a sustained period of
economic growth reminiscent of the early sixties.

The Reagan Administration, facing an election race next year, has eagerly
embraced that prospect. Its budget for the fiscal year 1985 and projections
through 1989 are based on the President's belief that the nation has entered a
long period of steady economic growth (4 percent a year during the second half
of the decade), subdued inflation (3.5 percent measured by the deflator in
1989), lower interest rates (a 5 percent Treasury bill rate by then), and
reduced unemployment (5 percent in 1989).

But has the United States truly entered into a post- shock era of economic calm?
Or will 1983 and 1984 turn out to be a brief interlude of growth, the prelude to
another unsettling economic shock?

There is a great deal of skepticism among economists and businessmen about the
dawning of a new era. Most expect 1984 to be a good year but are worried -
primarily by the huge size of the expected Federal deficit - about what lies
beyond the election year. A recent poll of 627 managers of financial
institutions by A. G. Becker Paribas Inc., an investment bank, found that fewer
than 8 percent expect depression or hyperinflation in 1984. But 30 percent
expect a depression and 36 percent expect hyperinflation before 10 years have
passed.

There is a dissenting view, however, and not just at the White House. It is held
by those who think that enough can be learned from studying the events and
disappointments of the past two decades of economic history to mark a better
course for the future.

One of the nation's most powerful economists, Paul A. Volcker, chairman of the
Federal Reserve Board, asserted this view at last month's meeting of the
American Economic Association in San Francisco. The United States, he said, may
be able to reverse the experience of the 1970's and demonstrate that ''an
economy that seemed to be going downhill, with one adverse shock begetting
another, can go up as well.''

''I do not share,'' he said, ''the doubts and skepticism - indeed the deep
cynicism of some - about our capacity as a nation to learn from bitter
experience and draw practical lessons for the future.''

He saw an ''enormous opportunity'' to set in train a long period of growth and
greater stability, but stressed that his ''happy vision'' would not come about
if the nation sat back and simply hoped the ''recent good news would produce a
lasting momentum of its own.''

There are new and and unprecedented risks to sustaining progress, Mr. Volcker
warned: the enormous budget deficits that loom ahead, the international debt
problem, the gaping and still growing imbalance in the United States'
international accounts, the strong forces of protectionism, and ''not least,''
he said, ''the temptation to return to behavior patterns bred in the years of
inflation.'' But he thought the threats could be met if the nation would act
upon the lessons of the bitter past.

Even the skeptics might agree to that proposition. But what are the key lessons
from history? Although economists and others may differ in degree about what
these might be, there appears to be general agreement on a few key points:


PRESIDENTS must make the tough decisions on how to use limited national
resources while there is time, not subordinate those decisions to immediate
political advantage.


Inflation was kicked off in this country during the Vietnam War when President
Johnson, with the economy approaching full employment, delayed, for political
reasons, the difficult choice among three possible policies: raising taxes,
cutting his Great Society programs or curbing military spending. And President
Nixon gravely aggravated inflation a few years later with his New Economic
Policy of Aug. 15, 1971, simultaneously launching a highly stimulative fiscal
and monetary policy, clamping on wage and price controls, suspending the
convertibility of the dollar into gold and embargoing sales of certain American
agricultural products. When the controls were lifted after his electoral victory
in 1972, the suppressed inflation burst forth.

There is a broad consensus among economists that President Reagan is taking
undue risks of imposing inflationary strains on resources by his huge budget
deficits, stretching, as David A. Stockman, director of the Office of Management
and Budget, has put it, ''as far as the eye can see.''

If tight money is employed to keep those inflationary pressures from getting out
of hand, the consequence, once again, is likely to be a shooting up of interest
rates and another steep recession.

Economists differ on just how much time President Reagan has to put his budget
in better order. Some see his so-called ''supply-side'' tax cuts as really
Keynesian demand-side tax cuts that have, combined with an easier monetary
policy, fortuitously helped to lift the economy out of the deep recession and
should be allowed to push it even closer to full employment.

Thus, Gardner Ackley, professor of economics at the University of Michigan and
chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers under President Johnson, told the
economists in San Francisco: ''For 1984, I see no reason to worry about the
deficits. Rather, we should welcome them for their contribution to recovery. But
I do worry about deficits of the size currently forecast if they extend much
beyond 1984.'' His reasons: Unless curbed by tighter monetary or fiscal policy,
the deficits threaten to reaccelerate inflation. And if excess demand were
curbed primarily by tight money, as now seems likely, that could generate even
higher interest rates and come at the expense of investment and growth.

Supply-siders, such as Alan Reynolds of Polynomics Inc., a consulting firm,
still contend that concern about budget deficits is vastly exaggerated and that
it would be foolish to try to reduce them by raising taxes. President Reagan, on
that point, still marches with the supply-siders and is determined not to raise
taxes if he can help it and not to reduce the planned rapid buildup of military
spending.

But most of the President's own economic advisers, especially Martin S.
Feldstein, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, disagree. They fear a
situation like Vietnam revisited - with military spending rising, taxes falling
and the budget deficit widening. They believe, as do most economists, that with
the economy in a recovery it is vital to bring down the deficit. Treasury
Secretary Donald T. Regan, who believes the President should defer the tax issue
until after the election, has laid out a list of options for Mr. Reagan to
consider, if the President decides to increase revenues to reduce the fiscal
year 1975 deficit from its expected $186 billion level. In a memo to the
President, which reached the press last week, Mr. Feldstein said, ''As you know,
there is no chance that we can get all of the proposed spending cuts enacted in
1984.''


THE United States must pay more

heed to the international economy in setting its domestic economic policies.

President Nixon, ignoring this rule, slammed the gold window shut to prevent the
further outflow of United States gold and make it possible for him to pursue a
highly stimulative economic and monetary policy. That move set off waves in the
world economy that accelerated inflation and eventually ended the Bretton Woods
system of fixed exchange rates. Mr. Maddison, the economist, blames the
''messy'' collapse of Bretton Woods and the resultant system of floating
exchange rates as a major cause of the breakdown of the golden age of growth and
the unleashing of stagflation in the seventies.

Mr. Volcker, in his address to the economists' convention last month, stressed
that the need to close the budget gap and bring down interest rates was
''pressing'' for international reasons. The level of dollar interest rates,
forced upward by the deficits, he said, ''plainly aggravates the strains on the
international financial system - strains apparent in the heavy debt burdens of
many developing countries and in the persistent and growing flow of capital into
the United States, with its counterpart of a widening trade deficit.'' Mr.
Volcker said he did not share the comfortable assumption of some that working
for better budget balance could wait a year or more.

C. Fred Bergsten, a former Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, warns that high
interest rates and the huge American trade deficit - now threatening to reach
$120 billion in 1984 - could bring on a deluge of protectionism and wreck the
world trading system as other countries retaliated. Foreign governments blame
high American interest rates for holding down the European recovery and for
draining the financial resources of developing countries like Brazil, Argentina
and Nigeria almost to the breaking point.  But untangling this skein could
itself be tricky. Geoffrey Bell, a leading international monetary expert and
former British Treasury official, fears that at some stage the process of a
strengthening dollar ''will certainly be reversed and then the fall of the
dollar could be very dramatic.'' That, however, could deal a new shock to the
monetary system.


TIGHT monetary policy must be

used with great caution.

There is no doubt any longer about the potency of monetary policy in checking
inflation. But, in the process of squeezing inflation down over the past few
years, tight money policy has taken an enormous toll in lost production, jobs,
investment and growth.

There is a still a school of economic thought, led by Professor Emeritus Milton
Friedman of the University of Chicago, that insists monetary policy should be
properly applied by a simple rule: The money supply be increased year by year -
or, if possible, month by month or day by day - at a rate consistent with the
national growth of productivity. Following the rule, says Professor Friedman,
will permit inflation-free growth over time - though it will not necessarily rid
the economy of cyclical fluctuations in production, income and employment.

Since the fall of 1979, Mr. Volcker has experimented with what he calls
''practical monetarism,'' heeding Professor Friedman's call for more attention
to gradual growth of the money supply and less to the level of interest rates.
But when tight money produced the recessions of 1980 and 1981-82, Mr. Volcker
swung to much more rapid rates of monetary expansion than sanctioned by the
Fed's ''target ranges'' and paid more heed to interest rates. Thereby,
discretionary monetary policy was used as a powerful tool for getting the
economy out of deep slumps. All but the most orthodox monetarists have cheered
the moves.

As Prof. James Tobin of Yale, a Nobel laureate who eschews monetarism, put it
recently, ''Our Federal Reserve finally took mercy on the economy about a year
ago and suspended its monetarist targets. Its easing of monetary policy saved
the world financial system from dangerous crisis and averted further collapse of
economic activity.''


ABETTER way must be found for

combining high employment

and growth with price stability.


With 8.2 percent of the labor force unemployed, this problem does not loom
immediately ahead, but if the recovery continues into the mid-80's it will.
Mandatory price and wage controls, last used by President Nixon, have proved
rigid and inefficient. Resisting overstimulus while controls were in place
proved impossible for the Nixon Administration. When the controls were finally
lifted, inflation accelerated.

But recessions are a costly way of undoing inflation, too. Thus, many economists
have been on the prowl for years to devise a new form of voluntary ''incomes
policy'' to hold back price and wage increases with less pain and less market
interference. Arthur Burns, as chairman of the Federal Reserve, had been urging
an incomes policy when President Nixon leap-frogged past him to mandatory
controls.

Henry Wallich, a governor of the Federal Reserve Board, who in the past has
favored an incomes policy based on tax incentives, offered a new idea in San
Francisco. He suggested ''taking a leaf from the wisdom of Japan'' with a system
of two-step wage increases, the second step of which is a bonus. ''With a bonus
in prospect,'' said Mr. Wallich, ''the first step can be more moderate. The
second step would reflect price and profit developments in the intervening
period.'' He proposed a dialogue between business and labor, both of whom he
thought had much to gain from such a plan.

Mr. Volcker also welcomed the new interest amongst both business and labor in
profit-sharing arrangements or other ways of ''rewarding workers when things are
good, without building in an inexorably rising floor on costs.''


THIS is just the top of the list of

lessons to be learned from the

past. Economists who share Paul Volcker's ''happy vision'' would argue that for
the first time in almost two decades the United States and the rest of the world
have at least a chance, however small, to profit from the harsh experiences of
the late 60's and 70's and enter a period of stable and lasting growth.

Inflation, for the time being, has been battered down, unemployment is still
relatively high, much industrial capacity is idle and after a rough run of
recessions, American corporations have cut costs and improved profitability. Not
since the Kennedy Administration in 1961 inherited an economy that had been
through back- to-back recessions has there been such an opportunity for
noninflationary growth.

At the San Francisco meetings Prof. W. Arthur Lewis, of Princeton University,
the outgoing president of the economists, admonished his colleagues for failing
to study history: ''If our subject is lowering its sights, this may be because
the demise of economic history in economics departments has brought us a
generation of economists with no historical background.''

Still, there is no simple formula provided by history to prevent the nation from
being blind-sided again by another shock - or a series of them.

Moreover, even if economists fully agreed on the lessons to be gleaned from the
troubled past, it does not follow that politicians would join in the agreement
or enforce its prescriptions. Inevitably it is they, not their economic
advisers, who will call the shots - or the shocks.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of W. Arthur Lewis (page 12); photo of Paul Volcker (page 12);
graph of 20 years of American economic experience; photos of the last five
Presidents

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINESE-U.S. RELATIONS TAKE A MORE REALISTIC DIRECTION

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER WREN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 866 words

DATELINE: PEKING


If China's rhetoric can be believed, two of its fondest friends are the North
Korean President, Kim Il Sung, and the ousted Cambodian guerrilla leader Pol
Pot, whose notoriety has isolated them elsewhere. By contrast, the United States
gets lumped with the Soviet Union as hegemonistic superpowers who pose the real
threat to the peaceloving world.

But an old Chinese proverb counsels: ''Listen to what a person says and then
watch what he does.'' This week Chinese Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang visits the
United States as head of a Government that has distanced itself from Washington
since diplomatic relations were established on Jan. 1, 1979, but that
nonetheless retains common interest on a range of issues.

In the last five years, perceptions on both sides have matured, sometimes
painfully, into a more sober realism about the limitations as well as the
potential of the relationship. Antagonisms persist over the future of Taiwan and
lesser problems, even as interdependence increases on other fronts. Mr. Zhao,
who is expected in Washington tomorrow and will see Mr. Reagan Wednesday, set a
conciliatory tone for the visit last week when he spoke at a news conference of
''great progress'' in relations between the two countries.

For complex reasons, China welcomed strategic cooperation with the United States
in 1979. The Vietnamese had invaded Cambodia, ousting Pol Pot's regime. Before
retaliating with a punitive invasion of Vietnam, China wanted a link with the
United States to discourage a comparable Soviet response on its northern border.
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan that year confirmed the value of such an
alliance for Peking. The Chinese and American outlooks still coincide on the
Cambodian and Afghanistan invasions, and converge on some other areas threatened
by the Kremlin's ambitions.  But the bilateral relationship suffered from an
American failure to live up to China's grand expectations. Peking hoped that the
severing of official ties between the United States and Taiwan would demoralize
the nationalist regime there and force it to negotiate with the mainland.
Instead, Taiwan has prospered, while enjoying new infusions of American military
aid. Mr. Zhao said last week he would not press for an immediate end to arms
shipments to Taiwan but indicated he would remind Washington of its pledge to
phase the sales out.  Peking also expected its friendship with the United States
to produce a cornucopia of capital and technology for China's modernization.
This was obstructed by high interest rates and tight controls on the export of
computers and other sophisticated hardware. The lack of a quick technological
fix from the United States was interpreted by China as a deliberate slight.
Coziness with the United States also hurt China's standing with other developing
countries, where American policies are not popular. This discovery produced a
shift in late 1981 toward conspicuous nonalignment. China shelved strategic
cooperation and revived its superpower label for the United States - a change
owing in large part to the election of Ronald Reagan, whose campaign remarks in
support of Taiwan upset the Chinese. Mr. Reagan's tough approach to Moscow also
left China freer to moderate its hostility toward the Soviet Union and agree to
talk about improving strained relations.  The Chinese-American communique of
August 1982 clarified the Reagan Administration's position on Taiwan but fell
short of dissipating the ill will. By last winter, the Chinese seemed to see
little prospect of getting along with Mr. Reagan. They were consequently
surprised by his decision to relax substantially controls on technology exports,
which involved reclassifying China from a potential adversary to friendly
nonaligned country. This week, an accord on industrial cooperation by which both
sides would facilitate private investment in China is due to be signed during
Mr. Zhao's stay in Washington. A treaty defining investors' rights may be ready
when Mr. Reagan visits Peking, probably in April.

Other aspects of the relationship have also expanded. Although bilateral trade
declined in 1983 because the Chinese stopped buying grain to protest a temporary
imposition of import quotas on its textiles, total trade is still expected to
exceed $4.2 billion. That is four times the figure for 1978, before diplomatic
ties were established.  United States officials estimate that at least 120,000
Americans visited China in 1983, compared with fewer than 10,000 in 1978. Some
13,000 Chinese students and scholars are studying in the United States, up from
virtually zero five years ago. Chinese delegations are visiting the United
States at the rate of 200 a month, a tenfold rise over five years ago.  China
remains beholden to its self-image as a revolutionary nation. ''The Chinese want
to think of themselves as Communists,'' said an Eastern European diplomat. This
may help explain why they claim to feel more comfortable with Kim Il Sung or Pol
Pot than with President Reagan. But when Mr. Zhao comes to Washington this week,
his baggage will be lighter with the absence of the old illusions about
Chinese-American relations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of American tourist showing his watch to Chinese

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS January 8, 1984Fiction1119

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 957 words


POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  2210

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  3329

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  4419

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  558

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfilling a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  668

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A detective from Earth
investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  7718

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  8910

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
91031

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  10123

BERLIN GAME, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $15.95.) Espionage on both sides of the
Iron Curtain.  11116

THE NEVERENDING STORY, by Michael Ende. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A lonely boy meets
challenges and finds his true self in a magical land.  1288

MORETA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  131323

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  141416

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  151515

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.



 Nonfiction 1116

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2217

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  3352

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  4519


ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  547

WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.  6661

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

7712

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $22.50.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the recent PBS television series.  8810

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.  9104

ONE BRIEF SHINING MOMENT, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $25.) A
profusely illustrated tribute to John F. Kennedy.  101138

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon. (Atlantic/Little, Brown, $17.50.) A
report on a trip through the back roads of America.  111374

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  12148

A HERO FOR OUR TIME, by Ralph G. Martin. (Macmillan, $19.95.) An anecdotal
account of the Kennedy years.  13 1

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random, $25.) Man's search to know
himself and the world over the centuries.  14 1

LATE NIGHT THOUGHTS ON LISTENING TO MAHLER'S NINTH SYMPHONY, by Lewis Thomas.
(Viking, $12.95.) Essays on a wide range of subjects by the physician-medical
administrator.  15153

THE KINGDOM BY THE SEA, by Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) A
novelist's journey around Great Britain.

Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 1

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES THREE, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.

2

GROSS JOKES, by Julius Alvin. (Zebra, $2.50.) Humor.  3

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson.  (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.

4

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.

5

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES TWO, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.

6

GARFIELD SITS AROUND THE HOUSE, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon
humor.

7

THE SECOND GARFIELD TREASURY, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $7.95.) Cartoon humor.

8

MORE ITEMS FROM OUR CATALOG, by Alfred Gingold. (Avon, $5.95.) A spoof of the L.
L. Bean catalogue.

9

THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1984.  (Newspaper Enterprise Association,
$4.95.) Latest edition of the standard reference work.

10

GARFIELD ON THE TOWN, by Jim Davis and Lorenzo Music.  (Ballantine, $4.95.)
Cartoon humor.

11

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon humor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHATEVER BECAME OF PALMER?

BYLINE: By SHARON JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 12; Page 47, Column 1; Survey of Education Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words


FRANCIS BACON once said: ''Writing maketh an exact man.'' Apparently, many
educators agree with him because, despite years of neglect of penmanship, they
still devote attention these days to teaching it.

''Until recently, instruction in handwriting was almost a lost art,'' said Dr.
Walter B. Barbe, adjunct professor of education at Ohio State University. ''The
philosophy of the 1960's and 70's was do your own thing and so some Americans
thought that instruction in penmanship was irrelevant. Others believe that the
increasing reliance upon computers in composition would make handwriting
obsolete.''

The 1980's, with its emphasis on efficiency, changed those attitudes, according
to Dr. Barbe, the author of several instruction books on handwriting, the
''writing'' of the three R's.

''Government and business found that they were losing an estimated $200 million
annually because of poor handwriting,'' he explained. ''The Internal Revenue
Service couldn't process tax returns and the Postal Service couldn't deliver
mail. Stores lost money, too, because they could not decipher some customer's
orders, and some job seekers didn't get hired because their applications were
unreadable. Americans also found that, despite the widespread use of computers
in business, there were still many informal occasions in life like writing to
friends that required them to write legibly.''

Thomas M. Wasylyk, a handwriting specialist for Zaner Bloser, an educational
publisher in Columbus, Ohio, credits the back-to-basics movement for the renewed
interest in penmanship.

''When teachers start devoting more time and attention to English composition
and spelling, they notice that their pupil's handwriting was not what it should
be,'' he said. ''About 20 percent of all spelling errors are really errors in
handwriting.''

Instruction in handwriting reflects these changes.

''The test of good penmanship today is 'Can someone read it?' rather than 'Is it
beautiful?' '' said Dr. Mattie Claybrook Williams, director of the Bureau of
Language Arts in the Chicago public schools. ''Schools are asked to do so much
today that there isn't time to devote to endless drills designed to foster
elegant handwriting the way there was through the 1950's.''

There is also more emphasis today on incorporating handwriting into the
language-arts curricula, rather than teaching handwriting as an isolated skill.
In Chicago, New York and other urban school districts, pupils are taught how to
form letters at the same time they are taught how to read and spell words with
those letters, so that handwriting will seem more relevant than it was in the
1950's when pupils were asked to practice writing a single letter many times.

INSTRUCTION in handwriting also begins earlier today. Interviews with

officials of eight school districts

across the nation reveal that handwriting is often introduced in nursery school
or kindergarten because educators want to tap the motivation that 4- and
5-year-olds have to write their names. Almost half of all kindergarden pupils
have the hand-eye coordination necessary for writing so that instruction in
manuscript, or printing, is started in kindergarten, which enables pupils to
begin cursive writing in first or second grade, rather than third or fourth.

Methods also have been updated. From 1898 to the 1940's, school districts tended
to rely upon the Palmer method, which taught handwriting by using ovals and
slanted push-pulls. Now, however, an increasing number of districts, such as
District 27 in New York City, have adopted the D'Nealian System which is based
on a slant manuscript in which most letters are formed with a continuous stroke.

''We hope that by introducing the children to curved writing earlier, it will be
easier for them to make the transition to grown-up writing,'' said Vincent S.
Romano, deputy superintendent of District 27 in Queens. ''The real test will
come in five years because then we'll be able to determine whether their
penmanship is more legible.''

Some school districts, like those in Chicago, emphasize manuscript as well as
cursive writing in the upper grades. Second- through sixth-graders are required
to print titles on all their papers because Chicago school officials believe it
is important to maintain skills in manuscript writing.

''The real world emphasizes printing as well as cursive writing,'' said Dr.
Williams ''People are asked to print on government and business forms all the
time.''

Dr. Walter Petty, emeritus professor of faculty education studies of the State
University of New York at Buffalo, believes that many teachers have ignored
handwriting instruction because they were not trained in how to teach the
subject in either college or on the job. Most colleges don't bother with the
subject because they assume that handwriting is a skill that children learn
informally.

''This is seldom the case,'' said Dr. Petty. ''Children need to be instructed in
such basics as how to form letters because, if left on their own, they won't do
it properly. Teachers don't need extensive instruction in handwriting methods,
but they should be taught how to diagnose and correct pupil's problems, such as
the tendency left-handed students have to space letters incorrectly.''

Teachers should devote about 5 to 10 minutes to teaching handwriting two or
three times a week in elementary school, Dr. Petty advises. Most schools won't
even devote that much time to the subject, however.

One of the few districts that emphasizes handwriting is in Houston where 20
minutes a day is being allocated to teacher-directed handwriting instruction in
the first through sixth grades. The students are given various exercises to help
them in the formation, alignment, spacing, slant, and sizing of letters.

''We don't get hung up on handwriting, though,'' said Ida Louise Shaw,
supervisor of handwriting and spelling at the Houston schools. I tell the
teachers that when the students are doing creative writing, don't bother them
about handwriting. Just let them get their words down on paper. Then teach them
to revise and clean up their handwriting.''

The program has been very successful. Parents say that they can now read their
children's work. Pupils from Vietnam say it has helped them learn English, and
special-education students report that it has increased their confidence.

''One of the unexpected dividends is that some of the teachers have found that
their own handwriting has improved,'' said Mrs. Shaw. ''Secretaries in the
district have even asked me to help them improve their writing too.''

The use and approach is spreading to other parts of Texas. Dallas has copied the
program and so have some of the smaller rural districts in the state.

District 27, which has pioneered new approaches to handwriting instruction in
the New York City public schools, hopes that its fledgling program will be
equally successful. Master teachers from other parts of the district view its
film describing the approach and go back to their schools and instruct pupils in
the D'Nealian method.

''Despite television and typewriters, a well-educated person still needs to know
how to write a letter or complete a bank statement legibly,'' said Mr. Romano,
the deputy superintendent. ''Whether they do so or not is up to them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT BOOKS

BYLINE: By Shirley Horner

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 2, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words

DATELINE: ONE of the best introductions to Princeton


both the university and the town - is the well-known

 ''A Princeton Companion,'' by Alexander Leitch (Princeton University Press,
Princeton, N.J. 08540, $22.50), a collection of about 400 articles about
''diverse elements of Princeton's heritage and its ongoing life.''

Look under ''Constitutional Convention'' to learn that the university provided
more alumni than any other college in the country to help in drafting the United
States Constitution. Its bicentennial, by the way, will be marked in 1987.


Princeton's geographic uniqueness receives its due in a new and valuable study
of the state,

''New Jersey: A Geography,'' by Charles A. Stansfield Jr. (Westview Press, 5500
Central Avenue, Boulder, Colo., 80301, $35; paper, $18).

Dr. Stansfield, a resident of Pitman and a professor of geography at Glassboro
State College, thoughtfully discusses ''the state's bipolar orientation to two
neighboring giant metropolitan areas.''

Not only do ''the commuting or daily interaction hinterlands of New York and
Philadelphia merge in the vicinity of Princeton,'' Dr. Stansfield contends,
''but the after-hours socializing and politicking . . . so important to any
bureaucracy is carried out in Princeton rather than Trenton,'' which, he says,
''has been virtually abandoned.''

The Governor's official residence is in Princeton, Dr. Stansfield notes, adding
that it surely is the only example in the United States of a Governor's mansion
not in the state capital.


Why Princeton is so desirable, at least from an esthetic point of view, becomes
apparent in the pages of

''Princeton Reflections: Contemplations in Color,'' a selection by Bruce
Campbell of Hopewell (Princeton University Press, $28.50).

Photographs of the Ionic marble columns of Whig Hall, majestic at sunset; the
distinctively gothic Blair Hall in a snow scene and the artfully tapered white
pillars of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs bespeak
a university of world renown.


How deeply the physical beauty of Princeton influenced the imagination of F.
Scott Fitzgerald, the best-known of Princeton's literary alumni, recurs as a
theme in

''F. Scott Fitzgerald: A Biography,'' by Andre LeVot, translated from the French
by William Byron (Doubleday, New York, $19.95).

When Fitzgerald, a graduate of the Newman School in Hackensack, entered
Princeton in 1913, ''it's great trees and ivy-shrouded Gothic towers'' resembled
''a palace worthy of his dreams,'' writes Professor LeVot, who devoted 20 years
to writing this engrossing, highly praised biography.

''In the dreary suburbia stretching from Trenton to New York,'' the author
continues, Fitzgerald found ''a poetic atmosphere'' and ''a secret and luminous
place that seems to have been imagined by the Shakespeare of 'A Midsummer
Night's Dream.' ''



''Fool for Love: F. Scott Fitzgerald,'' by Scott Donaldson (Congdon & Weed, New
York, $16.95), is an equally compelling book about the author of ''The Great
Gatsby,'' although sad to read for its many revelations of the novelist's
''offensive'' alcoholism.

It is Mr. Donaldson's thesis that Fitzgerald, whose father had failed in
business, was ''the kind of man . . . driven to please other people, especially
rich and prominent people.''

Although Fitzgerald, who was placed on academic probation in his junior year and
in 1917 left Princeton for good to join the Army, Mr. Donaldson writes that he
''became more devoted to his undergraduate college the older he grew.''

''He also courted Princeton's approval ardently and unsuccessfully.''


Two new novels - both well-received for their trenchant portrayal of the gender
gap - provide observations of the contemporary social scene in and around
Princeton.

''The Mind-Body Problem,'' by Rebecca Goldstein (Random House, New York,
$13.95), is set in Princeton and gives early notice of its direction by quoting
from a letter written by Albert Einstein shortly after he arrived there in 1933.

''A quaint and ceremonious village of puny demigods on stilts,'' wrote Dr.
Einstein about his new home. (It should be noted that he later wrote more kindly
of Princeton.)

''For your first novel,'' Dr. Goldstein said in an interview, ''you're always
told, 'Write about something you know,' and I did.''

The author, who lives in Highland Park, holds a Ph. D. in philosophy from
Princeton University. Her penetrating and poignant book tells how Renee Feuer, a
lapsed Orthodox Jew and a graduate student in philosophy at Princeton, wrestled
- physically, as well as metaphysically - with the conflict of mind versus body,
long a challenge for sages like Plato, Descartes and Kant.

Uncertain of her intellectual ability in a Princeton where ''the people who
matter are the intelligent, and the people who matter the most, the heroes, are
the geniuses,'' Renee marries one of Princeton's brightest.

First buoyant, she soon finds her self-confidence further eroded; even her
husband comes to regard her as ''trivial.''

Although the book deals seriously and successfully with female and marital
inequities, and occasionally with philosophical inquiry, it is, first and
foremost, an absorbing and entertaining novel.

For example, Renee, recalling how ''as a girl in the family I was expected to
wait on The Men,'' now chafes at her role as wife of ''The Genius'' and as
someone expected ''to jump up from the dinner table when he announced he wanted
a glass of water.''

''The man had a great brain, of course, but he also had legs,'' Renee reflects.



''Beautiful Women; Ugly Scenes,'' by C.D.B. Bryan (Doubleday, New York, $16.95),
identifies its locale as a well-to-do Princeton suburb and continues the
discussion about men and women and ''about rage and resentment.'' The novel,
intense and wildly erotic, is told from the point of view of the male character,
who is unnamed.

When he realizes that his second marriage is foundering - Alice, his wife, wants
a separation - the hero, a film-maker, almost automatically visits a lawyer to
learn how ''custody and property settlements'' are handled in New Jersey.

Still, Mr. Bryan reveals here a genuinely sensitive person, one inwardly
tormented because he is ''beginning to realize . . . I have been at war with
women for most of my life.''

At the novel's end, the hero believes that in Odette, a French woman described
as tender and caring, he has found the person with whom he can spend the rest of
his life. Odette wins, too, convincing him that he has ''always been treating
women with a bit of patronizing disdain'' and that her need for a job outside
the home is valid.

Mr. Bryan, the author of the much- praised ''Friendly Fire,'' a nonfiction work
about a family who lost a son in Vietnam, is the stepson of the late John
O'Hara, a Princeton writer.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 11, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ZHAO SAYS TIES TO U.S. HAVE 'UPS AND DOWNS'

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 10


President Reagan told Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China today that his visit
symbolized ''the growing trust and cooperation'' between the two countries. Mr.
Reagan said the United States and China shared ''common ground'' in opposing
foreign expansionism.

In a 19-gun welcoming ceremony at the White House, Mr. Zhao responded by
asserting that relations were ''at an important juncture,'' with ''big
challenges and great opportunities'' ahead.

Speaking through an interpreter, he said that, although there ''have been ups
and downs'' and ''difficulties and obstacles'' still persist, relations ''have
made considerable progress.''

Dispute Over Taiwan

In their two-hour meeting the two leaders talked of the problem of American
support for Taiwan.

Mr. Reagan, who has had a long friendship with the Nationalist Government on
Taiwan, said the United States could not let down its old friends, even as it
sought better relations with Peking. Mr. Zhao said his Government viewed the
future of Taiwan as an internal Chinese matter and would press the United States
to phase out its arms sales to Taiwan.

The stress, both publicly and privately, was on demonstrating the improved
relations of the past months.

Mr. Zhao, the first Chinese Communist Prime Minister to visit the United States,
told the several hundred guests on the South Lawn of the White House:

''As a friendly envoy of the Chinese people, I have come to visit your country
for the purpose of seeking increased mutual understanding, stabilizing the
relations between our two countries, enhancing Chinese-American friendship, and
helping to preserve world peace.''

Among those attending was Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin of the Soviet Union,
who is the dean of the Washington diplomatic corps.

The Chinese leader alluded to the differences over Taiwan and other issues that
have arisen since diplomatic relations were established five years ago, saying
that the growth of relations ''is far below the level it should have attained.''

''There have been ups and downs in the course of development and there still
exist difficulties and obstacles,'' he said.

Later, in his toast at a White House dinner, Mr. Zhao said, ''The Taiwan issue
is the major difference between China and the United States, or in other words,
the principal obstacle to the growth of Sino-U.S. relations.''

Behind the scenes, diplomats and officials were trying to remove differences
holding up conclusion of a treaty on nuclear energy cooperation and were
discussing mutual investment and tax agreements.

Relations between Washington and Peking developed more than 10 years ago during
the Nixon Administration at a time when China and the Soviet Union were in open
political warfare with each other. Washington and Peking still share common
points of view in opposition to Soviet involvement in Afghanistan and its
support for Vietnam, and to the Soviet military buildup in Asia. But the Chinese
have also sought to improve their ties with Moscow.

Mr. Reagan alluded to the Soviet Union when he said that ''we share many
concerns, especially in the arena of international peace and stability.''

''We stand on common ground in opposing expansionism and interference in the
affairs of independent states,'' he said.

Mr. Zhao said only that ''the world situation is at present more turbulent.''

''The United States and China, both being big countries, should be aware of
their heavy responsibility for the maintenance of world peace,'' he said.

In the private session in the White House, Mr. Reagan was joined by Vice
President Bush, Secretary of State George P. Shultz, Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger and Robert C. McFarlane, the national security adviser, in his talks
with Mr. Zhao and his close advisers.

A senior Administration official said later that the discussions were ''very
useful, very extensive.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President and Mrs. Reagan with Prime Minister Zhao (Page A1)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 11, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Accused Opens Fire In Florida Courtroom

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 141 words

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla., Jan. 10


A man who came to court to answer charges of resisting arrest whipped?out a
pistol, a shotgun and an assault rifle today and opened fire in the courtroom,
killing one bailiff and critically wounding two others.

The police said that another bailiff shot the man, Thomas Provenzano, 34 years
old, as he fled the courtroom. Mr. Provenzano, a veteran of service in Vietnam,
was wounded in the stomach, and a hospital reported him in ''guarded''
condition.

The police said that when Mr. Provenzano showed up in the Orange County
Courthouse for arraignment on the misdemeanor charge, he was stopped by Harry
Dalton, a bailiff, who wanted to check a knapsack on Mr. Provenzano's shoulder.

The man pulled out a revolver and shot Mr. Dalton. Arnie Wilkerson, 60, a
longtime baliff, was shot in the head and killed instantly, the authorities
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 11, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOUVANNA PHOUMA DIES IN LAOS; SERVED AS PREMIER FOR MANY YEARS

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1075 words


Souvanna Phouma, the neutralist Prime Minister of Laos who was ousted when the
Communist Pathet Lao took power in 1975, died yesterday at his villa in
Vientiane, the Laotian capital, the Vientiane radio announced. He was 82 years
old.

The Government radio station said Souvanna Phouma, a longtime resident of
Vientiane, had been an invalid for some time and had died of old age.

A nephew of Laos's King Sisavang Vong, he was born a prince and used his
princely title most of his life, serving as Prime Minister on and off from 1951
until December 1975.

In that month the 19-month-old rightist-Pathet Lao coalition Cabinet he headed
was abolished by the Pathet Lao, which also announced the end of the
six-centuries-old Laotian monarchy and establishment of the People's Democratic
Republic of Laos.



Communists Gained Dominance

As Prime Minister, Prince Souvanna was widely considered to be powerless after
the Pathet Lao had edged - shortly after North Vietnam's victory in South
Vietnam early in 1975 - toward total dominance of the coalition regime. Other
non-Communist leaders had quit Laos.

In later years, Souvanna Phouma, who was officially referred to as ''Mr,''
served as adviser to the Government. A high-born half-brother, the longtime
leftist leader Souphanouvong, has been President of the People's Democratic
Republic since its establishment.

Within months of the Pathet Lao takeover, Laotian Communists, who previously had
operated clandestinely, seemed to be in tight control of Laos. Scores of
thousands of Laotians became refugees in Thailand. The once- vast influence of
the United States was supplanted by the influence of the Soviet Union and of
North Vietnam, whose army controlled much of Laos.

Through all that change, and more, Souvanna Phouma lived on quietly in
Vientiane. Speaking French to an interviewer in 1979, he praised what he called
the ''socialisme a la Laotienne'' that had come to prevail in his homeland.

Trained in France as Engineer

A courtly, Westernized man, the Prince was a French-trained engineer, a
connoisseur of poetry and a patriot who wanted to do well by his intractible
Southeast Asian nation.

An artificial creation of French colonial policy, Laos is landlocked and
relatively underpopulated, with perhaps three million inhabitants belonging to
various ethnic groups. It became independent in 1953.

In the years that followed, Prince Souvanna tried to steer the country between
the Eastern and Western blocs, repeatedly establishing coalition cabinets -
combining disparate factions - to stem the perennial conflict beween the
Government and the Pathet Lao insurgents, led by his half-brother.

''I am a good friend to Communists abroad,'' he told an interviewer years ago,
''but I do not like them here at home.''

Efforts Praised by U.S.

In Washington yesterday, the chief spokesman of the State Department, John
Hughes, praised Prince Souvanna for his efforts to knit his country together.
Mr. Hughes said that many United States officials had worked ''with Souvanna
Phouma toward the goal of a united, independent, nonaligned Laos and the
peaceful reconciliation of all of Laos's people.''

In the 1960's Vietnamese Communists used overland routes through Laos that
became known jointly as the Ho Chi Minh trail to send troops and military
supplies into South Vietnam. The Saigon Government, with Washington's support,
sent its army across the border into Laos in 1971 in an effort to interdict that
traffic.

Earlier United States involvement in Laos in support of rightist leaders had led
the Prince to withdraw from Vientiane. He and Souphanouvong established a new
administrative center on Laos' remote Plain of Jars, which received aid from
Peking and Moscow.

But later, Prince Souvanna, objecting to North Vietnamese influence over the
Pathet Lao, effected a reconciliation with right-wing Laotians. Back in
Vientiane, he worked amicably with United States diplomats and gave his blessing
to air raids mounted by the United States on Pathet Lao forces.



Born in Royal Capital

After 1975, Souvanna Phouma occasionally left Vientiane to visit the Laotian
town of Luang Prabang, formerly the country's royal capital, where he was born
Oct. 7, 1901, the son of Princess Thongsi and Prince Bounkhong, then Laos's
viceroy.

The young Prince was educated at the elite Lycee Albert Sarraut in Hanoi before
receiving degrees in architectural engineering from the University of Paris and
in electrical engineering from the University of Grenoble. He entered the Public
Works Service of what was then French Indochina in 1931.

Able as well as well-connected, the Prince held a succession of government
engineering posts and, when World War II ended, established a provisional
Government jointly with Prince Souphanouvong and another half-brother, Prince
Phetsarath. It lasted only briefly until French troops returned to Laos. Prince
Souvanna then went into exile for three years.

In his final years, out of power again, Souvanna Phouma was variously reported
as being under surveillance and as being courteously treated by the Communist
Government and attending monthly Cabinet meetings and other high-level
gatherings.

Seen With Brother in 1977

In 1977, he stood beside Souphanouvong and other Laotian notables to review a
parade. And in 1979, a correspondent visiting Vientiane found that everyone in
the capital seemed to know - as they always had in earlier years - the location
of Souvanna Phouma's residence and office building on the banks of the Mekong
River.

The former Prince said in an interview at the time that 10,000 to 15,000
civilian officials and military officers who had served under him had been put
in detention since the Communist seizure of power in 1975.

''They worked for me,'' he said, ''but above all they thought of their own
interest. They lived too high above their means. Now they must get close to the
reality of our country.''

Prince Souvanna married Claire Alline Allard, who was of French and Laotian
ancestry, in 1933. They were divorced in the early 1970's, when their family
included two daughters and two sons, and she died in 1976. In 1979 it was
reported that their children were outside Laos.

The Laotian press agency said yesterday that Souvanna Phouma's body would lie in
state in a Government building in the capital and would be ceremonially cremated
on Saturday.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Souvanna Phouma

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ROLE IN LEBANON FAULTED IN SENATE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 765 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


Several Democratic Senators, with some support from Republicans, today attacked
President Reagan's policy toward Lebanon, and called for the withdrawal of the
Marines.

In a hearing of the Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Joseph R. Biden,
Democrat of Delaware, called the policy ''crazy.'' Senator Claiborne Pell,
Democrat of Rhode Island, said ''the Administration has not made a persuasive
case that U.S. forces can achieve anything in Lebanon.''

Among the Republicans, Senator Charles H. Percy of Illinois, who is the
committee chairman, suggested that the Marines be replaced by troops from other
nations. Senator Larry Pressler of South Dakota, called for a timetable for
withdrawal.

Among witnesses who urged withdrawal were two former Cabinet officers under
Republican presidents - James R. Schlesinger, a Secretary of Defense, and
William E. Colby, a Director of Central Intelligence.

U.S. Policy Is Defended

For the Reagan Administration, Deputy Secretary of State Kenneth W. Dam said it
was ''vital for us to persevere in Lebanon.''

''Now is not the time to flinch,'' he said.

Senator Rudy Boschwitz, Republican of Minnesota, supported that position.

Two other Republicans just back from a Middle East tour, Senator John Tower of
Texas and Senator John W. Warner of Virginia, who said Tuesday that withdrawal
would be ''disastrous,'' repeated their finding that friendly leaders in the
Middle East wanted the United States to retain a military presence in Lebanon.

Senator Christoper J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, disputed this conclusion.
He said he had talked with many of the same people and had heard a different
story.

Warner and Biden in Exchange

In an exchange with Senator Warner, Senator Biden said the issue was not what
would happen if the Marines withdrew, but what would happen if they stayed,
suggesting that they could be engaged in a conflict with the 40,000 Syrian
soldiers in Lebanon.

''There is no way that the presence of the Marines will get Syria to withdraw,''
Senator Biden said.

Senator Warner said the only thing the marines with whom he spoke worried about
was being badly treated on returning home, as they said had happened to some
Vietnam War veterans.

''It is up to us to see that it doesn't happen and that is why we have to change
this crazy policy,'' Senator Biden responded.

Senator Dodd, in his rebuttal to Senators Tower and Warner, said he had spoken
with many of the Egyptian, Israeli, Jordanian and Lebanese whom the two
Republicans met, and had found that ''there was hardly a consensus'' on whether
the Marines should stay.

He said he had found a widespread feeling that the Lebanese Government of
President Amin Gemayel was ''not capable of sustaining any kind of position''
and that there was ''little likelihood'' the presence of the Marines could
change that.

Senator Dodd quoted a Jordanian military officer as having said, ''If the
Marines are in Lebanon to fight, they are too few; if they are there to die,
they are too many.'' The Senator said senior American officers, too, were
''deeply concerned over constantly shifting policies.''

Mr. Schlesinger, who was Secretary of Defense in the Nixon Administration,
recalled that President Eisenhower had sent the Marines to Lebanon in 1958 to
help overcome internal turmoil.

''A full Marine division went in over the beaches,'' Mr. Schlesinger said.
''There was no resistance. Indeed, the Marines were met by vendors selling ice
cream and souvenirs.''

A Marine division has 20,000 men, compared with the 1,600 in Beirut now.

Mr. Schlesinger said there had been a reversal of policy since 1958.

''Rather than a massive deployment to deal with token resistance, we have had a
token deployment to deal with massive resistance,'' he said. ''Simply hanging in
there will prove to be a costly and unsatisfactory policy. The Marines will have
to be reinforced to the point that they change the balance of power - or else
withdraw.''

Mr. Colby, who directed the C.I.A. in the Nixon and Ford Administrations, said,
''Superpower forces should not be used in peacekeeping missions as they bring
too much ideological baggage with them.''

He said American aid to Lebanon was appropriate but the mission ''is not one for
United States Marines.''

''It is a mission calling, first, for diplomacy and, secondly, for military
assistance and advisory help to the Lebanese Army,'' Mr. Colby said. ''If the
Marines were removed, any implication of American withdrawal or retreat in the
face of danger could be obviated by strengthening this effort.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lance Cpl. Duane Leland

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STRATEGIC GOALS OFTEN APPEAR TO LOOM BEHIND ASSISTANCE FOR LATIN REGION

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1252 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Jan. 11


The report today urging a sharp increase in American aid to Central America
comes at a time when the United States is already spending hundreds of millions
of dollars in economic assistance to El Salvador, Honduras and Costa Rica.

As the United States has become more involved in military conflicts in Central
America, it has carried out a series of economic aid projects designed to
bolster the military position of its allies. It has also provided heavy support
for export businesses, a practice that has been criticized as not contributing
substantially to domestic development.

''The American approach in this region is different from most others,'' a
European ambassador said. ''They arequite aware of how each project will affect
their own interests.''

''Their program is is in no way neutral,'' said an American volunteer who
oversees several church-sponsored relief projects in El Salvador. ''It has a
very clear political purpose.''

Strategic Ends Cited

Administrators of the United States aid program said there would be little point
in sending large amounts of economic aid to Central America if the aid did not
serve a strategic end.

''Should our aid programs not support the foreign policy goals of the United
States?'' asked a senior aid official in San Salvador.

El Salvador, the largest recipient of United States assistance in Central
America, faces a series of problems brought on by civil war in addition to
longstanding patterns of poverty and deprivation. Experts say more than 300,000
Salvadorans have been displaced from their homes, and many are living in
makeshift camps supported by a variety of relief agencies, including the United
States Agency for International Development.

Through A.I.D. programs, the United States is spending large sums of money - a
total of over $290 million annually - to pave roads, rebuild bridges and power
stations destroyed by guerrillas, support businesses and provide food and
medicine to refugees. Much of the aid is distributed through agencies of the
Salvadoran Government.

''It is a political plus for the Government to be able to provide the services
people need,'' an A.I.D. official said.

'Plan for Well-Being'

A focus of the United States aid program in El Salvador is the so-called Plan
for Well-Being in the central province of San Vicente. It is based on a similar
project used to pacify areas of conflict during the Vietnam War and entails a
combination of military and civilian efforts.

Under the plan, the army is supposed to make special efforts to protect the
province so that refugees can return home and resume normal lives. This would
help restore the national economy, planners say, and be a sign that the
Government was defeating the guerrilla insurgency.

According to relief workers in the area, some American policies in San Vicente
appear designed to encourage refugees to leave camps and return to areas that
may not be secure. Refugees are being offered credits to rebuild their homes and
revive their farms if they return home, but most have refused to leave their
camps for fear that their villages are still too dangerous.

''The United States does not want to improve conditions in the camps, on the
theory that then it will be harder to get people to leave,'' said David Bonilla,
an employee of the Roman Catholic relief agency Caritas who administers a
refugee camp in San Vicente. ''But the sad reality is that these people cannot
go home now or anytime soon. It is Christian to build shelters for them and to
get running water into the camps.''

In some parts of the country where rebel guerrillas move freely, an unspoken
accommodation appears to have been reached between A.I.D. and the insurgents.
Guerrillas regularly destroy road-building equipment that they fear is being
used to facilitate military access to their territory, but they allow many
United States-sponsored projects to continue.

''I wouldn't call it an arrangement,'' said an A.I.D. employee. ''I don't know
what I'd call it.''

'Disaster in Social Terms'

A former Savadoran Economy Minister, Jorge Sol, said he believed American aid to
his country had been ''very successful in economic terms, but a disaster in
social terms.'' He said United States programs had helped the Salvadoran private
economy grow steadily in the last three decades, but said the aid served to
strengthen the economic power of an already prosperous elite and had ''very
little effect on poverty.''

But an A.I.D. spokesman denied charges by some private and religious relief
workers that American aid programs shy away from working with grass-roots
organizations for fear they will produce leaders who will challenge the
Government.

''If you look at all our projects and see what we're doing in fields like health
and agrarian reform, you could make a case that we're not supporting the status
quo,'' the spokesman said.

In Honduras and Costa Rica, important American aid projects are aimed at keeping
foundering economies alive. Other projects, according to diplomats and aid
officials, represent efforts to maintain pressure on the leftist Sandinista
regime in Managua.

The American economic aid program for Honduras has more than doubled since 1981
and now stands at $95.8 million, according to United States sources. Several
specialists in Tegucigalpa, the Honduran capital, said they did not believe
Honduras could absorb much more.

''There is no infrastructure to receive more assistance than they're receiving
now,'' a Latin American diplomat said.

But the United States Ambassador, John D. Negroponte, said in a telephone
interview that ''a pressing need exists for more aid'' and that absorbing it
''will not be a problem'' for the Honduran Government.

In both Honduras and Costa Rica, American aid is being used to build roads and
improve communications along borders with Nicaragua. The leftist Nicaraguan
Government has charged that these ostensibly civilian aid projects are actually
services provided to United States-backed insurgents fighting to overthrow it.

The largest part of American economic aid to the two countries is in so-called
economic support funds, most of which are used to provide hard currency to
businesses that need to buy raw materials abroad but cannot obtain normal
credit. Critics charge that this program amounts to a subsidy for the business
class and encourages export industries instead of local food production and
other projects that build self-sufficiency. But United States officials say
keeping businesses open is vital to economic and political stability.

Costa Rica has received more than $325 million in American aid since President
Luis Alberto Monge visited the White House soon after his inauguration in May
1982.

'Basic Change' Urged

''We are addressing a set of conjunctural problems, the vulnerability of Costa
Rica and our interests in the region,'' said an A.I.D. official in San Jose, the
Costa Rican capital.

Some development specialists critical of Reagan Administration policies said the
American interest in pursuing its strategic goals in Central America has led it
to design programs that do not address the causes of poverty.

''Some kind of basic change in those societies is necessary if people are ever
going to improve their lives there,'' said Stephen Hellinger, co-director of the
Washington-based Development Group for Alternative Policies. ''A policy that
ties us to the governing elite will never be able to support that kind of
change.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphs of U.S. aid to central america, total U.S. foreign aid

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MOTHER RECOUNTS MOVIE-SET DEATHS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 11


A mother broke down in tears today as she testified how she watched her
6-year-old daughter perish on the ''Twilight Zone'' movie set after being
assured the child was in no danger.

''I saw a helicopter fall down, and many fire sparks - also noise,'' the mother,
Shyan Huei Chen said as she burst into tears.

Gary Kesselman, the Deputy District Attorney, halted the questioning at that
point and did not ask her to continue.

A moment before, Mrs. Chen, testifying barely above a whisper in Mandarin
Chinese, told through an interpreter how she had asked the film makers whether
her only child, Renee, was in any danger and was told she was not.

Use of Explosives

When Mr. Kesselman asked if she had been told a helicopter would be flying over
the children, she said no. She also echoed testimony of her husband on Tuesday
that she did not know explosives would be used.

The Chen girl was killed along with the actor Vic Morrow and 7-year-old Myca
Dinh Lee when a helicopter filming a Vietnam War scene fell on them after being
disabled by a special-effects explosion in the early morning hours of July 23,
1982.

The case has raised questions about labor practices on movie sets using
children. Mr. Kesselman has focused on the film makers' apparent violation of
labor laws in requiring the children to work after dark and without permits.

Mrs. Chen's testimony came at a preliminary hearing to decide whether there was
enough evidence to bring the movie director, John Landis, and four others to
trial on charges of involuntary manslaughter.

Mr. Landis, calling it a ''terrible, terrible accident,'' said after the
mother's testimony, ''The idea that this could have been anything but an
unforseeable accident is not only wrong, it's bewildering.''

In her testimony, Mrs. Chen recalled what happened after special-effects
explosions began going off on the set but before the helicopter crashed.

Child Was Crying

''Some water splashed on her,'' she said of her daughter. ''She was crying that
she had some dust in her eye.''

Mrs. Chen said she saw Mr. Landis go over and pick up the crying child. The
mother said she asked the associate producer, George Folsey, ''Is that
dangerous?'' She said he replied, 'It is not dangerous, only noise.''

At another point, she said Mr. Folsey had warned her that if fire inspectors
came on the set she was to tell them she was ''a friend helping out,'' and told
her, ''Don't say anything about money.''

The testimony from the tiny, slender Mrs. Chen came in a silent courtroom. Her
answers were painfully slow and the emotional strain was evident. At the end of
her story, the five attorneys for the defendants conferred and said they would
ask no questions on cross- examination.

A moment later, after she had left the courtroom, Mr. Landis gathered reporters
around him and made an emotional statement, on the verge of tears.

''I can think of nothing worse than losing your child, and our hearts go out to
the families of Renee Chin, Myca Lee and Vic Morrow,'' he said.

'A Horrendous Thing'

Mr. Landis, reading from notes he had scribbled by hand as Mrs. Chen testified,
said, ''If anyone thought such a horrendous thing could have happened, we would
have stopped.''

''This is a terrible, terrible accident that will obviously cause pain and
anguish to all of us for the rest of our lives,'' he continued. ''I can't think
of what else to add.''

It was the first time Mr. Landis had commented since the preliminary hearing in
the case began Monday. The other defendants are Mr. Folsey; Dan Allingham, the
production manager; Paul Stewart, the special effects coordinator, and Dorcey
Wingo, the helicopter pilot.

Mr. Landis, Mr. Stewart and Mr. Wingo could be sentenced to six years in prison
if convicted on all charges. Mr. Folsey and Mr. Allingham, charged only in the
children's deaths, could receive five-year sentences.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Shyan Huei Chen

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FUTILE AMERICAN 'MEDDLING' IN THE PHILIPPINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 537 words


To the Editor:


The reprint (Op-Ed Dec. 18) of an interview that Philippines opposition leader
Benigno Aquino gave shortly before his assassination at Manila airport last
September was a dramatic reminder of the current crisis in the Philippines.
Unfortunately, both the analysis of the Philippine political situation presented
in the interview and its implication that the U.S. should intervene in domestic
Philippine politics are no longer correct.

Aquino said that the U.S. should use its leverage to persuade President Marcos
to end his 10 years of one-man rule and hold free elections because ''only
Marcos can bring us back to democracy.'' Aquino's own assassination, whether at
Marcos's behest or that of his generals, shows the depth of Marcos's commitment
to democracy and his willingness to negotiate in relinquishing control. Not
surprisingly, by boycotting the May 1984 elections which Marcos called in
response to pressure from the U.S. Congress, all major opposition groups have
declined to grant Marcos legitimacy.

Furthermore, the American news media have yet to address the fundamental issue
of why Aquino was such a threat to Marcos that he was shot immediately upon his
arrival in the Philippines. He was a threat to Marcos not only because of his
popularity but also because his previous work with the C.I.A. seemed to indicate
that the U.S. favored him as a replacement to the unstable Marcos.  In a 1981
interview with Multinational Monitor, Aquino candidly stated: ''I've worked with
your C.I.A. on many operations. . . . I headed our own equivalent of the C.I.A.
We had joint operations in Indonesia; we were in Laos; we were in Cambodia.'' As
one Filipino exile explained: ''Marcos was afraid he would be Diemed, that the
C.I.A. would replace him with Aquino just as in Vietnam in 1963 they replaced
Diem with Thieu in a coup.'' If so, fear of U.S. intervention may have deprived
the Philippines of a leader of the moderate opposition.  This fear may not be
unreasonable, given the Reagan Administration's concern with the maintenance of
the U.S. military bases at Clark Airfield and Subic Bay. To maintain these
bases, the Administration will pay $900 million in rent over the next five
years, and it may either continue to support Marcos or search for a successor
who will pledge to keep the bases.

But, as Philippine expert George McT. Kahin and retired Admiral La Roque have
pointed out in Congressional testimony, the bases are not vital for our
strategic interests and they make us dependent on an unstable regime. It would
be far better to shift our facilities to a politically stable location, such as
Guam.

Thus, we should find a suitable alternative for our bases in the Philippines
instead of going down that well-trod path of meddling in the domestic affairs of
another country to promote short-term political stability. Current U.S.
involvement in Philippine politics will only serve to increase polarization, not
restore democracy. Filipinos have had a relatively long democratic tradition and
their press is one of the most outspoken in Asia. They do not need excessive
U.S. assistance in restoring democracy.

ERIK GUYOT Leonia, N.J., Dec. 31, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

KISSINGER'S OFFICE SITE OF PROTEST

BYLINE: By DAVID BIRD

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 388 words


A group of about 50 demonstrators gathered yesterday outside the building where
former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger has his New York office to protest
the recommendations made Wednesday by the commission he headed on Central
America.

The group, which included clergymen, a psychiatrist, teachers and others who had
visited Central America recently, had tried to present a statement to Mr.
Kissinger. But the police, after determining that the protesters had no
appointment with Mr. Kissinger, refused to let them go farther than the lobby of
the building at 55 East 52d Street.

Diane Boutross, Mr. Kissinger's secretary, said the former Secretary of State
was not in the office. ''He's out of the country,'' she said. Mr. Kissinger was
in Brussels for a conference on the future of NATO.

The statement by the group said the commission ''has basically served first to
defend current Administration policy, and, even more dangerously, to justify an
intensification of U.S. military involvement in the area, bringing us yet closer
to another Vietnam War in Central America.''

Standing outside the building in front of a banner that said ''U.S. Out of
Central America,'' the Rev. Paul Mayer, a professor at the New York Theological
Seminary who has worked in Central America, called the commission report an
''obscenity.'' Mr. Mayer said there was a growing ''moral and spiritual outrage
at the policies af our government.''

He said Mr. Kissinger was the ''principal architect'' of those policies of
''military intervention and political destabliization.''

Among the protesters was Dr. Eli Messinger, a child psychiatrist who is a member
of the Committee for Medical Aid to El Salvador and who visited Grenada last
November. Dr. Messinger charged the United States, which invaded the Caribbean
island last October, had set up a military dictatorship in Grenada.

Among the other protesters were the Rev. Dennis Leader, who recently spent two
weeks in a vigil on the Nicaragua-Honduras border; Job Mashariki, of the Black
Veterans for Social Justice, who toured Nicaragua with Vietnam veterans, and
Darlene Cuccinello of the Inter-Community Center for Justice and Peace, a
coalition of 37 religious communities in the New York, New Jersey and
Connecticut area, who has spent 10 years in Chile.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WAR POWERS: BACK IN COURT

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 912 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


For the first time since the Vietnam War, the Federal courts are being forced to
grapple with allegations that the President has illegally usurped the power of
Congress by waging an undeclared war. The issue this time centers on Central
America.  The latest development on the legal front was a ruling Tuesday by
Federal District Judge Stanley A. Weigel in San Francisco that President Reagan
and top defense aides may have committed criminal violations of the Neutrality
Act of 1794 by supporting guerrilla attacks on Nicaragua.

The Neutrality Act forbids furnishing the money for, or taking part in, ''any
military or naval expendition or enterprise'' against a nation with which the
United States is at peace. The maximum penalty is three years in prison and a
$3,000 fine.

There is virtually no chance that Mr. Reagan or anyone else will be prosecuted
even if Judge Weigel's decision is upheld on appeal, because the plaintiffs in
the civil case still have to clear a formidable array of legal hurdles. There is
also little chance that either Congress or the courts will stop the
Administration's sponsorship, through the Central Intelligence Agency, of covert
operations in Nicaragua.

An Illustration of Ambiguities

But the case, coming at a time of mounting debate about Central America policy,
illustrates the legal ambiguities that arise whenever the President supports
guerrilla operations amid dispute as to whether Congress has authorized them.

While the Administration asserts that its covert activities in Nicaragua were
authorized by Congress, critics in and out of Congress disagree. Judge Weigel
said the Administration had not yet proved this authorization, although he left
open the possibility that it might be able to.

The ultimate issue is whether the covert wars that Mr. Reagan and other modern
Presidents have carried on violate not only the Neutrality Act but also the
exclusive power of Congress under the Constitution to declare war.

Judge Weigel's ruling came in a lawsuit brought by Representative Ronald V.
Dellums, Democrat of California, and two private citizens. They seek to force
Attorney General William French Smith to apply for court appointment of an
independent counsel, or special prosecutor, to investigate their contentions
that the Administration has violated the Neutrality Act.

Judge Weigel ordered Mr. Smith to conduct a preliminary investigation and, by
Feb. 3, either seek court appointment of an independent counsel or explain why
further investigation would not be warranted. He stopped short of finding that a
crime had been committed, but he said the allegations about
Administration-sponsored attacks, if proved, ''may reasonably be construed as
involving a Federal crime.''

Arguments Rejected

Judge Weigel rejected the Administration's argument that executive branch
officials are exempt from the Neutrality Act. He also rejected its narrow
interpretation of the special prosecutor provisions and criticized Mr. Smith's
''persistent refusal'' to begin a preliminary investigation.

The Administration plans to appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for the
Ninth Circuit. It has argued that the courts have no power to order the
preliminary investigation or to determine the legality of Administration actions
in Nicaragua, that the plaintiffs lacked standing to sue and that the Neutrality
Act does not apply to operations approved by the President.

The last contention goes to the heart of the case, inasmuch as the
Administration has not denied using Federal funds and personnel to support
attacks by Nicaraguan exiles who seek to overthrow the Sandinista Government.

No executive branch official has ever been convicted of violating the 190-
year-old Neutrality Act. The Administration argues that it was intended only to
outlaw private military expeditions, because they might interfere with the
Government's conduct of foreign policy. But Judge Weigel said one of the act's
major purposes was ''to protect the constitutional power of Congress to declare
war or authorize private reprisal against foreign states.''

'It Remains to Be Determined'

He acknowledged there would be no crime under the Neutrality Act if, as the
Administration asserts, its operations in Nicaragua were authorized by Congress.
But he was skeptical of the contention that scrutiny of the Nicaragua operations
by the House and Senate intelligence committees, under a vaguely worded law
authorizing certain covert operations and requiring reports to Congress,
amounted to Congressional authorization of the operations.

And while the judge suggested that Congress may have authorized the paramilitary
activities in Nicaragua in November, by voting $24 million for such purposes, he
said that ''it remains to be determined'' whether the Administration was in
violation of the Neutrality Act before that vote.

In December 1982, Congress voted to forbid use of Federal money to support
activities ''for the purpose of overthrowing the Government of Nicaragua or
provoking a military exchange between Nicaragua and Honduras.'' That provision
expired late in 1983.

Administration officials said they had complied with this restriction since
their purpose was to harass the Sandinista Government, not to overthrow it -
even though the guerrilla leaders who were attacking with C.I.A. assistance said
their own purpose was to overthrow the Sandinistas.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TSONGAS, ILL, WON'T RUN FOR SECOND TERM IN THE SENATE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Jan. 12


Senator Paul E. Tsongas, a liberal Democrat, announced today he would not run
for re- election this fall because of a ''chronic illness'' that he declined to
define.

The sudden announcement by the Senator, who had been expected to win easily in
this heavily Democratic state, opens the way for a large field of Democratic
candidates.

''It will be a small army out there, with more candidates than you can shake a
stick at,'' said an aide to Gov. Michael S. Dukakis. ''This place is suddenly on
fire.''

Senator Tsongas, who is 42 years old, said his illness, ''while serious,'' would
not have prevented him from running for re-election, nor from serving a second
Senate term.

He Uses the State House

''The doctors are in agreement on this,'' the soft-spoken, graying Senator, who
was accompanied by his wife, Nicola, said at an overflow news conference in the
auditorium of the Massachusetts State House.

Senator Tsongas, who was elected to the Senate in 1978, defeating Senator Edward
W. Brooke, said his illness was discovered three and a half months ago. He
checked into Bethesda Naval Hospital for tests, but his staff was not told the
results.

The experts' report, Senator Tsongas said, forced him to reassess his
responsibility to his family, and he reached a decision last Friday night after
putting his three daughters, Ashley, 10 years old, Katina, 6, and Molly, 2, to
bed.

''The time has come for us to begin a new chapter of the family,'' he told the
audience, which included many of his staff workers, some in tears.

3 Potentials in Congress

Among the potential candidates for the Tsongas seat are three liberal Democratic
United States Representatives, Edward J. Markey, Barney Frank and James Shannon,
as well as former Gov. Edward J. King, who is more conservative. Another strong
possibility, in the view of Massachusetts politicians, is Lieut. Gov. John F.
Kerry, a Vietnam War hero and antiwar activist who reminds some people of the
Kennedys.

Governor Dukakis, also a liberal Democrat and potentially the strongest
candidate of all, will not run, James Dorsey, his spokesman, said today. ''He is
interested in doing a good job as Governor,'' Mr. Dorsey said.

The only announced candidate for the Republican nomination so far is Raymond
Shamie, a businessman who lost in landslide to Senator Edward M. Kennedy in
1982.

When Senator Tsongas entered his news conference, he was given a three- minute
standing ovation.

Asked why he would not describe the illness that led him to his decision,
Senator Tsongas replied: ''This is a political event, not a medical event. What
I am doing today is giving up a career. That is the story, not my illness.''

The Senator said that interest in his health ''will diminish as time goes
along'' and that eventually it would not be an important subject.

Returning to Lowell Asked what he would do when his term expired, Mr. Tsongas
joked that he was considering becoming a television broadcaster, ''given the
lamentable state of news analysis.'' But the only decision he has made, the
Senator said, is to return to Lowell, where he grew up and attended public high
school.

As a member of the Lowell City Council and later as a member of the House of
Representatives, Mr. Tsongas was instrumental in devising a joint
Federal-private effort to revitalize Lowell, then a decaying mill town and now
the headquarters for an electronics industry led by Wang Laboratories.

The son of a Greek immigrant, Senator Tsongas went to Dartmouth College and the
Yale Law School. He spent two years in the Peace Corps in Ethiopia and the West
Indies and later worked as a Peace Corps administrator.

As a Senator, he won a reputation as a liberal, being a strong advocate of arms
control. But he defied many of his liberal colleagues by helping to engineer
passage of the plan under which the Chrysler Corporation received Federal aid to
avert bankruptcy.

Today Mr. Tsongas said, ''I think what I've done is show you can be a liberal
Democrat and care about economics, that profit is not a dirty word.''

He said he would not endorse anyone as his successor. Some months ago he
endorsed Senator John Glenn of Ohio for the Democratic Presidential nomination.

Possible Successors Scattered

Today most of the likely candidates for the Tsongas seat were abroad.

The press secretary for Representative Markey, who was in Mexico on vacation,
said the Tsongas announcement was a ''shock'' to Mr. Markey and ''I think Ed
feels it's not the right time to think about his own political future.''
Representative Markey, who is 37 years old, has been a major proponent of the
nuclear freeze.

Lieutenant Governor Kerry is in Europe to study acid rain there. His press
secretary, Larry Carpman, said Mr. Kerry was ''shocked and deeply saddened'' to
hear the news. Mr. Kerry ''will seriously consider'' whether to run after he
returns, Mr. Carpman said.

Former Governor King is also in Europe.

Whoever runs will have to move quickly, because to be nominated for the
Democratic primary in September a candidate must receive at least 15 percent of
the delegate votes at the Democratic state convention on June 9. The delegates
will be chosen by city and town caucuses on Feb. 11.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Paul Tsongas and wife (Page A1)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE METHOD BEHIND THE SUPER BOWL MADNESS

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1212 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


Thirty- one days has January, but in Washington the month can seem like an
Arctic night when there is nothing to look forward to except the familiar
political rituals and the first snow of winter.

This month, President Reagan, in solemn mood, is to take a short ride to Capitol
Hill to deliver his State of the Union Message. That is to be followed by the
Democrats' response on national television. It is the kind of theater likely to
tell us more about the State of the 1984 Campaign than the Union. A few days
later, in an exercise similiar to a boa constrictor swallowing a pig whole,
official Washington will begin absorbing the latest White House budget proposals
and planning its resistance.

Perhaps the rest of the country can understand, then, why Washington
bureaucrats, senior Government officials and politicians are so desperate for
diversion from this January routine, and why some are cashing in their social
and political chips for advantage in the Super Bowl ticket line.

Contrary to the impression that news reports may have left with the rest of the
country, Washington is not a city currently preoccupied with hunger, Central
America, Lebanon and visiting prime ministers. The talk of the town is whether
the Redskins will win their second straight Super Bowl championship on Jan. 22,
and whether President Reagan, in a brief announcement seven days later, will
announce plans to seek a second term.


Wagers are being placed around town on both events, but some local gamblers
can't shake an uneasy feeling about the Reagan decision, even though the odds
are heavily in favor of his going for four more years. For one thing, there is
the memory of how President Johnson, at the conclusion of a Sunday night
television address on the Vietnam War March 31, 1968, stunned the nation with
the surprise announcement that he would not run for re-election. In Mr. Reagan's
case, the timing of his five-minute announcement, which is to be carried live on
national television at 10:55 P.M. Jan. 29, is baffling to some who specialize in
the reading of political nuances. The President nearly always schedules his news
conferences and major television speeches in the prime-time window of 8 to 9
P.M. Some Washington hostesses, apparently sensing the possibility of a
surprise, are building dinner parties around the President's speech.


Although the President's intentions hold the most suspense, for the moment most
Washingtonians seem more interested in football than politics. ''This year's
Super Bowl comes at a good time for Congress,'' said Morris Siegel, a local
radio sports commentator. ''They have the good sense not to reconvene until the
day after the game, which means they won't be embarrassed by a lack of attention
the way they were last year.''


It would be understandable if first- time visitors to downtown Washington got
the impression that this city had supplanted Iowa as the hog capital. Vendors
are hawking plastic hog snouts, which can be attached to the human nose, banners
proclaiming ''Hog Power'' and other porcine souvenirs. It has nothing to do with
real hogs. Last year Joe Bugel, the Redskins' offensive line coach, exhorted his
men to get in there and root like hogs. The name stuck. John Riggins, the team's
running back, is even shown in car and truck commercials with hogs.


Some liberals caught up in the city's football madness concede that they would
be more comfortable in their stadium seats if the team officially changed its
name to the Washington Hogs. Imagine, one lawyer mused the other day, how some
of these liberal football fans would have reacted if James G. Watt, the former
Interior Secretary, had ever referred to American Indians as redskins. Many
native Americans, as they prefer to be called, consider that word pejorative and
racist.

''I agree with them,'' said Joseph Rauh, a long-time civil rights lawyer and
Redskins fan, ''but I have to say that it isn't very high on my civil liberties
agenda.''

A few years ago, when a group of American Indians protested the team's name, Mr.
Rauh wrote a letter supporting the complaint, but held on to his football
tickets.  After the American Indians raised the issue, the Redskins organization
did make one small concession to their sensitivity. The team song, ''Hail to the
Redskins,'' was rewritten to remove offensive language. A line in the original
version went like this: ''Beat 'em, swamp 'em, touchdown! We want heap more.''
The new version reads: ''Beat 'em, swamp 'em, touchdown! Let the points soar.''


If the Indians have their complaints about Washington football, so do the
Democrats. Some of them complain less about losing the White House in 1980 than
losing the owner's box at Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium.

Some Democrats say the box, where a chosen few can watch the game and sip
champagne, has tilted toward the Republicans since Jack Kent Cooke, the team's
principal owner, moved back to Washington. When Mr. Cooke was living in
California, the box was under the control of Edward Bennett Williams, the trial
lawyer and former Democratic Party treasurer who owns a 14 percent interest in
the Redskins.

''When Ed Williams had the box you saw Tip O'Neill, Jack Valenti, Joe Califano,
Ed Muskie and good Democrats,'' said a long-time observer of the box. ''Cooke is
more likely to have Paul Laxalt, Mike Deaver and Jim Baker sitting with him.''


The Republican vantage in the owner's box, however, is of less concern to the
Democrats than political advantage that they believe Mr. Reagan gains from a
Redskins championship.  Silly as it may sound, the other night at a cocktail
party a few Democrats were complaining that football, at least as practiced by
the Redskins, is unfair. There was no brie on the table and the bartender
reported that whisky was holding its own against white wine, a sure sign that
something was out of kilter.

''Do you realize,'' said a disconsolate party official, ''that Reagan could be
the first President to have two Super Bowl victories? Democrats have never had
one. It does make a difference. I guess we should be grateful that the Redskins
lost the Super Bowl in 1972 when Richard Nixon was President. What if Watergate
had coincided with a Super Bowl win? Nixon might have beat the rap.''


Robert Neuman, the former director of communications for the Democratic Party
who is now a political consultant, offers this theory: ''This Redskins thing
allows Reagan to get away with murder. The leakers and mischief makers in
Washington are so preoccupied with the Redskins and getting Super Bowl tickets
that they're not doing their usual job. A lot more would have been made of
Charles Wick's taping phone calls and Paul Thayer's resignation if it weren't
for the Super Bowl. Ask most people around this town about Wick and they say,
'Is he a defensive back?' This is two years in a row the Redskins have given
Reagan a break.''

To Mr. Neuman, January is a ''mini-August,'' a time when ''Congress is out of
town and not much is really happening.'' A political v a c u u m , he added,
''is always risky for a President.'' That is why, he contends, the Gipper is the
real winner when football madness fills that vacuum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
About Face On the Left Bank

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 826 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 12


A tide has turned in France. The intellectual establishment, a fiefdom of the
left since World War II, has broken away from its political tutors.

It would be wrong to say it has shifted to the right. The new theme is that the
age-old left-right vendetta, honed by intemperate rhetoric among current
politicians, is obsolete nonsense.

And it is too early to say how far and deep the new trend will carry. But it is
a historical change of direction in French cultural life. There are many signs
that large parts of the public agree and are fed up with what is called the
''polarization'' of discourse between dogmatic enemies.

That hasn't visibly affected practical politics, although it adds to the
distress of Socialist leaders whose popularity has wilted. Ironically, the
movement has come when the left - Socialists and Communists in backbiting
coalition - achieved power for the first time in a generation, with an
intellectual as President and a romantically utopian, almost literary social
program.

Further, it has come when anti- Americanism is on the rise in the rest of
Europe, and in the very country that had defined independence and free thinking
as thumbing its nose at the United States. It is primarily students and
intellectuals who express anti-Americanism elsewhere on the Continent, so the
new mood of intellectuals here makes France an exception to the trend.

The resounding tocsin among the crowd that has long made its spiritual home on
the Left Bank is Yves Montand. The beloved 62-year-old singer- actor doesn't
exactly qualify in the highbrow set. He has always been too earthy,
unpretentious and popular for that.

But it is the outpouring of response from self-proclaimed intellectuals to his
recent declarations denouncing ''Red fascism'' and extolling democracy that
shows something fundamental has happened. He has been lavishly praised and
effusively thanked for ''saying out loud what we've all been thinking under our
breath,'' in the words of more than one lifelong leftist writer.

Jean Daniel, editor of the pro-Socialist weekly Le Nouvel Observateur, applauded
Mr. Montand for not being afraid to say, among other things, that he was ashamed
to think of Lech Walesa seeing delegates to the French Socialist Party congress
clasp hands with Soviet representatives and sing the ''International.''

Communist critics accused Mr. Montand of trying to be the French Ronald Reagan.
But others leaped to the idea that he should run for president. Never at a loss
for humor, Mr. Montand replied that he wasn't following Mr. Reagan's footsteps
because the reason the American President switched careers was his failure as an
actor.

It is Mr. Montand's own political odyssey that makes his new stand so trenchant.
He and his wife, the actress Simone Signoret, who is considered a bona fide
intellectual, were never members of the Communist Party. But they long disdained
to say so, so close were they to its positions and so acquiescent in the
argument that Communists should not be criticized because that would ''serve the
right.''

They signed all the fashionable petitions, appeared at the appropriate
demonstrations, and brought a lot of people in their wake for nearly 30 years.
They were starring practitioners of the late Jean-Paul Sartre's call for
political ''engagement,'' always well to the left.

It was Sartre who provided the slogan ''Don't cause Billancourt to despair,'' a
reference to a heavily Communist working-class suburb of Paris. For over a
generation it gagged discussion of Soviet and Communist evils, while encouraging
attacks on the United States. So intense was the pressure to conform that
dissident or merely politically indifferent writers, actors and artists had
trouble getting work and recognition unless they joined the small band of
militant anti-Communists, often denounced as fascists by the claque.

Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's ''The Gulag Archipelago'' had an explosive effect on
France. Until his book appeared here in 1974 much of the intellectual elite
simply refused to believe widely documented evidence of slave labor camps,
forced confessions or thought police in the Soviet Union.

Opposition to the Algerian war, the Vietnam War and the Pinochet coup in Chile
kept alive sympathies for Soviet-backed causes of the early postwar years, with
enough noise to drown out the unpleasantness of the Hungarian revolution, the
invasion of Czechoslovakia and everyday misery in the East.

The reassessment has been gathering quiet momentum for a few years, but Mr.
Montand's public position has now enshrined it. The movement has been given a
name, ''the neo-realists.'' Mr. Montand's passionate, finger-wagging television
injunction gave it marching orders: ''We have to defend democracy; that's all
we've got left, kids,'' he said last week.

The style may change again some day, but the Left Bank will never be the same.
It is, as the French press says, a ''phenomenal event.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Recognizing Rome - and Politics

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 426 words


President Reagan's decision to restore diplomatic relations with the Vatican
sounds purely political. The diplomatic arguments for doing it are thin. The
arguments against it are hardly stronger, but they are deeply felt by millions
of Americans. So why revive such a contentious issue? We suspect Richard
Wirthlin's polling for the White House indicated that on balance, it's a winner.

Diplomatic relations with Rome are not a legal issue. Though they were cut off
by statute in 1867, in step with Italy's unification, that law was repealed last
year.

Neither is there much of a constitutional issue. Fundamentalist opponents of
Vatican recognition say it violates the separation of church and state in the
first 10 words of the Bill of Rights: ''Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion. . . .'' Those words prohibit establishment of an
official church, not diplomatic ties to Rome, or Mecca or anywhere else.
President Reagan has no thought of opening the door to an official state
religion in this country.

The Administration makes a practical argument for recognition. It supposedly
will give the United States better access to the Vatican's worldwide contacts
and information. A bigger staff in Rome will be better able to engage the
Vatican bureaucracy, but that's a thin argument. Consider the much greater
advantage of diplomatic relations with places like Cuba and North Vietnam, which
remain unrecognized because Washington doesn't like their governments.  What the
question of Vatican relations comes down to, finally, is politics - and at one
level, the politics would seem to militate against recognition. Mainstream
Protestants seem less alarmed about full recognition than when President Truman
tried it three decades ago; but fundamentalists, a growing force, oppose it.
Some Jews are cool to the idea, remembering that the Pope embraced Yasir Arafat
but refuses to recognize Israel.  Most interesting, the reaction of the American
Catholic hierarchy has been lukewarm. The bishops may see some similarity of
interest between a President angered by their bishops' stand on nuclear weapons
and a Pope dissatisfied with the American church's discipline.  President Reagan
is presumably banking on this as a vote-getter among the nation's 52 million
Roman Catholics, and not so offensive to his natural constituents among
conservative Protestants that they will abandon him. The operative word, in
short, is not constitutionality or religion or diplomacy. It is, in this
election year, arithmetic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: FROM TV TO BEST SELLERS

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 28, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 666 words


THE debate over whether television contributes to illiteracy may never be
settled, but one thing is beyond debate: television exposure can do wonders for
the sale of books.

The latest example is ''The Citadel'' on public television, adapted from A. J.
Cronin's novel about a young doctor's odyssey from the mining valleys of Wales
to the glitter and glamour of London. The book was published in 1937, and while
the hard- cover edition has remained in print ever since, the mass-market
paperback went out of print in 1975. But the recent 10-part PBS dramatization
created such renewed interest in the book that Little, Brown published a trade
paperback edition tied to the television series and that edition has landed on
at least two regional best- seller lists.

While the television series did wonders for sales of ''The Citadel,'' it also
created interest in the author's other books. In April, Little, Brown plans to
reissue two more Cronin novels, ''The Keys of the Kingdom,'' published in 1941,
and ''Shannon's Way,'' from 1948. Both have long been available in hard cover,
now they will be published for the first time in trade paperback.

Stanley Karnow's ''Vietnam,'' an illustrated history of the war, benefited
greatly from the recent television series; there are now 190,000 copies of the
$25 hard-cover book in print, and it has been on The New York Times list for 12
weeks.

D. H. Lawrence's ''Lady Chatterly's Lover'' and Evelyn Waughs's ''Brideshead
Revisited'' became best sellers last year, decades after their original
publication, when they were adapted for television. David Attenborough's ''Life
on Earth,'' which grew out of a BBC series, became a huge hard-cover success in
the United States in 1982 after it was shown on public television. Herman Wouk's
''Winds of War,'' published in 1971, was reissued in hard cover last year
because of the demand created by the television mini-series.

''The Thorn Birds'' by Colleen McCullough and ''Shogun'' by James Clavell, huge
best sellers when first published, enjoyed a second sales life after their
adaptation for television.

Quality Paperback Club Marks 10th Birthday

The Quality Paperback Book Club celebrated its 10th anniversary last night with
a reception at a Manhattan cafe. With 300,000 members, the club is a profitable
and robust member of the Book-of-the-Month Club family, a family that includes
not only the giant 58-year-old parent, but also the smaller Dolphin Book Club,
which offers books on boating; Book-of-the- Month Club/Science; the Fortune Book
Club, and the Cooking & Crafts Club.

The Q.P.B., as the paperback club is familiarly known, was one of the first
projects begun by Edward Fitzgerald, chairman of Book-of-the- Month Club, who
joined the company in 1971, after having headed the rival Literary Guild and
having briefly been president and chief executive of the McCall Publishing
Company. (Book-of-the-Month Club is owned by Time Inc., the Literary Guild by
Doubleday.)

''Our first offering,'' Mr. Fitzgerald said of the paperback club, ''was Kenneth
Clark's 'The Nude.' '' a history of the nude through art. ''We shipped 1,964
copies, but the acceptance rate, the lifeblood of a book club, was an amazing
72.6 percent. Now you'd be happy to get 20 percent acceptance for your biggest
authors.''

The Q.P.B., which sells hard-cover- size books in soft-cover editions at lower
prices, offers a wide array: such best sellers as ''One Brief Shining Moment''
by William Manchester and ''In Search of Excellence'' by Thomas J. Peters and
Robert H. Waterman; boxed sets, including the six Dumas Malone volumes on
Jefferson, and books on tape. The club also offers William Kennedy's
''Ironweed,'' which this week was named the best work of fiction in 1983 by the
National Book Critics Circle.

The paperback club is not yet a serious rival to the Book-of-the-Month Club,
which has more than a million members, but it has clearly become a major force
in bookselling in a very short time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FORNATALE'S RADIO SHOW OF THE NOT SO LONG AGO

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 661 words


When the songs were young, so was the audience. The listeners may have been
joining an anti-Vietnam War rally the first time they heard James Taylor sing
''Fire and Rain,'' or perhaps they were lying on the beach at midnight the first
time they heard Judy Collins sing ''First Boy I Loved.''

The songs are older now, and so is the audience, and Peter Fornatale brings them
together every Sunday morning on his award-winning radio show, ''Mixed Bag,'' on
WNEW-FM (102.7). As he plays protest songs by Phil Ochs or gets Melanie to sing
her latest song during a studio interview, Mr. Fornatale envisions his audience:
''In their bathrobes, having bagels and cream cheese, reading the morning paper
and, of course, there are children around.''

The 37-year-old Peter Fornatale (a husband and father of three) believes that
the music Bob Dylan and Joan Baez recorded so long ago - ''folk rock, 60's
music, whatever you call it'' - is still alive and evolving today. And he keeps
finding new performers who embody the spirit of 60's music.



Anniversary Celebration

''Mixed Bag'' recently won an Armstrong Award, the FM radio equivalent of an
Oscar or an Emmy. And this Sunday from 8 to 11 A.M. he will broadcast a benefit
concert given at the Lone Star Cafe last Sunday to celebrate the show's first
anniversary. It features Eric Andersen, David Bromberg, Tom Chapin, Tom Paxton,
Aztec Two Step, the Washington Squares, Christine Lavin, some of them more
recent than the 60's and, of course, Richie Havens.

Mr. Havens had to be at the concert because, a very long time ago in 1967,
WNEW-FM inaugurated a change in its music format by playing a song from a Richie
Havens album, ''Mixed Bag.'' Rosko, the disk jockey who opened that era, doesn't
recall whether the song was ''High Flying Bird'' or ''San Francisco Bay,'' but
either way, WNEW-FM was soon attracting an audience that was young and hip,
politically and socially conscious.

''I honestly believe that WNEW's audience did not look for mere diversion, that
it was looking for something more than entertainment,'' says Mr. Fornatale, who
in that year turned 21, was graduated from Fordham University and radio station
WFUV-FM, and was working his way into commercial radio.

In those years, WNEW-FM's disk jockeys were encouraged to select their own music
and to provide personal comment, which often ranged into monologues by Jonathan
Schwartz on the glory of the Boston Red Sox or the pain of being in love.



A Time of Innovation

The late 1960's and early 70's were a time of innovation in FM pop music, but in
recent years WNEW-FM and most other stations have largely adopted what Mr.
Fornatale calls ''lowest-common-denominator programming, just like the
television programming we grew up with.''

Charles Kendall, program director at WNEW-FM, says the station is happy with Mr.
Fornatale's show, though, and he insists: ''There is still a place for 60's
music.'' That place is from 8 to 11 A.M. on Saturday, when Mr. Fornatale does an
oldies show, and from 8 to 11 on Sunday, when he does his ''folk rock, whatever
you call it'' show.

One memorable ''Mixed Bag'' show was with Kate and Anna McGarrigle, the sisters
from Quebec, whose enthusiasts consider them the best thing since maple syrup
poured on fresh snow. As the sisters were approaching the studio, Mr. Fornatale
recalls, ''They saw an old man hit by a taxi, which sped away. They would not
leave the scene until an ambulance arrived, and they were pretty shaken up when
they came into the studio.'' But Mr. Fornatale's patient microphone manner
induced some lovely songs in French and English from the McGarrigles, who were
not household names in the 60's, but are linked to that tradition.

Pete Fornatale is hopeful about the future of 60's music. ''For a long time I
didn't feel good about the music I was playing,'' he says, ''but since 'Mixed
Bag' went on the air, I feel my best work in radio is yet to come.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Peter Fornatale

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EVENTS FOR MARTIN LUTHER KING'S 55TH BIRTHDAY

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 866 words


''There is nothing in all the world greater than freedom,'' the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. said. ''I would rather be a free pauper than a rich slave.''

Dr. King, the Baptist minister, civil-rights leader and winner of the Nobel
Peace Prize, was born 55 years ago this Sunday. He was assassinated April 4,
1968. Although his birthday will not become a national holiday until next year,
people all over New York will celebrate Dr. King's achievements, and his spirit,
this weekend.

One powerful tribute is ''Do Lord Remember Me,'' a play made up of the
reminiscences of former slaves and directed by Regge Life. The play, which was
last produced a year ago, will run through Feb. 19 at the American Place
Theater, 111 West 46th Street.

''One of the themes of the play,'' its author, James de Jongh, said, ''is the
faith of people - these slaves - who were able to hang onto an ideal that they
saw no chance of achieving. We no longer have to make these long- range
projections of hope that we did during the time of slavery. And the pivot, the
person that changed that, was Martin Luther King.''

Performances this weekend are tonight at 8, tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M., Sunday at
3 and 8, and Monday at 2. Tickets are $18 weekends and $15 weekdays.
Information: 246-3730.



Prayers, Poetry and Song St. Patrick's Cathedral, Fifth Avenue and 50th Street,
will be the site of an ecumenical prayer service for Dr. King at 2 P.M.
tomorrow, including gospel music and readings from Dr. King's speeches.
Information: 371- 1000, extension 2681-2.

Other events this weekend blend poetry, prose and song to celebrate the
achievements of Dr. King and black American culture. The annual New York City
celebration, for instance, Sunday evening at 7:30 in Town Hall, 123 West 43d
Street, will include works from all over the world that extol peace and
brotherhood. Admission is free. Information: 435- 7431.

Coretta Scott King, Dr. King's widow, will attend a concert of gospel music at
Newark Symphony Hall, 1020 Broad Street, in downtown Newark, Sunday at 6 P.M.
Tickets are $10 to $15; $25 includes a reception at 3. Information: (201)
643-4550.

The Religious Task Force, which is coordinating birthday celebrations for Dr.
King around the country, will be host to a New York celebration tomorrow at 3
P.M. in the Convent Avenue Baptist Church, 420 West 145th Street. Speakers will
talk of today's issues in relation to Dr. King's life. Admission is free.
Information: 858-6882.



Concert in Brooklyn

At the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, an illustrated talk on
the achievements of black Americans will lead into a concert of works by black
poets, musicians and others by the Brooklyn Philharmonic. The program, Sunday at
2 P.M., includes ''Odyssey of King,'' by Muhal Richard Abrams. Admission is $2
(free for Botanic Garden members). Information: 622- 4433.  Black music and
poetry from the United States, Africa and the Caribbean will be the focus of a
tribute to Dr. King on Monday night at 7:30 at the American Museum of Natural
History, Central Park West and 79th Street. The program is in the main
auditorium, and admission is free. Information: 873-1300, extension 514.

On Aug. 28, 1963, Dr. King led 250,000 people, black and white, in a
civil-rights march on Washington. The march stopped in front of the Lincoln
Memorial, where Dr. King spoke. ''I have a dream. . .'' he began.

A concert of music and poetry Saturday at 8 P.M. at the Third Street Music
School Settlement will include a musical setting of that speech, as well as
settings of poetry by Langston Hughes. The settlement is at 235 East 11th
Street, and admission is $5. Information: 777-3240.



Celebration in Yonkers

An hourlong celebration on Sunday at Philipse Manor Hall, Warburton Avenue and
Dock Street in Yonkers, will include Nikki Giovanni's poem ''The Funeral of
Martin Luther King.'' Philipse Manor Hall is near the Yonkers station on
Metro-North's Hudson Line, from Grand Central Terminal. Tours of the building
will be given from 1 to 5 P.M., with the concert at 3, and both are free.
Information: (914) 965-4027.

Near the end of his life, Dr. King spoke out more and more against the Vietnam
War. ''If we assume that mankind has a right to survive,'' he said, ''then we
must find an alternative to war and destruction.''

In memory of Dr. King's work in the cause of peace, the activist playwright
Amiri Baraka is presenting the premiere of his ''Primitive World,'' an
antinuclear musical, at Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South. Performances will
take place Sunday through Thursday at 10 P.M. and midnight and next Friday and
Saturday at 10 and 11:45 P.M. and 1:30 A.M. Tickets are $10. Information:
242-1785.

Mr. Baraka will also take part in readings of poetry by black women sponsored by
the Brooklyn Arts and Culture Association tonight at 8 in the Downtown Cultural
Center, 111 Willoughby Street, near Borough Hall. Tomorrow night at 8, the
Cultural Center's program shifts to a melange of song, theatrical pieces and
poetry from the 1960's and about the civil- rights movement. Tonight's program
is free; admission tomorrow is $4. Information: 596-2222.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Martin Luther King Jr.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WEEKENDER GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Blau

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1048 words


Friday KING JOHN' ON BOWERY

Combat vignettes range from the 13th century to the Vietnam War in a production
of Shakespeare's rarely staged ''King John,'' which opens tonight at 8 at the
Cocteau Repertory, 330 Bowery. The idea is to show the futility of war. While
this theme was not exactly spelled out by Shakespeare, this history play is open
to such an interpretation, according to Eve Adamson, the company's artistic
director, who is staging it. The ''perplexing'' title character, she says, is
neither a hero like Henry V nor a charming villain like Richard III. The play
follows John's desperate attempts to keep his throne from its rightful heir.
Tickets: $8.50. Reservations: 677-0060. ART AT THE CLOCKTOWER

Every year, some 25 artists from around the country and 15 from abroad are
awarded low-cost studio space at the Clocktower in Lower Manhattan and at P.S. 1
in Long Island City, Queens, under a program of the Institute for Art and Urban
Resources. Now they are showing what they have been up to. An exhibition of
paintings and sculpture, as well as performance and sound art, is on at the
Clocktower, 108 Leonard Street, through Feb. 12. It's free. Information:
784-2084. ARCHITECTS' TREASURES

Columbia's Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library is showing its recent
acquisitions in a free exhibition through Jan. 27 in the rotunda of the Low
Memorial Library on the campus on Broadway at 116th Street. Among these are
''view books'' - photographs of American towns and cities, mostly of the late
1800's; letters and drawings of Stanford White; letters from such other notables
as John F. Kennedy, Le Corbusier and Frank Lloyd Wright; drawings for such
projects as the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center; a catalogue of 1916
''Readi-Cut Houses,'' to be put together in a day, and Piranesi etchings.
Mondays through Fridays, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. Information: 280-5573.

Saturday SAILING INTO COLISEUM

The fleet will be in Saturday through Jan. 22 at the New York Coliseum - some
600 sail and power boats on display in the 74th New York National Boat Show. The
''queen,'' or longest, this year is the Tempest, a 44-foot diesel yacht, which
can reach a speed of more than 50 miles an hour. It has such amenities as suede
and leather upholstery and wall coverings, and a microwave oven in the galley,
and it will sell for about $250,000. Also on hand will be boat-related items,
including engines, clothing, electronic equipment and furniture, and information
about insurance and finance. Tickets: $6 ($2 for under-12's). Information:
765-9450. (More on the Boat Show,

page A00.) A CHILD'S 'SCHEHERAZADE'

To prevent her new husband, the Sultan, from having her beheaded, Scheherazade
each night - for 1,001 nights - starts a story whose ending she won't reveal
until the following night. So it goes in ''The Arabian Nights,'' which inspired
Rimsky-Korsakov's ''Scheherazade,'' to be played, along with a puppet enactment,
Saturday at 11 A.M. and 1 P.M. in Avery Fisher Hall. The Little Orchestra
Society will perform ''Scheherazade'' in one of its ''Happy Concerts for Young
People'' after its conductor, Dino Anagnost, introduces the musical themes and
plot. Acting it out will be puppets as tall as nine feet from the Pickwick
Puppet Theater (other puppet shows this weekend, page C12). Tickets: $6 to
$12.50. To charge, call 874-6770. GREGG SMITH FESTIVAL

The Gregg Smith Singers, 16 in all, accompanied by a pianist, will offer a
Festival of Psalms at St. Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue and 54th Street, on
Saturday at 8:30 P.M. The program ranges from the 15th to the 20th century; it
includes music by Gabrieli, Josquin des Prez, Orlandus Lassus and Claude Le
Jeune and by Charles Ives and Ned Rorem, as well as premieres by Darrell Handel
and Fred Thayer. Tickets: $8 and $10.  Reservations: 865-7035. PAPER SYMPHONY'
ON S.I.

Felicia Tedesco will conduct a ''paper symphony'' at the Staten Island
Children's Museum on Saturday as a finale to her 1:30 P.M. workshop for
youngsters 5 years old and older. Participants will explore ways to make sounds
with newspapers, tissue and other kinds of paper. They may not be able to
produce actual notes, but they can make, for instance, rattling, crumbling,
blowing and ripping sounds. It's free with museum admission: $1 for adults, 50
cents for children. Information: 273-2060.  Sunday MEADOWLANDS ANTIQUES

Interested in a time clock to verify arrivals in pigeon races? A ropemaking
machine from the early 19th century? How about a police or firefighter's helmet
or badge from the turn or the middle of this century? They can be found at the
Meadowlands Antiques Exposition along with such diverse items as teddy bears and
lead soldiers, Oriental rugs, Chinese silver, pottery, jewelry, brass scientific
instruments and dolls. It's being held Sunday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. at the
Meadowlands Hilton on Meadowlands Parkway in Secaucus, N. J., off Route 3. Free
parking. Admission: $3. Information: (201) 262-3063. PERAHIA IN MONTCLAIR

The pianist Murray Perahia, who has won praise for such qualities as lyricism
and delicacy of touch, will perform in the Montclair (N.J.) High School
auditorium, Park and Chestnut Streets, on Sunday at 3:30 P.M. His program will
include Beethoven's Sonata in D (Op. 10, No. 3), Chopin's Barcarolle, Berceuse
and Fantasy in F minor and Schumann's Fantasia in C (Op. 17). Tickets: $9 to
$14. Reservations: (201) 744-6770. RARE LOUISE BROOKS BILL

With her distinctive black bobbed hair and siren looks, Louise Brooks can be
seen in two rare films Sunday at the Thalia Theater on 95th Street, west of
Broadway. She's a Manhattan salesgirl out to have fun in ''Love 'Em and Leave
'Em,'' a silent film based on a stage comedy by George Abbott. It was made in
1926, three years before the Kansas-born actress went to Germany to play a
melodramatic version of the same character, Lulu, in the classic ''Pandora's
Box'' (piano accompaniment by Steve Sterner at the evening performances). And
Miss Brooks is a stenographer who becomes a film star in ''Prix de Beaute''
(1930), a talkie, in which her voice was dubbed into French (English subtitles).
Admission: $4 ($2 for children and over-65's before 5 P.M.) Information:
222-3370.  Eleanor Blau

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MCGOVERN IS RELAXED ON WEARYING CAMPAIGN

BYLINE: By FAY S. JOYCE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: SIOUX CITY, Iowa, Jan. 13


As a pink crack formed in the black sky, George McGovern walked to the back of
the rattling Winnebago to point out the first glimmer of dawn to his wife,
Eleanor.

''I just want you to see how early I start my day,'' he said with a smile,
touching her shoulder.

Indeed, the 1972 Democratic Presidential nominee has returned to the campaign
trail in earnest in his quest for the party's nomination in 1984. On a wearying
two-day swing through northwestern Iowa, his fourth trip to the state, he
stumped in 17 towns, shook hands at the gate of a meatpacking plant, addressed
an attentive but not especially enthusiastic audience of college freshmen on the
subject of 'Big Brother,' spoke to groups of people ranging in size from eight
to 100, and gave interviews to as many radio, television and newspaper reporters
as his staff could find.

Yet it was all done in such a relaxed, gentlemanly fashion that it was hard to
recognize it as a political campaign. Unlike some of his fellow Democratic
contenders, Mr. McGovern spoke well of Walter F. Mondale, the front-runner.

He Carries Reporter's Luggage

When an aide shivered in the cold at a factory gate, he handed the young man his
gloves. At the end of a long day he hauled luggage to a reporter's room.

''I'm having a better time than in any other campaign,'' Mr. McGovern said.
While he appears to have little chance of repeating his success of 1972, he said
he had less worry and frustration now than he did then. Defeated in his bid for
re-election to the Senate in 1980, Mr. McGovern, now 61 years old, said this is
his final campaign for public office.

The 1984 Mr. McGovern is an updated but easily recognizable version of the 1972
candidate. He still argues strongly against United States military involvement
abroad, but now he focuses on Lebanon and Central America, not Vietnam. The
revolutions in Central America should be allowed to run their course, he said.

''We sometimes forget we were founded in revolution,'' he said, adding that the
American colonies revolted against much less onerous circumstances than Central
Americans have been living under.

Mr. McGovern calls for reducing American military divisions in Europe by half
and withdrawing all American soldiers from South Korea by the end of the
century. He believes the military budget should be cut 25 percent.

To attack unemployment, Mr. McGovern calls for putting people to work at public
service jobs rebuilding the nation's railway and public transit systems. To
provide better public education, he says the Federal Government should take over
the states' share of welfare and Medicaid costs, freeing money for the states to
spend on schools.

His Hopes in Caucuses

Mr. McGovern hopes to place among the top three or four finishers in the Iowa
caucuses next month in order to demonstrate credibility and strength, but he
must overcome the earlier campaign starts and what appear to be more extensive
organizations by some of the seven other Democratic candidates, as well as the
memory of his 1972 landslide loss to President Nixon.

At Fort Dodge, three of Mr. McGovern's young, passionate 1972 supporters came to
see their former hero. They illustrate one of the problems he faces.

''I was a senior in high school when you were running in 1972 and I did
leafletting for you,'' Dan Bednor told him. ''Welcome to Iowa.''

Mr. Bednor said later he now supports Mr. Mondale because the Iowan thinks the
former Vice President has a better chance of being elected.

''I'm older and more practical now,'' he said. ''But I still admire McGovern.''

Mike Libbie and a young woman who asked that her name not be used sat
reminiscing about 1972 after Mr. McGovern spoke. Mr. Libbie is now the county
coordinator for Senator John Glenn and the young woman supports Senator Gary
Hart.

''My politics have changed,'' said Mr. Libbie.

''The economy is the issue, not nuclear war,'' the woman said.

But Mr. McGovern speaks out against the arms race as well, calling for the
United States to give up the B-1 bomber and the MX missile in hopes of bringing
the Soviet Union to the bargaining table on arms reduction.

He is in this race to make his voice heard, if he does not beat the odds and
win. Nonetheless, Mr. McGovern finds, as several county Democratic chairmen here
said, that many voters have not made up their minds. And in this, like the
youngest political newcomer anywhere, he finds hope.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RECENT RELEASES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 28, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 638 words


To Be or Not to Be Starring Jack Benny and Carole Lombard; directed by Ernst
Lubitsch. 1942 Vestron 93 minutes. $59.95

This is the question: Should a home viewer buy a sprightly, classy farce that
was critically blasted in 1942 for its setting of a war-stricken Poland? Or
should you wait a while, and have a theater look at Mel Brooks's hilarious new
remake? Answer: Try both.

Time has mellowed the uneasy, wartime flavor of the original movie, eerily
compounded by Miss Lombard's death shortly before its release. Benny is gone, so
is Lubitsch. On TV, an iron-controlled Poland is a visible fact of life.

So, too, after all these years, is the charm and gleaming irony of Lubitsch's
caper, rendered more intimate in a small screen's tight focus. Edwin Justus
Mayer's wise, subtle dialogue is catnip for the two stars, who portray the
Polish equivalent of the Lunts. The briskly paced plot is a pell-mell scramble
involving deceptions, disguises, murder and a final escape to freedom aboard
Hitler's private plane. It makes curious sense now, looking back at a war-
entangled world gone mad. But back then, packaged as comedy, it must have been
jarring indeed.

The role of the ham-flavored stage idol suits Benny perfectly. As for Lombard's
swan song, she was never prettier or brighter or more elegantly amusing.

Howard Thompson


Verdi's 'Rigoletto' at Verona Mastervision 115 Minutes. $74.95

This video cassette, with digitally mastered stereo hi-fi sound, offers a
pleasant, painless trip to the opera house. Those expecting the close scrutiny
that television at its best offers the operatic medium, however, will be less
happy.

Verdi's mixture of sordid plotline and beautiful music is adequately sung, but
this performance - outdoors at the Arena di Verona in Italy - makes no
concessions to the camera. We are given telling close-ups of listeners and
program hawkers, but the stage action features the kind of broad gestures
designed to reach the back rows of a large space.

There are some colorful touches. This Italian audience greets the pretty,
blandly sung Gilda of Alida Ferrarini with warmth, but Vincenzo Bello's
sharpness in Act II earns whistles and hoots. Garbis Boyagian, the Rigoletto, is
a smooth journeyman. The Arena orchestra under Donato Renzetti plays very well.

Bernard Holland


The Jimi Hendrix Concerts Videogram Harmonyvision 38 minutes. $39.95

Since Jimi Hendrix brought the rock guitar into a new realm of electronic
abstraction, it was a good idea to let some video makers from the art world try
to visualize the eight songs on ''The Jimi Hendrix Concerts'' album. Yet, for
all its technological wizardry and eye-popping colors, most of the ''Videogram''
looks like either an inept imitation of current rock video clips or an average
psychedelic lightshow.

The most impressive images are Stephen Beck's computerized fireworks on ''Voodoo
Child'' - evoking solar flares, Op Art moire patterns and fissioning chromosomes
- and Shalom Gorewitz's abstracted, Day-Glo-colored city scapes in ''Hear My
Train'' and ''The Star-Spangled Banner.'' ''Little Wing,'' by the W.T.V. group,
is a too-pretty collage of a dancer's silhouette with ''zebras and butterflies''
from the song's lyrics, while Dan Reeves's version of ''Hey Joe'' tries to link
pulsating lightshow blobs with Vietnam War footage. The other selections are far
too prosaic for the music.

Most Jimi Hendrix fans would be better advised to close their eyes and listen to
the album.

Jon Pareles

Video cassettes are generally available in two formats, VHS and Beta. Some
titles are also available on CED and Laservision video disks. Unless otherwise
specified, prices cited are the manufacturer's suggested retail price for a VHS
cassette; rental rates vary from store to store.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A Military Solution

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 667 words


In a rueful backward glance at Vietnam, Gen. Maxwell Taylor once remarked,
''Until we know the enemy and know our allies and know ourselves, we'd better
keep out of this dirty kind of business.'' It's an apt text for weighing the
wisdom of the proposals now offered by the Kissinger commission on Central
America.

Agreed, Central America isn't Vietnam. But the tocsin sounded by the Kissinger
panel report has a familiar, martial ring.

Why is Central America important? Because, the commission declares, ''Our
credibility worldwide is involved. The triumph of hostile forces in what the
Soviet Union calls the 'strategic rear' of the United States would be read as a
sign of U.S. impotence.''

The same fears about impotence and credibility were the stuff of a thousand
speeches justifying American involvement for a generation in the lost war in
Indochina.

And now, as if on cue, the Reagan Administration is preparing to ask for $250
million in more military aid for El Salvador, quadruple the current figure. So
it is plain that what matters most about the Kissinger panel's recommendations
isn't its human rights trimmings or its grab bag of economic proposals, no
matter how generous. What matters most is that the bipartisan commission
endorses pouring more arms and advisers into another regional civil war.


Arms alone won't make Central America whole, nor have three years of
militarization brought it nearer to peace. There are other paths to explore, and
it would be simple prudence to weigh real choices. What, to begin with, do we
know of our enemies?

Enemy No. 1 is Nicaragua, depicted in most sections of the Kissinger report as
irredeemably Marxist-Leninist. But the commission is, ultimately, equivocal
about whether the United States can tolerate that. It says there ''could'' be a
comprehensive regional settlement that ''would not imply the liquidation of the
Sandinista Government or the for- mal abandonment of its revolutionary ideals,
but only that it submit itself to the legitimizing test of free elections.'' So
why not spell this out? Why not use the incentive of a settlement to bargain for
verifiable security guarantees? Such guarantees would make impossible the
external assistance that the commission claims Nicaragua is giving to Enemy No.
2, the Salvadoran guerrillas.  Senator Moynihan, having met with the Managua
Marxists, urges such a test of their realism, and his judgment is as expert, and
as anti-Communist, as that of any commission member. Nor is Mr. Moynihan alone
in his skepticism about depending on weapons to stop the guerrillas in El
Salvador.  The commission says that 37,000 Salvadoran troops are not enough to
prevail over 6,000 armed rebels. It favors a 10-to-1 Government edge and figures
that $400 million in military aid will break the stalemate. But El Salvador's
Catholic Archbishop thinks that half the weapons will end up in the hands of
guerrillas, and that adding more weapons will simply increase an appalling level
of violence while reducing chances for a settlement.  What, after all, feeds the
Salvadoran insurgency? It is a cycle of violence that the Government has been
unable to control because, among other things, some of its military commanders
are implicated in death squad murders. The overriding goal of U.S. policy for El
Salvador should be to break that cycle and give an ill-used people new choices.
The Kissinger panel says as much in arguing that any military aid ought to be
conditioned, and seriously, on human rights and social progress in El Salvador.
Alas, even that recommendation is blunted by a tricky dissent from the
commission's chairman, of all people. Mr. Kissinger and two other commissioners
argue that if a choice must be made, defending human rights means less than
fighting Marxism- Leninism. That's a policy all right, but it ignores what
Maxwell Taylor learned at hard cost. It's the way to turn a second-rate
challenge into a first-rate calamity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AS MILITARY COMMANDER

SECTION: Section 6; Page 25, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5546 words


Richard Halloran, a member of The Times's Washington bureau, covers military
affairs. By Richard Halloran

 VER THE LAST 18 months, President Reagan has clearly stepped into the front
ranks of those American Presidents who, since World War II, have been willing to
employ military force as an instrument of national policy.  In his
constitutional post as Commander in Chief of the armed forces, Mr. Reagan has
dispatched marines and warships to Lebanon, mounted an aerial and naval show of
force against Libya, sent warships and combat soldiers to Central America and
ordered the invasion of Grenada.

That has put Mr. Reagan in a league with President Truman, who sent forces to
fight in Korea, and Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, who led the United States
into the war in Vietnam. In those years, President Eisenhower, the retired
general, was the most restrained in the use of military force.

In recent years, President Nixon represented a turning point as, having ordered
the invasion of Cambodia and resumed the bombing of North Vietnam, he then
extracted the United States from Vietnam and refrained from employing military
force thereafter. Presidents Ford and Carter generally followed that lead.

President Reagan, however, represents a return to a reliance on military power
to achieve political objectives. Moreover, he has shown himself to be bolder
than his generals, with whom he confers more often than any other President in
recent memory. Several times, the Commander in Chief has weighed but disregarded
their advice to be cautious about deploying American forces unless there are
clear-cut objectives, sufficient numbers and public support.

Certainly, Mr. Reagan gives every appearance of taking seriously his obligations
as Commander in Chief. After a commission led by Adm. Robert L. J. Long,
retired, produced a highly critical report last month on the policies and
practices that permitted the truck bombing of American marines in Beirut on Oct.
23, the President said: ''If there is to be blame, it properly rests here in
this office and with this President. I accept responsibility for the bad as well
as the good.''

Mr. Reagan's style as Commander in Chief was illuminated with particular clarity
at his conference on Dec. 2 with his national security advisers. When they filed
into the Oval Office that Friday morning, the President had already been through
a week of discussions on the Middle East, including meetings with Prime Minister
Yitzhak Shamir of Israel and President Amin Gemayel of Lebanon. Now on the
agenda: a request from the commander of the naval task force off the coast of
Lebanon, Rear Adm. Jerry O. Tuttle, for authority to strike harder at Syrian
forces in Lebanon that had been shooting at the Marines and at naval
reconnaissance planes. If the Commander in Chief approved, that would deepen the
United States military involvement in Lebanon.

Mr. Reagan turned to Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and senior military adviser to the President. Back in September 1982,
General Vessey and the four service chiefs had argued against sending American
forces into Lebanon for fear that the United States would become entangled in a
conflict that might turn into a quagmire like the war in Vietnam. President
Reagan had not taken that advice, indicating for the first time that he was more
disposed to use military force than were his military advisers.

But with that decision taken, and the Marines committed now, General Vessey, a
veteran of World War II and Vietnam, did not hesitate. When American forces are
shot at, the general said, they should shoot back.

Mr. Reagan had come to the meeting inclined to approve the request, since
intelligence reports had indicated that the Syrians might become more
belligerent. The discussion widened to include Vice President George Bush,
Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Thayer,
who was sitting in for Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, then in Paris
for discussions with the French. Robert C. McFarlane, the national security
adviser, took notes. (Mr. Thayer has since resigned to contest charges of
involvement in insider trading in the stock market.)

A consensus quickly formed for what one official later described as ''vigorous
and prompt reprisals.'' Mr. Reagan agreed with a suggestion that targets be
limited to Syrian units that had actually fired at Americans. The message: The
United States would respond to attack but was not spoiling for war. The
President asked General Vessey to draw up contingency plans and to keep in touch
through Mr. McFarlane.

Things moved faster than expected. The next day, Saturday, the Syrians let loose
at two F-14 reconnaissance planes with a salvo of surface-to-air missiles,
missing both. Mr. McFarlane called the President at Camp David with plans for
reprisal; Mr. Reagan approved, asking that Mr. Weinberger be reached in Paris to
issue the order to execute. Mr. Weinberger gave that order at about 9:40 P.M.,
Paris time. Four hours later, 28 bombers from the aircraft carriers Kennedy and
Independence took off at dawn, Beirut time, to strike three Syrian
missile-launching sites, with the loss of two planes, one flier killed and
another captured. Mr. Reagan returned to Washington that af= ternoon, saying in
a brief news conference beside his helicopter that, in the future, ''if our
forces are attacked, we will respond.'' (The captured flier, Lieut. Robert O.
Goodman Jr., was released by the Syrians through the efforts of the Rev. Jesse
Jackson, a Democratic Presidential candidate. The President capitalized on the
moment by inviting the flier to a ceremony in the White House Rose Garden.)

The President's military decisions, however, have caused widening anxiety. There
is a distinct division among senior military officers and civilian defense
specialists as to whether Mr. Reagan fully understands the applications and
limitations of military power.

To his admirers, the President is decisive and knows when to employ military
force for national security. An officer who has watched Mr. Reagan make military
decisions says: ''Ronald Reagan has the best sense of the proper use of military
power of any of the living Presidents. Richard Nixon had the best understanding
of foreign policy. But even Dick Nixon didn't understand as well how to use
military forces.''

But to his critics, the Commander in Chief is on parade without a clear concept
of the uses of military power to achieve political objectives. A civilian who
has spent a career working on military issues says: ''Those people believe in
independent military power. It has an aura all its own. But they are neither in
control nor do they listen to the advice flowing up from the military itself.
They don't know what they are doing.''

Both admirers and critics found ammunition in the aftermath of the bombing of
the Marine base in Lebanon. The President's supporters applauded his political
courage and the propriety of his taking blame as Commander in Chief. But the
critics pointed out that the commission headed by Admiral Long had questioned
the reliance on military options in that situation, asserting that ''there is an
urgent need for reassessment of alternative means to achieve U.S. objectives in
Lebanon.''

Until now, Mr. Reagan has had it relatively easy. Libya backed off from its
threat to the Sudan after the American show of force. United States troops in
Central America have been limited to maneuvers. The invasion of Grenada was a
pushover. But with the Long commission's report and with events rumbling along
in Lebanon, the President's first critical test is at hand.

In stark terms, the 2,000 American marines in Lebanon, along with the French,
Italian and British troops there, are, in effect, no longer a peacekeeping
force. Instead, they have been caught up in the conflict in a country fractured
by belligerent factions. If there is further escalation, American forces could
be confronted by the 40,000 Syrian troops in Lebanon, backed by 7,000 Soviet
military advisers and troops in Syria.

In that bleak situation, Mr. Reagan would appear to have four military options.
He could order American soldiers to drive the Syrians out of Lebanon, which
would require an enormous American military force, risk a confrontation with the
Soviet Union and enrage other Arab nations. Or the President could apply
ever-increasing pressure on the Syrians with bombing raids, naval gunfire and
occasional ground action, but with no guarantee of success. The United States
failed in the 1960's to dissuade North Vietnam from invading South Vietnam
despite a continual escalation of military force. Third, the President could let
the Marines stay and take the pounding. Finally, the President could decide that
the vital interests of the United States are not at stake in Lebanon and arrange
to withdraw with as little loss of face as possible.

EDUCATION

Three years ago, Mr. Reagan arrived at the White House without much background
in military affairs and without a cohesive or comprehensive military policy
beyond the 1980 Republican campaign pledge ''to achieve military and
technological superiority over the Soviet Union.''

Like other postwar Presidents, Mr. Reagan once served in the armed forces. In
1942, shortly after the American entry into World War II, he was inducted from
Hollywood, where he was acting, into the Army as a lieutenant. But he was soon
back in Hollywood in a unit assigned to make training and documentary films at
Hal Roach Studios, which was promptly renamed Fort Roach. Mr. Reagan worked on a
film that trained bomber pilots to attack the seemingly impenetrable German
rocket installation at Peenem"unde, and he narrated another set of films,
assembled from models and actual footage of Tokyo, to help pilots find targets
there. He was eventually promoted to captain, but turned down a promotion to
major because he had not served in combat.

From then until 1980, Mr. Reagan showed little interest in military affairs.
During his eight years as Governor of California, he rarely spoke out about the
Vietnam War. In seeking the Presidential nomination in 1976, he addressed
military issues only in general terms. He scorned the military parity with
Moscow that underlay the detente pursued by Presidents Nixon and Ford and
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, suggesting that he would seek superiority.

In the election year of 1980, it was a different matter. The war in Vietnam
became ''a noble cause,'' and Mr. Reagan dwelt on reports of a ''hollow army,''
ships that couldn't sail, aircraft unfit to fly, and a





 hemorrhage of talent as experienced people left military service. He pointed to
the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the disastrous attempt to rescue American
hostages in Iran as evidence of Mr. Carter's neglect of the military. Yet, while
offering solutions to specific problems, he made public few thoughts on military
policy.

Similarly, on military issues, Mr. Reagan's first year in the White House was
mainly an extension of the campaign. The President gave most of his attention to
domestic matters and the economy, leaving national security to Mr. Weinberger
and Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. The Administration proposed a
$1,500 billion plan to ''rearm America,'' to include building the MX missile and
the B-1 bomber as part of a program to revitalize the nuclear deterrent. Beyond
that, military policy was largely ignored. Richard V. Allen, the new President's
assistant for national security, scoffed at strategy. ''We don't need any more
studies of strategy,'' he said. ''All we need to do is set priorities and start
building.''

In that climate, Mr. Reagan gave an uninspired speech at a West Point
graduation. He was not informed for several hours, because he was asleep, that
Navy fighters had shot down two Libyan attack planes over the Gulf of Sidra near
Libya. He caused a nervous outburst among Europeans by suggesting that a
tactical nuclear exchange could be confined to Europe without engaging the
United States. When he went on television to announce plans to modernize the
nuclear arsenal, he was unfamiliar with the program's basic components.

By the end of 1981, senior Administration officials sensed an urgent need for
change. Tension in the Middle East had increased with the assassination of
President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt and the outbreak of war between Iraq and Iran.
Leftist guerrillas threatened much of Central America. At home, the military
budget was under attack by Congress, and by David A. Stockman, director of the
Office of Management and Budget, because of the rising Federal deficit. Within
the Administration, Mr. Haig was feuding with Mr. Weinberger. ''Defense was
saying 'A' and State was saying 'Z,' '' an official said.

During the first six months of 1982, the Administration went through a painful
transformation.

The President purged his top security team. Mr. Allen was eased out as national
security adviser, supposedly for filing away a $1,000 honorarium intended for
Mrs. Reagan for granting an interview to a Japanese magazine, but more for
having failed to organize the National Security Council staff. He was replaced
by Deputy Secretary of State William P. Clark, Mr. Reagan's friend from
California; Mr. Clark brought with him Mr. McFarlane, who got the National
Security Council staff into operation.

Since Mr. Clark had little background in military matters, the President asked
Thomas C. Reed, a former Secretary of the Air Force, to come in from California
to direct an intense study of national security policies. General Vessey was
named Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff after the retirement of Gen. David
C. Jones, with whom the President had little rapport. Finally, the increasingly
quarrelsome Mr. Haig was replaced as Secretary of State by Mr. Shultz, another
of Mr. Reagan's California friends.

Policy planners in the Pentagon, led by Under Secretary Fred C. Ikle, drafted
their first Defense Guidance, a secret five-year plan to guide the armed forces
on conventional and nuclear strategy, on acquiring and deploying forces, and on
budgets and procurement. The document's policy sections were fed into Mr. Reed's
examination of military posture.

Mr. Reagan was personally engaged throughout the four months of the study, with
each section being submitted to him for his approval or, more often, his
revisions. Intelligence officers briefed the President on Soviet nuclear forces
in sessions that an official has described as '' 'The Day After,' without
graphics.'' The President also took part in two long sessions of the National
Security Council to resolve differences on military policy.

At the conclusion, in May 1982, Mr. Reagan signed a directive, National Security
Decision Directive 32, that was top secret, as usual for such papers. NSDD 32
instructed the armed forces to make plans and acquire forces that would enable
them to prevail either in a prolonged global conflict with conventional weapons
or in a protracted nuclear war, should deterrence fail.

''In that process,'' said an Administration official, ''Ronald Reagan got
educated.''

In March 1982, Mr. Reagan had taken part in a war game - the first President in
25 years to do so. It was a five-day computerized exercise code- named Ivy
League, run by the Defense Department's Studies and Gaming Agency. Mr. Reagan,
on advice from the National Security Council staff, watched and asked questions
rather than play a direct part. ''No President,'' said an official, ''should
ever disclose his hand, even in a war game.''

The war game, much of which took place in the cramped underground Situation Room
in the West Wing of the White House, posited Soviet attacks with conventional
weapons on American forces in Europe, Korea and Southwest Asia. The United
States responded with conventional forces, but widened the conflict. Then the
Russians escalated by destroying an American warship with a tactical nuclear
weapon and by firing chemical weapons.

After ''the President,'' played by former Secretary of State William P. Rogers,
received that news, he was presented with options by the Joint Chiefs and chose
to retaliate with small nuclear weapons. Later, he gave field commanders
authority to fire tactical nuclear weapons as the war spread. In the end, the
Soviet Union unleashed a nuclear attack on Washington that killed ''the Presi-
dent.'' He was immediately succeeded by ''the Vice President,'' played by a
former Director of Central Intelligence, Richard Helms. Mr. Rogers and Mr. Helms
were invited to take part because they were experienced officials with highly
sensitive clearances who could be trusted to be discreet later.

Who ''won'' the game? Officials won't say, but Mr. Reagan was reported to have
said that ''the lessons learned will ultimately help us prove that our
adversaries have nothing to gain by such an attack.'' At the same time, the
President, Mr. Bush and Mr. Weinberger were reported to have been chastened by
what they had seen. ''After President Reagan watched someone face up to the
decision to push the nuclear button,'' said an official, ''all of a sudden,
there was a sensitivity that wasn't there before.''

Less apocalyptic but not to be overlooked, officials said, was the British
military campaign to recover the Falkland Islands from Argentine occupation in
the spring of 1982. According to an Administration official, the British victory
reaffirmed Mr. Reagan's conviction that ''historically, we protect our national
interests and further our moral obligations by being an active player on the
world scene.''

The consequence of all that, says an informed official, was that ''in June of
1982, Ronald Reagan took the portfolio of national security for himself.''

DOCTRINE

The search for a military doctrine that ended with the President's signature on
NSDD 32 arrived at a strategy for fighting a prolonged conventional war, decided
on geographic and political priorities, and produced a strategy for a protracted
nuclear war if deterrence failed. NSDD 32 also set a framework in which small
wars might be fought to forestall bigger conflicts, or to ''roll back'' Soviet
influence, as in Grenada, if the chance came along.

Under previous Administrations, the armed forces had been instructed variously
to prepare for simultaneous action in wars against the Soviet Union and China,
plus a smaller conflict; or war against the Soviet Union and a separate
brush-fire war; or war against the Soviet Union and two different smaller wars.
The military services had also been advised to arm for a war with the Soviet
Union in which conventional weapons would be used for only 30 days, and would
then give way to nuclear arms.

NSDD 32, which reflected the thinking of specialists in military policy, did
away with those strategies, instructing the armed services to prepare for a
global war in which actions in one theater would be connected to those in
another. Pentagon planners argued for a strategy, known as horizontal
escalation, in which American forces might strike back at an adversary not
necessarily at the point of attack but where he might be hurt more. The response
to a Soviet thrust toward the Persian Gulf, for instance, might be an American
attack on Vladivostok. But that was overruled by Mr. Reed in favor of meeting
Soviet attacks head-on, acknowledging that conflict might spread, notably at
sea, and reserving the option of retaliating in other places.

The armed forces were also instructed to acquire stockpiles of arms, ammunition,
fuel and supplies to carry on a prolonged war with conventional weapons.
Otherwise, the Soviet Union, with its larger numbers of conventional arms and of
men, could entice the United States into expending its ammunition in 30 days,
confronting the President with the choice of surrendering or firing nuclear
weapons. The new doctrine, far more expensive than the former, represented an
effort to delay the need for going nuclear.

White House officials won a dispute with the Pentagon on geographic priorities
before that issue reached the President. Officials in both places agreed that
defending the United States and adjacent parts of the Western Hemisphere would
come first; fulfilling American commitments to NATO and Western Europe would be
next. But the White House insisted that priorities in the Middle East and the
oil region of Southwest Asia be made explicit, overruling the Pentagon's
preference for keeping them vague. Japan and Korea came next; Latin America and
Africa were down the list.

NSDD 32's policy on nuclear weapons evolved from those of earlier
Administrations. Since the 1960's, missiles have become more accurate and
nuclear warheads smaller but more powerful, permitting target officers to aim
away from people in cities and at fortified military sites. That ability led to
strategies for fighting a protracted war in which nuclear weapons would not be
fired in one all-out spasm but in smaller numbers, like conventional weapons.
One theory was called ''shoot, look, shoot again.'' President Carter endorsed a
strategy similar to that in Presidential Directive 59 in the summer of 1980.

President Reagan's NSDD 32 emphasized that the nuclear triad of intercontinental
ballistic missiles, submarine- launched ballistic missiles, and aircraft
carrying nuclear bombs must be as invulnerable as possible. Most important, it
called for communications that would survive a nuclear attack and permit the
President and his advisers to fight a prolonged war.

While NSDD 32 was being deliberated, military officers told Mr. Weinberger the
global strategy was too ambitious. They estimated it would take $325 billion
more than the proposed $1,500 billion to build sufficient forces for peacetime,
and that it would take another $325 billion to acquire forces adequate to defeat
the Soviet Union. The Administration told the military commanders to do their
best anyway. Senior military officers, while complying by translating doctrine
into detailed war plans, have warned that American forces are being stretched
thin.

APPARATUS

In making military decisions, President Reagan seeks advice from a remarkably
small group, his most influential advisers being Mr. Weinberger on policy and
General Vessey on operations. On the Middle East, Mr. Shultz has called many of
the turns. Mr. Weinberger and General Vessey are the President's principal
military advisers not only by law but also because of their personal relations
with Mr. Reagan. Mr. Weinberger has been a friend and political ally since
California days, and is noted for his loyalty to Mr. Reagan. The President and
Mr. Weinberger listen to General Vessey, officials say, because he is of the
same generation, is experienced as a battlefield commander, does his homework
and avoids publicity.

Of the principles that guide his advice to the President, Mr. Weinberger said in
an interview, ''I am strongly imbued with the idea that you should not use
military force unless it is absolutely necessary, and absolutely necessary means
that it is necessary to prevail.'' He added, with a chuckle: ''Or, to use that
terrible word, to win.''

He said he had been critical of the rescue mission into Iran and the war in
Vietnam because ''we didn't have a clear-cut decision as to what it was we had
to do.'' Military force should not be employed ''in a way that leaves in doubt
your commitment or the necessity of doing it,'' he said. It has been difficult
for the United States to make conventional and nuclear deterrence credible, he
contended, because of the ''perception of a country not willing to acquire or
maintain or, ultimately, to use military strength.''

General Vessey, who was lifted to his present post out of relative obscurity as
the Army's Vice Chief of Staff, has sought to enhance his influence, and that of
the Joint Chiefs and the top field commanders, with the President and the
Secretary of Defense. In a speech shortly after he became chairman, he said that
''our job is to help the President and the Secretary decide what are the prudent
risks that the country can afford to take.'' He emphasized timely advice,
meaning that the Chiefs should speak up before being asked: ''The President and
the Secretary must have good military advice before they know they need it.''

To get that advice, Mr. Reagan agreed to the general's proposal that the Chiefs
meet with him regularly. Those meetings, outside of crises, occur about every
six weeks, far more often than in previous Administrations. General Vessey, as
an adviser to the National Security Council, also meets with the President at
least once a week. In addition, the general sees Mr. Weinberger daily, and has
said: ''We have agreed that he and I, not his staff or the joint staff, will
argue out the issues between us.''

Among the few criticisms of General Vessey by Administration officials is that
he is too cautious about using military force for political reasons. During a
rare television interview in the fall, the general said: ''I think one has to
think through very carefully putting American troops in any kind of an operation
where we're using them as a political lever. Certainly, I would urge caution in
any such operation.''

In the military field, Mr. Reagan initiates few policies, preferring to approve
proposals that come up to him. Mr. McFarlane, who replaced Mr. Clark in October
as national security adviser, is still a question mark as a policy counselor
since he is not among Mr. Reagan's associates from California. Mr. Ikle, the
Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, has become the Administration's
theoretician, writing many of the strategy papers. Richard Perle, an Assistant
Secretary of Defense, is an able political operative whose proposals on nuclear
and NATO issues are usually accepted. Senator John Tower, Republican of Texas
and chairman of the Armed Services Committee, is often consulted quietly. The
service chiefs - Gen. John A. Wickham Jr. of the Army, Adm. James D. Watkins of
the Navy, Gen. Charles A. Gabriel of the Air Force and Gen. P.X. Kelley of the
Marine Corps - are well regarded.

The hub of military operations in the White House is a crisis-management staff
within the National Security Council directed by Mr. McFarlane. That staff of
politically appointed civilian specialists and a sprinkling of military officers
handles immediate problems, such as Grenada, and longer-term issues, such as
relations with the Soviet Union after the rule of Yuri Andropov, the ailing
Soviet leader. The Defense and State Departments, the Central Intelligence
Agency and other agencies are brought in, depending on the issue. National
Security Council staff members brief the President, who, like many other
politicians here, absorbs information more by hearing than by reading. The staff
prepares option papers for his decisions and directives for his signature.

Administration officials assert that the President controls policy, making what
one called ''the high-visibility decisions.'' Mr. Reagan also makes many minor
decisions out of the public eye. But, unlike President Johnson, who personally
directed bombing strikes during the Vietnam War, he does not decide on military
tactics or pick targets.

While policy is controlled at the top, responsibility for execution is
delegated. Mr. Reagan believes in leaving operational decisions to subordinates.
Mr. Weinberger, while declaring that the Administration has retained civilian
control over the military, has said he ''would not dream of interfering with the
decisions of commanders in the field.'' General Vessey, when asked to become
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said he would accept on the explicit
condition that he would control operations. The general, in turn, thinks
commanders should command without headquarters constantly looking over their
shoulders.

American military commanders thus have more operational authority today than at
any time in recent history. Mr. Weinberger has emphasized that commanders off
the coast of Lebanon are free to choose air attacks or naval gunfire in
responding to Syrian antiaircraft missiles. During the fighting on Grenada,
advanced communications made it possible for the President to talk with
commanders in the midst of battle. But he refrained and spoke only with General
Vessey. In contrast, President Carter himself monitored the abortive rescue
mission into Iran.

ACTION

In military operations, the record shows that President Reagan has been more
willing than his military advisers to apply military force. To explain that, one
officer said: ''Never underestimate the legacy of Vietnam.'' The turbulent
experience of that conflict has enhanced the innate wariness of military
officers, who are not eager to recommend military options, since they must pay
the price. But once the Commander in Chief has made a decision, they have
saluted and refrained from criticizing that decision in public.

Mr. Reagan launched into military operations in August 1982 by sending the
Marines into Lebanon briefly to assist in evacuating the defeated forces of the
Palestine Liberation Organization. Then, in late September, after the massacres
in the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps, he returned the Marines to Lebanon as a
peacekeeping force. The President acted on the advice of Mr. Shultz and his
special Middle East envoy, Philip C. Habib.

As the conflict in Lebanon has intensified, the Joint Chiefs have quietly urged
the President not to embroil the United States in a war there. General Vessey
said in November: ''We would like to get them out of there as quickly as
possible, but our Government has set a mission there. It's involved in our
larger Middle East strategy.''

The Joint Chiefs were more sympathetic to the President's decision in February
1983 to warn Libya not to attack the Sudan, where a coup might have put a
hostile power alongside United States lines of communication to the Persian
Gulf. As an officer said, ''They saw that as a better-than-even gamble.'' After
American and Egyptian intelligence reported that Libya might attack the Sudan,
the President deployed the nuclear-powered carrier Nimitz, with her 100 combat
planes, off the coast of Libya and sent four Awacs radar warning and control
planes to Egypt. In addition, Mr. Reagan let it be known that he was prepared to
destroy the Libyan Air Force if the coup were tried. It was not, and American
forces were withdrawn.

Later in 1983, senior military advisers cautioned the Administration against
becoming militarily involved in Central America, where 6,000 American soldiers,
marines, and airmen have been on maneuvers as a show of force against the
Sandinista Government in Nicaragua. Many officers contend that the problems of
Central America are more political and economic than military, and that soldiers
should not be asked to solve them.

Equally important to the military is the lack of clear support from the American
people on the Central American venture. Before retiring as Chief of Staff of the
Army in June, Gen. Edward C. Meyer said: ''There will have to be a consensus
within the United States populace that what we are doing is sufficiently
important that American soldiers go to war. You can't send soldiers off to war
without the support of the American people.''

When President Reagan decided on the invasion of Grenada, the Joint Chiefs were
again hesitant. Said an Administration official: ''Jack Vessey was the last one
to jump aboard on Grenada.'' General Vessey urged several days' delay to collect
more intelligence and allow for better planning. But he was overruled by the
White House, which feared that more time would allow the Cubans to organize
better resistance. The general was also overruled by Mr. Weinberger on numbers
of troops. About 7,000 rangers, paratroopers, marines, sailors and airmen were
employed; General Vessey had wanted 10,000, because of the unknowns.

The heady experience of success in Grenada has evidently made the President
ready to flex military muscle again, if necessary. ''Readiness,'' Mr. Weinberger
has said, ''is our principal priority.'' Mr. Reagan affirmed that principle when
he went to New York in mid-December to meet with 125 winners of the Medal of
Honor, the nation's highest military decoration. They listened to a bewigged and
red-coated fife- and-drum corps play patriotic tunes, after which the President
took the stage under a gigantic reproduction of the pale blue ribbon and
five-pointed star of the Medal of Honor. Referring to Grenada, the Commander in
Chief said: ''Now the world knows that when it comes to our national security,
the United States will do whatever it takes to protect the safety and freedom of
the American people.'' To vigorous applause, he added: ''Our days of weakness
are over. Our military forces are back on their feet and standing tall.''

Two days later, the 16-inch guns of the battleship New Jersey, silent since the
Vietnam War, thundered off the coast of Lebanon.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan with Lieut. Robert O. Goodman Jr.; photo of
the President meeting with Joint Chiefs of Staff; photo of President Reagan on
trip to Korea in November

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 6, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words


Dominating the Momentum KEITH BENDIS


It's fourth and inches. (If you do not instantly tense with the knowledge that
this is football shorthand for ''fourth down and inches to go for a first
down,'' skip hurriedly to the next item; the vocabulary for next week's
Superbowl is not for you.) The worried quarterback looks over to the sidelines
for the perfect verb to call. The coach sends in a tight end (a lineman woozy
from doing too many beer commercials) with the pro- bowl predicate of the year.

The meaning sought is ''to be winning decisively.'' Two wide receivers, control
and command , line up on the right; the tight end, intimidate , hiccuping
noisily, is on the left; the tailback, rule , is ready to cooperate in a play-
fake to freeze the linebackers; the offensive linemen are worried about being
penalized for holding sway . In the stands, a couple of oldtimers, in the
driver's seat and have the upper hand , are yelling ''AH-fense!''

Which verb gets the call? You go with that action- packed part of speech that
has been smashing steadily into our eardrums, standing tall over all the words
used in sportscasting this year. The unanimous choice is considered unstoppable
in its race for Most Valuable Vogue Verb in the linguistic superbowl.

It's a give to the fullback! There goes dominate !

PAT: We just have a moment to wrap up. John, what do you think was the turning
point of the game?

JOHN: It was when dominate began to dominate. That was their game plan, to
dominate on the ground and force the other side to change their strategy,
permitting them to dominate in the air.

PAT: Whatever happened to get momentum ?

JOHN: Got too old, I guess, happens to all of us. Get momentum this year has
been totally dominated by dominate .

PAT: Was dominate this good in college? He wasn't even a first-round draft pick.

JOHN: In those days, he was predominate , which was too long and intellectual.
In the past few years with the pros, dominate shed that extra poundage, that
baby-fat prefix of his, and came into his own this year. The game can't do
without him.  PAT: Nobody else comes close to being verb of the year. I see
they're helping intimidate off the field. Do you suppose dominate will ever be
replaced?

JOHN: Keep your eye on that kid on the bench, domineer - he's even more arrogant
and push-'em-around than dominate and just needs a break to get in there and
dominate dominate .

PAT: Well, they all come from the same house, or domicile, and are accustomed to
ruling the roost. I expect they'll blow 'em away. Our hang-time is up - over to
you, Brent.


Blow 'Em Away

''It was a good, solid fire fight,'' said Vice Adm. Joseph Metcalf 3d,
describing our early military action on Grenada, ''and then we blew them away.''

After White House aides had an advance viewing of an antiwar film, one anonymous
confidant told columnists Evans and Novak: ''This can blow us away.''

''We dominated them the first half,'' a Redskins fan said, in describing the
early- season loss to the Dallas Cowboys, ''and then they blew us away.''

Whence comes this thunderous metaphor for ''defeat decisively''? How come nobody
ever moans, ''They kicked our teeth in,'' or boasts, ''We beat their pants
off''? Who sold short on ''smithereens''?

The answer is going to blow your mind. During the Revolutionary War, when
cannons were firing, they were said to be blowing away ; a common command to
fire was ''Blow away!'' Then a quaint method of execution came to the fore: A
traitor or spy was tied to the mouth of a cannon and with the roar of the
explosion was described as having been ''blown away.''

''The first use of to blow away a person ,'' says lexicographer Stuart Flexner,
''was in this rather gory sense. The term then reappeared, or perhaps appeared
anew, in street-gang use of the 1950's, referring to killing a rival gang member
or stool pigeon. From that street-gang use, it entered - re-entered, really -
the military in the Vietnam War, where our soldiers used it in referring to
killing an enemy or destroying a village.''

Other uses of blowing are still in the wind; we all still blow our stacks, tops,
fuses and gaskets. And it still exists as an archaic euphemism for ''damned'':
In Dickens's ''Our Mutual Friend,'' Fledgely shouts, ''Holiday be blowed!''
expressing a feeling many people have in January.


Genie Out of Bottle

A dialectologist has to hang loose about pronunciation.  Asked about the
pronunciation of San Jose, a city in California, Prof. F. G. Cassidy reports
that the Spanish loan name is most regularly pronounced San HoZAY , but often
loses the h in SANoZAY , and is jocularly referred to occasionally as San JOsie
. Correctness is a function of context: If you're talking to the Chamber of
Commerce, use the first; if you're singing ''Do You Know the Way to San Jose?''
an elision to SANoZAY is appropriate, and if you're kidding around, it's O.K. to
kid around.

When the push of dialectology comes to the shove of etymology, however, great
wordsmen stand their ground. They will make a persuasive pitch for pronunciation
that preserves the root of a word, in the hope that they can affect the language
for the better - that is, the more understandable.

''One word that seems to be making great headway in misbegotten form,'' Dr.
Cassidy complains, ''is homogenous with second-syllable stress.''


''A homogeneous population is easier, less subject to stress because of few
racial or ethnic conflicts'' is a sentence that comes trippingly off the tongues
of demographers, many of whom pronounce the word ho-MOJ-en- us . Wrong.

''The correct etymological form is homogeneous with the third-syllable stress,''
observes Dr. Cassidy, whose Dictionary of American Regional English is eagerly
awaited by dialect freaks the world over and who pronounces the word homo-
GENE-e-ous . It comes from the Greek homos , meaning ''same,'' plus genes (from
genos ), meaning ''kind'' - in other words, of the same kind, as in homogenized
milk , which is not a mixture of milk fluid and butter fat that tends to
separate but a mass that does not separate because it has been processed to make
it all of the same kind.

That's what has been blowing away the old pronunciation of homo-GENE-e-ous .
''The form homogenous is probably due to the influence of homogenized , widely
familiar through its application to milk. If we quite correctly say homogenize ,
we analyze it as homogen- plus -ize and see no harm in using -ous rather than
-ize . So we produce homogen-ous , and there goes that e .''

You lose the e , you confuse the etymology; in a thousand years, who's going to
know how the word came to be? These columns are not chiseled in granite, and
even that breaks down, as Ozymandias discovered. Cassidy stands bestride the
bridge: ''However, to explain the process by which the new form comes about does
not make the product acceptable. Homogeneous, five syllables, with stress on the
third, is etymologically correct - and, though Greek, it rolls off the
English-speaking tongue more naturally than homogenous does anyway.''

If you need a mnemonic, geniuses say homogeneous, and only the shook-up say
homogenous .


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: cartoon

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REVIVING THE RITUALS OF THE DEBUTANTE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4704 words


D. Susan Barron is an assistant professor in the Department of Communications at
Simmons College in Boston. By D. Susan Barron

 OR EVERYTHING THERE IS A SEA son, including one for ''coming out,'' the custom
whereby young women are presented to that privileged circle called ''society.''
Within the past few weeks throughout America, properly credentialed debutantes
have been celebrating the zenith of their season with unabashed enthusiasm. From
Dallas, where an elite handful of debutantes are culminating three months of
social pyrotechnics, to the more restrained provinces of Boston, where the
season is significant though fleeting, it seems fashionable once again to
display the perquisites of wealth and class.

After a decline that augured the end of debutantes, they are re- emerging in
larger numbers. In staid Boston, where recently the ranks had thinned from a
customary 100 young women in the 1940's through 1960 to a modest two dozen in
the late 1970's, a revival is evident. ''The numbers increase each year,''
writes Dana Bisbee, society columnist for a Boston newspaper. ''The desire to
make a debut is clearly coming back.''

In the prismatic social life of New York, more young debutantes are luxuriating
in their revalidation. The waiting list is growing at the New York Debutante
Cotillion and Christmas Ball. Its consultant-director, Lois Best, says, ''We
have tried to keep it to 70 debutantes, but the numbers have crept up each year.
I've done this for many years, but I've seen great enthusiasm in the last two to
three years.'' Last month, in the Art Deco Grand Ballroom of Manhattan's
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, 77 debutantes sang the traditional ''We're Coming Out
Tonight'' at the Debutante Cotillion, which benefits the New York
Infirmary-Beekman Downtown Hospital. The following evening at the Plaza Hotel,
50 young women from old New York families were presented at the low-key but
prestigious Junior Assembly. Two days before the new year, another 50 young
women debuted at the International Debutante Ball at the Waldorf.

To outsiders with limited prospects or interest, the debut remains a curiosity,
a spectacle whose time has passed. To the intoxicated players, it is a ritual, a
celebration of wealth, a familial rite and an affirmation of social identity.
What's more, after more than a decade of feminism and two decades of
countercultural revolt and social upheaval, it offers a refuge from confusion.
For qualified participants in search of validation in uncertain times, it
provides the illusion of position and the solace of belonging.

Amitai Etzioni, sociologist and professor at George Washington University,
attributes the resurgence of debutantes to a ''general search for affirmation,
for what people think may have happened - never mind what really did.''

''In earlier times,'' says Professor Etzioni, ''we had a social order. There
were rules of conduct, guidelines for behavior. Now nothing is clear anymore.
Our present is miserable; our future is uncertain. So the idea of a powerful
Establishment, based on a solid set of rules, appeals to us.''

Contrasting the symbolism of President Carter, who walked to the White House at
his inauguration, with that of the Reagan Administration, he argues, ''President
Reagan represents the relegitimization of the stretched-limousine age. He and
his cohorts have reintroduced the principle that having wealth and flaunting it
are proper social conduct.''

In light of the popular longing for status and the new license to satisfy it,
the re-emergence of the debutante is not so surprising. Etzioni observes,
''After a decade and a half of coming apart, the reconstruction is just
beginning. Now we are just warming up.''



 T BARNARD COLLEGE IN NEW York, where debutantes would have been anachronisms 10
years ago, coming out has regained its acceptability. Marion Salmon, a
19-year-old freshman whose British grandmother was presented to the queen, bowed
at the Debutante Cotillion and the International Debutante Ball last month.
''Though it wasn't very in at Barnard for a long time,'' says Miss Salmon
demurely, ''and a lot of girls refused, now they are closer to their families,
feel more conservative and want to come out. You get into a social circle, and
if you don't do it, you're left behind. I feel that I'm at the edge of something
exciting.''

Miss Salmon's roommate, Joanne Mann, a tall, sophisticated blonde, also made her
debut at the Debutante Cotillion and the Junior Assembly. Though the New York
season typically runs from Thanksgiving through the New Year, Miss Mann, like
many debutantes, inaugurated her season last summer with a dinner dance that
''everyone knew was really a coming-out party.'' Under the close scrutiny of her
mother, Joyce, 600 guests celebrated at the Manns' Southampton, L.I., home
amidst pink and white tents and 11,440 pink and white balloons.

Mrs. Mann, a former Fort Worth and New York debutante, was glad to do it,
particularly after witnessing a period that seemed to mark the end of
debutantes.

''I watched the riots at Columbia during the Vietnam War, when everyone became a
radical,'' Mrs. Mann recalls. ''All the children of rich parents who had no
intention of giving up their advantages became, in quotes, Communists, although
not really, and started talking about Che Guevara. They'd wear old mittens, any
old jackets and wouldn't come out of their jeans.

''All of a sudden, about two years ago, I noticed that all the girls on campus
got into looking pretty, going to parties, wearing those beautiful peasant
skirts and, you know, dressing up.''

In preparation for her debuts, Miss Salmon reduced her academic schedule and her
weight and made repeated visits to be fitted for her gown. She also spent time
being photographed, writing guest lists, making seating arrangements and doing
other things she freely calls ''a nuisance.'' ''In some ways,'' she admits,
''the whole thing is such a hassle, you don't even want to talk about it.''

Nonetheless, Miss Salmon is planning a June presentation at the Palais
Schwarzenberg in Vienna, because ''traditionally, it's the thing to do.'' Miss
Mann, however, has ruled out the Viennese presentation, estimated to cost at
least $9,000, because it seemed ''a bit much.''

Indeed, the expense of launching a daughter into New York society, particularly
via charity balls, can be vexing. A debut at the Debutante Cotillion, for
example, where seating, drinks, dinner and donations are separate items, may
cost parents upward of $2,000. ''The only practical thing about it,'' says one
debutante's mother, ''is that your daughter has officially come out, and you are
spared the expense of giving her a private party.'' Total costs, including
evening gowns for mother and daughter, hair styling, limousines and the like,
can easily exceed $10,000.  Some young women, socially qualified to be
debutantes, decline the opportunity. ''I was invited to come out at the
Infirmary ball,'' says Nicole Morris, a freshman at Hamilton College in Clinton,
N.Y. ''But when I thought of the time and effort involved and the added expense
to my family, I decided not to do it. My friends who are coming out have invited
me to their balls, and I would rather be a guest.''

In a small number of cases, potential debutantes decline invitations on more
philosophical grounds. ''A debut is almost as bad as a wedding,'' explains one
senior at Simmons College in Boston, ''It is so much preparation, hard work and
planning, in order to make such a superficial and unnecessary social statement,
I wonder why so many girls do it. To me, it's just an excuse to have a party.
When I get my first good job, I'll consider that a cause for celebration.''

Absent from the celebrations by reason of birth rather than by choice, are those
who fall outside prescribed social boundaries. For these aspirants, debuts are
less exclusive than exclusionary.

''I live in Pomona, N.Y., went to Saddle River Country Day School in New Jersey,
have a waspy first name, and move around in deb circles,'' explains one young
woman, ''but since I'm a Jew, for whom coming out is not the thing to do, we
just didn't do it.''

When past and present debutantes were telephoned recently and asked if any
Jewish or black women had been presented at the big balls in New York and
Boston, the response was negative. One Manhattan social secretary angrily
refused to reply and hung up. In Dallas, a society editor, who could not recall
any blacks or Jews being included in that city's mabor ball, said that every
ethnic group tended to have its own party.

Although the debutante ritual may be alien - and, indeed, anathema - to many
people, many others, regardless of background, have adopted this traditionally
white, Anglo-Saxon, Protestant custom, which originally announced a young
woman's nubility. Coming out today cuts across cultural and racial boundaries.
In Westchester County, N.Y., young black women debut at the Crystal Ball,
organized by the Westchester Cotillion Committee for Community Services. In
Dallas, Cotillion Idlewild, a 63- year-old group of black professional men,
chooses debutantes on the basis of their intellectual achievements. (The group
originally took its name from Dallas's exclusive club for white men, but,
according to a past president, ''We copied from the white group at the
beginning, but it's not a copy anymore.'') Dallas's Pan American Club, a
Mexican-American organization, holds a very modest party for young women.



 PERHAPS HE CRAVED EXALTATION, OR SOME OBscure romantic release, but James Paul
was inspired by the lushness of the time and its gospel of wealth when he
presented his daughter to Philadelphia society almost 80 years ago. He had
10,000 Brazilian butterflies concealed in gossamer nets near the ballroom
ceiling, where they were to be released at the appointed time. That they
succumbed to the heat and rained down dead proved embarrassing to Paul and
portentous to social skeptics. But the debutantes, less fragile, survived.

Although debutantes managed to waltz through the Depression, not all families
could remain oblivious to changing social conditions. In many cities, chastened
by World War II, lavish private parties gave way to charity events and group
presentations, where the tone was sincere, but muted.

Individualism resurfaced in 1959 when Henry Ford 2d spent an estimated $250,000
for the debut of his 18-year- old daughter, Charlotte. Five rooms of the Country
Club of Detroit were decorated with 18th-century tapestries and medieval arms
and armor. In one corridor, two million magnolia leaves, flown in from
Mississippi, lined the walls. Later that evening, 1,200 guests, including
various Roosevelts, duPonts, Firestones and a Churchill, watched Henry Ford
ascend the Meyer Davis bandstand to lead the orchestra in ''Hey! Ba-Ba-Re-Bop.''

To inquire about Charlotte Ford is to miss the point. Just as, in Yeats's
phrase, one cannot tell the dancer from the dance, one cannot tell the debutante
from her debut. In the romantic mythology of coming out, the two are eternally
united.

Unraveling the debutante's raison d',etre, Dixon Wecter, the social historian
and author of ''The Saga of American Society: A Record of Social Aspiration,
1607-1937,'' wrote almost 50 years ago that in a society in which ''the break-up
of old-time solidarity'' had destroyed many marks of class identification, ''the
social game is a vital means to success, and to keep at it, the only security
against being forgotten.''

Deprived of hereditary nobility, the would-be socialite then must invent himself
through wealth. And, in today's blurred social landscape, costly rituals become
the equivalent of divine right; the debutante, the symbol of success.

For this reason, debutantes have their work cut out for them. Surrounded by the
grim reminders of poverty, joblessness and hunger, they can escape behind social
rank into a private realm of pleasure in which ceremony overcomes confusion, and
the romance of the past obscures the reality of the present. In the murky
outposts of modern society, debutantes, their parents, aspiring friends, social
secretaries and arbiters become artists of a sort. They make the arduous social
battle look effortless. They order the chaos that is ''society'' by shaping it
to their private wishes and dreams of aristocracy. Through their labor, they
often accomplish what other artists do - the creation of an alternative
universe, more exalted than reality.

The New York office of the Society of Mayflower Descendants, founded in 1894,
might be considered an alternative universe. Inspired by the legacy of the past,
its members take sanctuary in a nostalgic pride. Within the office of the
society, memorabilia are displayed: an engraving of William Bradford, Governor
of the Plymouth Colony, signing the Mayflower Compact, a collection of early
china; walls of leather- bound genealogical records, and a framed lithograph of
the Mayflower Compact, a forerunner of the United States Constitution and a
virtual totem of the Mayflower society.

Kathryn B. Schneider, the society's executive secretary, a Pilgrim descendant
and a member of the Daughters of the American Revolution, still remembers a
trip, years ago, to a bank to make a deposit in the group's school fund. A bank
employee told her she belonged to a ''group of ancestor worshippers.''

''It's not that you worship the fact that you come from an old, distinguished
family,'' Mrs. Scheider says, ''but that you try to make yourself worthy of it.
You think of the few brave little people who suffered and endured, and you want
to live up to them for yourself and your country.''

For the past 30 years, the New York society has held a reception and ball at the
Plaza Hotel, where young women between the ages of 17 and 19, officially
confirmed as Mayflower descendants, have their presentation. Their $350 fee,
accompanied by a $150 contribution to the Mayflower Fund, benefits the society's
educational-fund program, through which outstanding New York high-school history
students are awarded each a $50 savings bond and a copy of the Mayflower
Compact.

The Mayflower Society's reception and ball reflects an attention to detail. The
Grand Ballroom is awash in pink, the official color of the New York society. Two
hundred and fifty guests enjoy a dinner of sorrel soup - according to the menu,
''from the cauldrons of Governor Bradford'' - Plymouth turkey and squash and
other authenticated Pilgrim dishes.

At dinner's end, as guests enjoy coffee, the society's governor, William R.
Miller, in white tie and tails, announces the names of the two debutantes:
''Miss Tabitha Ann Mitchell, descendant of John Howland,'' and ''Miss Abby Alden
Spencer, descendant of John Alden.'' To a drum beat provided by Lester Lanin's
orchestra, the two young women, wearing white gowns and carrying pink bouquets
and accompanied by their fathers, walk across the floor, approach the dais,
deeply curtsy to the governor, who presents each with a gold

Mayflower charm suspended from a pink ribbon, and turn to bow to the assembled
guests. Then they and their fathers waltz to the first selection of the evening,
''Tales From the Vienna Woods.''

In Boston, which takes its pleasures in small doses, the debutante season has
dwindled to one largely ignored evening in June, when young women with
private-school backgrounds and three sponsors mingle with family in the ballroom
of the elegant Copley Plaza Hotel. The only event to which the ''public'' is
invited is a winter party at the Park Plaza Hotel. If Boston debutantes are
returning, they are doing it with characteristic discretion. In a town
mistrustful of hedonism, where young women are still cautioned by their mothers
that a ''lady's name appears in print only when she marries and when she dies,''
such pleasures are scrupulously guarded from public scrutiny.

A Boston Brahmin defends the official policy of privacy. ''For inbred Yankees,
and that's what we are, lavish, publicized parties are in poor taste, and kind
of, well, disgusting,'' she says. ''We may laugh about it, but a debut is a
family tradition and, quite frankly, no one else's business.''

Still more impenetrable is the Philadelphia Assembly, the oldest ball in the
United States, where George Washington once danced. Since its inception in 1748,
its subscription lists have been coveted as trophies. But, as Susan Bunting
Pierce, who organized the recent Philadelphia Charity Ball, says, ''You're born
into the Assembly.'' Unlike female-dominated societies, the Philadelphia
Assembly, called by one historian ''the most compact and inviolable little group
of aristocrats in America,'' follows the European mold. It is ruled and
administered by men's rank alone, rather than in association with their wives',
and rank determines membership.

Responding to a request to observe the ball, Elkins Wetherill, a member of the
board of the Philadelphia Assembly, clarifies its position: ''The Assembly is
not, nor has ever been, a debutante party. If a young lady is present and wants
to say she's coming out, that's fine. But, technically, she's a subscriber. And
the event is only for people who are members. I couldn't promise you even a
minor window.''


In Dallas, there apparently are no minor windows, particularly for debutantes.
And a young woman is not really a debutante unless she is an Idlewild debutante,
one of seven or so young women handpicked yearly by members of Idlewild, a
100-year-old gentlemen's club dominated by bankers, ranchers, developers and
assorted oil men. The craving for nobility that characterizes Dallas's social
life has just been officially recognized by Debrett's Peerage, Baronetage,
Knightage and Companionage, Britain's 214- year-old royal social register.
Debrett's has just published its first American version, Debrett's Texas Peerage
- drawn from an aristocracy of wealth.

Though Idlewild members maintain that their criteria for debutante selection are
a secret, one suspects that physical stamina might be considered. From the time
the young woman makes her first bow in her white gown at the Idlewild Ball at
the end of October, until she makes her final bow in her pastel gown at the
Terpsichorean Ball three months later, she will have attended two to three
parties each day in her honor, six days each week; purchased an inestimable
number of ball gowns, cocktail dresses, luncheon dresses, suits and casual wear;
written approximately 1,600 thank-you notes, and learned how to make a full
court bow without toppling as well as how to remain cordial in the face of
battle fatigue.

Though such a regimen might appear excessive, it is natural in Dallas, which
regards the ritual of coming out as the prototype of all social life. Perhaps,
too, debutantes personify their city. They are young, unencumbered by history,
lured by the illusion of limitless possibility.

From behind the wheel of his glossy brown Mercedes 450 SL, DeWitt Ray 3d, the
28- year-old grandson of a Dallas banker and immediate past president of
Idlewild, is expounding on the virtues of a well-planned debutante season. ''I
want a win-win situation here in Dallas, because that's an unspoken law,'' says
Mr. Ray, who has made his fortune in investment banking. ''Everything is tied
in. Civic, business and social affairs. This is a community where people work
with folks they know, and surround themselves with the best of everything.''

Bred to the belief that there are no problems, only opportunities, Mr. Ray
projects this philosophy warmly to the parents of potential debutantes. Over
lunch, he explains, as fully as Idlewild Club policy allows, the steps leading
to the selection of the debutantes.

''Our main question always is: 'How can we involve the best people, the ones who
have made the strongest impact, more directly into the community?' We're always
looking for somebody who has something to offer Dallas, whether civically,
socially or politically. So we don't seek out the debs just for the frivolity of
having a party, but to make a statement for the city.

''When we talk to the families, and they ask us, 'Can we really do the job,
representing Dallas?' - why, that's just fabulous. That shows their concern and,
boy, do I love to see that.

''And you know, the families who do present their daughters tell us that
spending so much time together throughout the deb season, doing so much, has
brought them closer than they ever were before. It's a bond they never lose.''

In a city in which social and business interests are intricately linked, the
debutante is as much a booster as the chamber of commerce. When Gwendolyn
Kakaska, now 24, was presented by Idlewild four years ago, she immediately
acquired civic responsibilities. ''All of a sudden, I was on a list,'' she
recalls. ''I was invited to every function that went on - symphonies, theater,
music. They know a deb will spend that year, buy tickets and patronize new
restaurants because they're supposed to. It's their season.

''The men who are the names here,'' she adds, ''they're out front, and we like
it that way. We back them and help them do their business.''

For the debutante's parents, who may spend an estimated $50,000 to $300,000 for
a private party, it is ''a heavy- duty social scene,'' says one Dallas society
editor. ''Coming up with anywhere from $50,000 to $500,000 in cash for the
season is a sizable thing, but most of the families want it because it is
networking, and they need the exposure.''


Sistie Stollenwerck, the wife of Henry Stollenwerck, a Dallas trial lawyer,
remembers the spring of 1976, when the president of Idlewild invited the
Stollenwercks to present their daughter, Brooke.

''At the time, he wasn't all that specific,'' recalls Mrs.  Stollenwerck, a
large, robust blonde dressed in black and red silk and abundant gold jewelry.
''He told us they were interested, and our only obligation was to have a ball.''

Mrs. Stollenwerck, driving home in her turquoise Mercedes sedan, dramatically
recounts how she and her husband decided to stage a circus. Because of space
needs, the party eventually had to be held in the Dallas Convention Center,
which posed difficulties. ''First, there was a problem with food. We didn't want
their barbecue,'' she says, referring to the center's regular fare. ''We wanted
hamburgers, fries, circus types of food. Then we had to get a permit from the
city to park cars at the center, and the permit was $1,000. Then $1,000 for
extra security for all the doors, and other things that don't come up when you
go to one of the country clubs.

''I worried before the party, 'What have I done?' because sometimes you can be
so different it can go over like a lead balloon. Here, we had to buy bowler
hats, all the games, we had to come up with prizes, buy 5,000 balloons with
Brooke's name on them, 5,000 stuffed animals and special money printed so that
people could play the games.

''In the center ring, we had Brooke's name painted in the center star. My name
and Henry's were painted in the corners. But those in the circus got so
involved; they were just so grand. Going into the sideshow, a man posted 20-foot
canvases of the family. I was the fat lady. Brooke was the snake charmer. We had
a lady who had a bird act; we had dancing camels, bears on a unicycle; two
orchestras, one regular and a rock group. The orchestra conductor, I forget his
name, left early. He got mad because he couldn't compete with all the animals.
But the party went on until about 1 A.M., when we ran out of stuffed animals.''

Mrs. Stollenwerck leads the way into her rambling brick house in the Preston
Hollow area of North Dallas, and sits down on a cream-colored sofa in the
family's trophy room. On a beige silk-covered wall are the heads of greater
kudus, nyalas, wart hogs and wildebeests, shot on a recent trip to South Africa.
Later, her daughter, Brooke Frampton, now married and the owner of a foreign-car
dealership, arrives.

''Yes, I was a debutante, and it gave me so much, in the way of social mobility,
and contacts with the most prominent people in Dallas,'' says Mrs. Frampton,
running a graceful, manicured hand over her cream-colored leather pants. ''But I
was 21 then, I had that fairy tale, and now it's time to go on.

''Now, I import foreign cars, and people I don't even know who come to my
dealership remember my party and say, 'Aren't you the girl with the circus?' ''

''I'll admit that our two boys felt a little left out,'' Mrs. Stollenwerck says
as she points to an animal trophy on the wall. ''We had to do something
comparable for them, so we took them on a safari to Africa.''


Just what the debutante season in Dallas is all about provokes opinion. Nancy
Smith, society editor of The Dallas Times Herald, claims that debutante parties
are the oldest social events in Dallas. ''Dallas has so few traditions, really,
that these debuts are the only Old Guard thing around,'' she says.

Joe Frantz, professor of history at the University of Texas in Austin, and a
noted social historian of Texas, fails to find tradition at the root of the
Dallas debut. ''I could be sent down here by General Dynamics with Texas
millions that are 15 minutes old, and my daughter would make it,'' he says.
''Texas was poor for a long time and is having a late catch-up. When America
began to get rich in the latter part of the 19th century, there were fabulous
deb parties. So Texans are trying to emulate this past. They are really behind
the times.''

The night before the Idlewild Ball, I am sitting in a limousine at 4 in the
morning listening to a young man describe a conflict rarely spoken of but often
felt in Dallas: old versus new money. The issue, though, is hardly confined to
Texas.

''One hundred and ten years ago, there was nothing here,'' he says, looking out
on an illuminated parking lot crowded with Cadillacs. ''The fourth generation is
as old as you can get here. They have the prestige, but trouble holding on to
all their money. With each generation, they lose a little, then a little more.
They need the new Dallas, the industries, the capital. And these
first-generation millionaires depend on the older families to bring them into
the network. But each resents the other and wants supremacy, and their children
get caught in the whirlwind.

''My mother always told me that the very worst thing that could ever happen to a
person was to have the money and the power and position, and then lose it. We
all live with the fear of slipping.''

On the night of the ball, the crimson ballroom of the Fairmont Hotel,
illuminated by thousands of twinkling lights, resembles a forest. Arches of
greenery, towering trees, urns filled with fragrant hyacinths dominate the room,
which soon becomes a blur of diamonds, ruffles and velvet. Women in haute
couture gowns, and men in white tie and tails wait for the presentation of the
first Idlewild debutante.

She is first not alphabetically but in order of social importance. As DeWitt Ray
explains it, because the first debutante of the season is escorted by the
president of Idlewild, she should be ''the girl who is most steeped in
tradition, the one with the strongest legacy.''

Mr. Ray announces her from a podium in front of the Harvey Anderson orchestra:
''Miss Catherine Anne Corrigan, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Leo Francis Corrigan
Jr.''

The daughter of Mr. Corrigan, a second-generation Texan, a real-estate magnate
with an estimated worth of $150 million and Mr. Ray's uncle, crosses the
elevated stage to the orchestral strains of ''As Time Goes By.'' Dressed in a
long, white gown with a huge, gold-embroidered sunburst on the bodice and
carrying a bouquet of red roses, Miss Corrigan approaches the spotlight, bends
her right knee, lowers herself gingerly to the floor and, to the collective
holding of breaths, gracefully executes the Dallas court bow.

''Had she not wobbled a little,'' says one of the guests, ''it would have been
absolutely perfect.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Joanne Mann dressing for Debutante Cotillion; photo of Dallas
debutante Cynthia Canfield; photo of dozen of 77 women presented at New York's
Cotillion

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 970 words


January 15, 1984Fiction 1211

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  2120

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  3330

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  4104

BERLIN GAME, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $15.95.) Espionage on both sides of the
Iron Curtain.  5420

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  6719

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  7129

MORETA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  859

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfilling a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  969

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A detective from Earth
investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  10811

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
11117

THE NEVERENDING STORY, by Michael Ende. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A lonely boy meets
challenges and finds his true self in a magical land.  121324

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  131417

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  14932

RETURN OF THE JEDI, adapted by Joan D. Vinge. (Random House, $6.95.) Illustrated
storybook based on the latest ''Star Wars'' film.  151516

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.



 Nonfiction 1117

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2353

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  3218


THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  4420

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  5662

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

6713

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $22.50.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the recent PBS television series.  758

WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.  8811

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.

91039

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon. (Atlantic/Little, Brown, $17.50.) A
report on a trip through the back roads of America.  10132

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random, $25.) Man's search to know
himself and the world over the centuries.  11154

THE KINGDOM BY THE SEA, by Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) A
novelist's journey around Great Britain.  1295

ONE BRIEF SHINING MOMENT, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $25.) A
profusely illustrated tribute to John F. Kennedy.  131175

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  14 2

APPROACHING HOOFBEATS: HORSEMEN OF THE APOCALYPSE, by Billy Graham. (Word Books,
$11.95.) The evangelist's interpretation of the Book of Revelation.  15142

LATE NIGHT THOUGHTS ON LISTENING TO MAHLER'S NINTH SYMPHONY, by Lewis Thomas.
(Viking, $12.95.) Essays on a wide range of subjects by the physician-medical
administrator.





Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 1215

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  215

THE HUMAN BODY, by Jonathan Miller. (Viking, $16.95.) A pop-up book illustrating
the workings of the human body.  3531

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  4494

JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) An exercise book for
women, seasoned by the film star's philosophy of physical well-being.  5 12

THE MARY KAY GUIDE TO BEAUTY.  (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) An illustrated guide
for women prepared by the staff of a cosmetics firm.



The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: listlist And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of
particular interest)

BLACK APOLLO OF SCIENCE: The Life of Ernest Everett Just, by Kenneth R. Manning.
(Oxford, $29.95.) This biography of a black biologist depicts the interplay of
his genius with a racist society.

THE BOURGEOIS EXPERIENCE: Victoria to Freud. Education of the Senses, by Peter
Gay. (Oxford, $25.) The first volume of this immensely ambitious work
concentrates on Victorian sexuality.

DOSTOEVSKY: The Years of Ordeal 1850-1859, by Joseph Frank.  (Princeton, $25.)
The second volume of a multivolume biography spans the decade of Dostoyevsky's
and exile in Siberia.

THE IDEA OF POVERTY: England in the Early Industrial Age, by Gertrude
Himmelfarb. (Knopf, $25.) A study that attempts to extract the concept of
poverty from the literature of 1750-1850.

IN SEARCH OF MIND: Essays in Autobiography, by Jerome Bruner. (Harper & Row,
$20.) A fun book by a serious man, giving a rare and engrossing picture of a
scientist at work.

PITCH DARK, by Renata Adler. (Knopf, $12.95.) Like ''Speedboat,'' Miss Adler's
new novel reflects her analytical mind and ebullient style. It also has an
old-fashioned real story to tell, a love story.

STONES FOR IBARRA, by Harriet Doerr. (Viking, $14.95.) This first novel by a
73-year-old American who writes like a poet reveals a distinctive vision of life
in a Mexican village.

THE SUCCESSION: A Novel of Elizabeth and James, by George Garrett.  (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Not just the story of the transfer of power from Elizabeth I to James I
but an achievement in fiction.

WINSTON S. CHURCHILL: Finest Hour 1939-1941, by Martin Gilbert. (Houghton
Mifflin, $40.) The sixth volume of the official biography unfolds on a scale
appropriate to its heroic subject.

list

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIEQUES: ISLAND OF SLOWER RHYTHMS

BYLINE: By David Binder

SECTION: Section 10; Page 37, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1615 words


There is something about a middlingsize island that concentrates the mind as
much as it stirs fantasy, whether it be Manhattan or Diego Garcia.  It is the
scale of such a place that performs both functions: small enough so that you can
survey its entirety from some lofty vantage point, large and strange enough to
invite exploration.

In my case, the concentration and fantasy are focused on Vieques, an island
about twice the size of Manhattan lying a few miles off and belonging to Puerto
Rico.

Vieques possesses some 50 beaches of various shapes and sizes, a mountain with a
small rain forest, a reputation as a Spanish Main pirate hideout, a 19th-century
fort, some straggling villages, a wildly disparate collection of Christian and
Christian-cum-voodoo churches, a fundamentalist radio station, a few telephones,
remnants of vast sugar plantations, a tiny fishing fleet, a U.S. Navy
bombing-strafing range, a Marine training base, land crabs of considerable
dimensions, mango trees, coconut palms, tree frogs, dogs, goats, mongooses, a
hundred or so wild horses, cows, some cattle rustlers, a handful of English and
American expatriates and about 4,000 Hispanic natives.

It is an oddity in a sea full of islands spiked with high-rise Caribbean
condominiums and resort hotels, including Puerto Rico itself, catering yearly to
millions of sallow yanquis.

In a paradox fostered largely by the Navy's atavistic desire for overseas bases
even in an age of nuclear submarines and missiles, Vieques remains almost
pristine: No newspapers, no casinos, tolerable road traffic, company if you like
it and places where you can be by yourself morning, noon or night.  The Navy
acquired a lease on about two-thirds of the island in 1941, but has been
compelled since to allow residents and visitors to roam on most of its
anachronistically fenced and desultorily guarded lands.

About once a year the Navy stages maneuvers on and around Vieques.  Dullish
booms of gunnery practice can occasionally be heard off the southern shores, as
can the bombing and strafing runs of Navy fighters on targets secluded at the
eastern tip of the island--far from populated areas.  Marine units occasionally
practice amphibious landings inside the perimeters of Camp Garcia, on the
southeastern coast, which is usually open for swimming, fishing and sailing.

Despite its accessibility, one-and-a-half hours by ferry from Fajardo, at the
northeastern tip of Puerto Rico, and a few minutes by small plane, Vieques
conveys a strong sense of remoteness.  Once there, you feel mas afuera--far out.
It is a place where you read old newspapers and magazines, old novels, too.

The rhythms of the island have their own cycles.  Horses badly spavined appear
suddenly in the cone of the car's headlights, crossing the road at close to
midnight.  At 2 A.M., dogs bark in a rising contrapuntal chorus as they chase
stray cattle.  A few hours later, at first light, tropical birds commence
chattering and chirping.  Egrets strut around in the swamps anticipating the
ticks they will find later on the backs of cows and bulls.  Tree frogs ululate
an endless divertimento for flutes.  Aside from the frogs and dogs, nocturnal
Vieques seems bereft of its own music.  Where was the vivid salsa of Puerto Rico
except on the main island itself?  That the music exists was proven by a school
class of Vieques children who sang their way one day the whole 17 miles from
dockside at Isabela Segunda aboard the ferry to Fajardo, con gusto.

To compensate, perhaps, the proprietor of La Casa del Frances, a former
plantation house functioning now as a small hotel, played Beethoven when he
served chicken and Mozart with fish dishes for candle-lit dinner.  There was
another stereo system in the lush garden beyond the tiled floor of the loggia
amplifying the sounds of tree frogs in an obbligato that went very well with
Wolfgang Amadeus, less so with Ludwig.  The mind that dared that musical leap to
record the ubiquitous sounds of the frogs after a heavy rain and then play them
back in concert with classics belongs to Irving Greenblatt, late of eastern
Massachusetts.  Irving, working on his fourth year of voluntary expatriation,
wore a T-shirt that bore the legend, COMO UN TIGRE--like a tiger.  He had a
small gray mustache in the style of Clark Gable's, a rum drink in his hand, and
soft brown eyes.  His aim, after a career in publishing, appeared to be to
induce others to follow his life style.

La Casa itself displayed a hacienda splendor in its atrium garden and, again, in
the tended jungle of reds, lavenders and greens beyond the porch: mallows, aloe,
tiny firecracker flowers, ripening coconuts, bananas, mangoes and, farther
beyond, the orange-red of flamboyant trees.  This was the work of Stacey Notine,
another expatriate, who has the touch that makes plants, animals and friendship
flourish.  She has brought two of the island's abused paso fino horses, the
prancing descendants of conquistador mounts, back to shining form.  (Her touch
was not in time to prevent a two-horse collision on a sharp Vieques road curve
that was fatal to both steeds a few years ago.)

Stacey knew other island types who had fallen under Vieques' spell.  There was
Terry Price, a Yorkshireman who served on Royal Navy minesweepers out of Hull in
World War II, worked for a stretch in the merchant marine, tried corporate
America with a tire company and made his way to Vieques in a fortuitous
used-yacht deal.  He paints in oils, haunting seascapes and portraits of locals,
and sculptures in scrap iron--fish, horses, birds--''for myself.'' You visit him
on invitation using four-wheel drive over two steep ridges and past five
Doberman pinschers.  His library shows he prefers the Celtic Dawn to the Celtic
Twilight.  There was Duffy, also in his early 60's, ex-ship's engineer,
photographer, promoter, who had also planted children and restaurants on several
continents.  On Vieques he has two children and three restaurants.  There was
Doug, a Vietnam vet who made shell jewelry, and Mickey, another veteran who
climbed palms barefoot to retrieve fronds that he wove into women's purses,
giant grasshoppers and other designs.

Along with the expatriates there was the perverse attraction of a heritage of
colonialism: the bottomless sadness of a native population condemned to food
stamps, welfare payments, unemployment--to uselessness, as if the sometime
Spanish name for Vieques, Las Islas Inutiles, applied to the people as well as
the island.  On the road from Isabela Segunda to Esperanza an old blind man
walked a mile each afternoon under the hot sun in a ragged jacket and cap,
tapping familiar trees and bushes with his thick cane to find his way to a
tavern.  It is a forlorn quality that appears in the paintings of Romon Guzman
Velez, the 26-year-old surrealist whose Puerto Rican trucks and ramshackle
houses hang in the clouds, as if striving to get closer to heaven, or in the
declaration of the beer drinker to no one in particular on a Good Friday in the
Vistamar Restaurant: ''I speak American, but why you no speak Spanish?'' It was
a remark that would sit well with the Puerto Rican authors convened last spring
at Rutgers University who were trying to cope with their people's national
dichotomy.

On an island like Vieques, small things loom larger.  One day a search party
from the Department of Natural Resources in San Juan went up into the rain
forest heights of Pirata, the 1,000-foot mountain at the western tip, and found
a plant thought to be extinct, a variety of Bromeliad.  To reach Pirata the
party had to enter the forbidden grounds of the Navy's weapons depot.

Forbidden, but not inaccesible.  Recently a friendly Coast Guard officer was
traveling about Vieques checking and renewing navigation aids and drove deep
into the base area on his mission until he was seized by a patrol.  Security
officers, embarrassed at the breach, interrogated him until they discovered that
he had crossed in simply on the strength of his vehicle's Government license
plate.

If you wake up early enough you can accompany Alicio Ayala, the grizzled
one-toothed boatman of the Vieques Fishermen's Cooperative, on a troll along the
Caribbean coast.  He starts his outboard about 7 A.M. in the harbor of Esperanza
and heads for Sun Bay, where he expertly casts a weighted throw net until he has
enough sardines for bait.  He hooks them on midwater jigs and then cruises the
coves.  It might be mostly mackerel, but once in a while you may hook a
magnificent red snapper.  Cooked in wine and vinegar at the Casa, it is a
special treat.

Gradually you come to associate Vieques with treasure, as the aboriginal Taino
Indians and later the pirates did.  Snorkeling in the southern bays you could
find a sizable helmet shell on the sea bottom--fluted brown, pink, white, black
and creamy beige.  A shell merchant on the north coast said they were worth up
to $15.  However, it took Tito, the carpenter at La Casa, over an hour to
extricate the organs of a helmet shell with a bent coathanger.

Is it a kind of paradise, sitting of an evening at the outdoor bar of the Casa
sipping a Don Q rum drink or a Corona beer, seeing the younger folk cope with
love or puppy love, listening to Caribbean rhythms on the radio and watching the
stars come out?  After the wild horses, the land crabs the helmet shells and the
expatriates you sense there are still unexplored dimensions.

''You didn't screw up, so you car come back,'' said Irving Greenblatt by way of
invitation.

I think I will.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of 19th-century fort; map of Vieques Island

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FIRING ON MARINES SETS OFF SHELLING BY U.S. BATTLESHIP

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Jan. 15


The battleship New Jersey shelled rocket and mortar positions in the hills east
of Beirut today after United States Marines came under heavy fire and a Marine
Corps fuel depot was set ablaze.

Maj. Dennis K. Brooks, a Marine spokesman, said in a statement that the
destroyer Tattnall also joined in the counterattack in the first United States
naval action in Lebanon in nearly a month. Both ships, he said, fired their
five-inch guns. He said there were no Marine casualties.

Major Brooks did not say who was shooting at the marines based at the
international airport, but civilians at the airport said rockets, mortars and
fire from antiaircraft guns came from hills that are occupied by Druse
militiamen.



Battle Raged Three Hours

Major Brooks said the marines responded with all the weapons at their disposal,
including 155-millimeter howitzers, in a battle that raged for three hours.

Major Brooks did not say how many shells the New Jersey and the Tattnall fired
today, but a Pentagon spokesman in Washington, according to a report reaching
here, said the two ships fired 120 rounds. That was twice as many as a Marine
spokesman said were fired the last time American ships off Lebanon opened fire
in December.

The major said the fuel depot was struck by mortar shells and rockets. Witnesses
said the depot looked like a cauldron of orange flames with a tower of black
smoke rising high into the sky.



Bullets Ricocheted Off Terminal

As the fighting began at about 3:30 P.M., machine-gun bullets and antiaircraft
shells sprayed over the heads of the marines and ricocheted off the walls of the
airport's main terminal, where about 500 people were waiting for flights.

One bullet shattered the windshield of a Middle East Airlines Boeing 707 jet
that had just arrived from London and was parked on the apron, according to
Salim Salaam, the chairman and president of the airline. He said the plane was
empty and no one was hurt.

Mr. Salaam said airline employees led waiting passengers to a lounge on the
lowest floor of the terminal, grouped them near the reinforced corners of the
building and told them to stay away from the windows.



'They Didn't Panic'

''They all did very well,'' Mr. Salaam said, ''They didn't panic. We served them
refreshments, drinks and sandwiches.''

Five Middle East Airlines aircraft that had been approaching the airport when
the shooting started were diverted to Cyprus.  Major Brooks said the fighting
ended at 6:30 P.M. Mr. Salaam said the militiamen formally agreed, through a
standing cease-fire committee, to stop firing at 7:45 P.M. and at 8:20 P.M. the
airport reopened with the departure of a flight for Jidda, Saudi Arabia. Forty
minutes later a Middle East Airlines jet flying from New York via Paris landed
and was soon followed by the planes that had been sent to Cyprus.

Ships in the United States flotilla off Lebanon last fired their guns on Dec. 18
after United States aircraft came under antiaircraft fire in the mountains about
10 miles east of the capital. The Marine spokesman said that at that time the
guided-missile cruiser Ticonderoga and the Tattnall fired a total of 60 rounds.

Called Into Action Twice Before The 45,000-ton New Jersey, which was put into
mothballs after brief duty in Vietnam and recommisioned in late 1982 at a cost
of $326 million, has been called into action in Lebanon only twice before, on
Dec. 14 and again on Dec. 15, both times against antiaircraft positions in
Syrian-controlled territory east of Beirut along the main highway to Damascus.

Only once, on Dec. 14, has the battleship fired its 16-inch guns, with shells
that weigh 1,900 pounds. The Marine spokesman said the ship fired 11 rounds that
day.

The fighting at the airport further dimmed hopes that a much-delayed plan to
disengage the warring factions in Lebanon would soon be put into effect.

Shortly before the fighting broke out at the airport, Donald Rumsfeld, President
Reagan's special Middle East envoy, arrived from Tel Aviv. He has been in the
region since last week, apparently trying to help in the carrying out of the
disengagement plan that the United States believes can contribute to building a
climate in which it may be possible to withdraw the marines gracefully.

Syrians Reported Adamant On Thursday and Friday he met in Damascus with
President Hafez al-Assad of Syria and Syria's Foreign Minister, Abdel Halim
Khaddam. But reports from there indicate the Syrians remained adamant in their
demand that they would stand in the way of any steps toward peace in Lebanon
until the Beirut Government abrogates the agreement it signed with Israel last
May 17. The agreement, as finally amended, provides for the simultaneous
withdrawal of Israeli and Syrian troops.

Tonight the Israeli television reported that during his trip to Israel Mr.
Rumsfeld told Defense Minister Moshe Arens and the Foreign Ministry Director
General, David Kimche, that there was little chance of putting the agreement
with Lebanon into effect.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ZHAO'S WIT PROVES TO BE A MATCH FOR MAYOR

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 971 words


Zhao Ziyang held his Tiffany's crystal seal of New York aloft, showing the
assembled crowd his latest American gift.

''Turn it around,'' Mayor Koch told Mr. Zhao. ''You're holding it backwards.''

And so began an encounter yesterday between the Mayor of New York and the Prime
Minister of China. For the first time during his nine-day tour of America, Mr.
Zhao shed his deliberate, and somewhat stiff, demeanor and seemed to relax and
enjoy himself at a Gracie Mansion lunch in his honor.



Catches the Mayor's Style

He caught the Mayor's bantering style and deftly lobbed it back, with a wit and
animation that charmed the 80 assembled guests, mostly New York City and State
officials.

The Mayor quickly set the tone when he said that, in a private meeting, the two
men had exchanged views. ''But because of protocol,'' he said, ''I can't tell
you how we disposed of Hong Kong, Vietnam and other problems.''

Then Mr. Koch strayed from his prepared remarks to tell the Prime Minister about
the recent visit to New York of the Mayor of Peking, Chen Xitong.  ''You should
promote him,'' he said, adding an aside to the audience that he hoped that Mayor
Chen would ''do the same for me.''

Then it was Mr. Zhao's turn. He raised his arm above his head and said archly,
through an interpreter, ''As far as my personal wishes are concerned, I would
like to see Mayor Koch promoted to an ever higher and higher position.''

As the Mayor and his guests roared with laughter, Mr. Zhao continued with a neat
jab at the Taiwan issue he has been talking about all week in more serious
tones.

''But I don't think I can make this a commitment in front of the reporters
because if I did that, the State Department will complain that the Premier of
China is interfering in U.S. internal affairs.'' That is exactly the phrase he
has been using to explain why the United States should not interfere in the
Taiwan issue.

And so they went, back and forth. Asked why he was serving the Prime Minister
marinated scallops and chicken Florentine instead of the ''authentic American
beef stew'' he had promised, Mr. Koch shrugged, ''I looked in the wrong pot.''

Before lunch, the Prime Minister was given a grand - and swift - Gotham tour. As
hundreds of police officers blocked off city streets, his 30-car motorcade left
the Plaza Hotel.

Most New Yorkers didn't give the procession a second look, except those who
loudly cursed the traffic snarl it caused.

One tourist staying in the hotel, however, turned to another in wonder. ''Whose
motorcade is that?'' she asked. ''Do you think it's a soap opera star?''

''I hope it's Burt Reynolds,'' her friend replied.

Visits the Met

Accompanied by a coterie that included the United States Ambassador to Peking,
Arthur W. Hummel Jr., and the Chinese Ambassador to Washington, Zhang Wenjin,
Mr. Zhao started with an early trip to the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

He looked at paintings of Chinese sages with wispy beards, calligraphy exhibits,
and then was shown the Ming garden with its dramatically shaped rocks and bamboo
and banana trees. He was given two presents by museum officials: a book on the
Met's Chinese treasures and a film showing the construction of the Ming garden,
which opened in 1981.

At the World Trade Center, Mr. Zhao received yet another gift, this time a
silver medallian showing the activities of the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey.

''I hope you will recommend businessmen here participate in China's
modernization,'' Mr. Zhao told Alan Sagner, chairman of the Port Authority.

Sees Statue of Liberty

It was a theme he has repeated often in his meetings with Americans, both in
Washington and in San Francisco, where he spent two days before coming to New
York.

In New York, as he has throughout his trip, Mr. Zhao urged a closer friendship
between his country and the United States that would lead to an infusion of
foreign capital, technology and trade.

Mr. Sagner told the Prime Minister that he would find every New York official
eager to promote such trade, since the jobs of 150,000 New Yorkers depend on the
import-export business.  The Prime Minister then met the Lady in the Harbor,
taking a quick Circle Line tour boat for a brief trip around the Statue of
Liberty. A tugboat saluted Mr. Zhao with an arching, All-American spray of red,
white and blue waterspouts.

Back at the Plaza, Mr. Zhao was interviewed by the television networks.

Serenaded by John Denver

At lunch, he struck a lighter tone. He was serenaded by John Denver, who was
introduced by Mayor Koch as a singer who is ''as famous in China as he is in
America.'' Afterward, the Chinese press asked their American counterparts who
the singer was. ''We've never heard of him,'' said one reporter.

Mr. Denver, wearing a Big Apple lapel pin, told the Prime Minister about a trip
to China he took in 1981. He sang a song he had written about the country called
''Shanghai Breezes.''

About his day in New York, which ended with a meeting with members of the city's
Chinese-American community and a dinner given by David Rockefeller and Henry A.
Kissinger at the Council on Foreign Relations, he remarked: ''New York is the
biggest city in the United States and plays a very important role in American
political, economic and cultural life. Some people say New York is a miniature
of the U.S. and that one cannot claim to have been in the U.S. without visiting
New York.

''Others say that New York does not represent the U.S. It's difficult to say
which position is right.''

''Nevertheless,'' Mr. Zhao concluded with a grin that indicated which camp he
was in, ''it is universally acknowledged that New York is a world famous city.
As the Chinese saying goes, better to see once than to hear 100 times.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Zhao Ziyang

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Required Reading On Presidents

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 417 words


If CBS were to run a computer composite of the last five Presidents of the
United States - Ronald Reagan, Jimmy Carter, Gerald Ford, Richard Nixon, Lyndon
Johnson - the resulting image would appear no more frightening than your average
neighborhood used car salesman.

At the end of Eisenhower's second term, some wag remarked that ''Truman proved
anyone could be President; Eisenhower proved that no one had to be President.''

That is the good news. As we enter 1984, no one has to be President. The
American people are pretty much in charge of their own lives.


Jobless Veterans

''Few Grunts Need Apply,'' from a pamphlet entitled ''Recovery? What Recovery?''
published in Washington by the Rural Coalition, a national alliance of rural
organizations:

Rural areas contributed more than their share of soldiers to the Vietnam War
(West Virginia headed the list, on a per capita basis), so it's not surprising
that jobless Vietnam veterans can be found in practically every small town
across America. The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that 520,000 Vietnam
-era vets - one out of every 14 who served between 1964 and 1975 - were
unemployed as of November, compared to 720,000 a year ago.

That's an overall improvement, but unemployment remains disturbingly high (12
percent) among vets aged 25- 29. This group includes many of the last to serve
in the war. They found it particularly hard to adjust to a society that wanted
to forget the whole thing. They've had trouble getting jobs. They've had trouble
finishing school. They've had trouble, period.

The so-called ''emergency jobs bill'' passed by Congress last March included
$150 million for subsidized jobs for veterans. In December the Labor Department
and the Veterans Administration began awarding job training grants. Employers
are reimbursed up to $10,000 for a veteran trained on the job and, for the
disabled, training may last up to 15 months.

The Administration says 5,000 employers have expressed interest in the program
and predicts finding jobs for as many as 50,000 vets eventually. Publicists are
trying to use the program to demonstrate that the Administration does indeed
have a heart. Typically, they don't mention that the program exists only because
of pressure from veterans' groups (the Administration opposed the bill
originally in Congress). And they don't mention that, at most, fewer than 10
percent of the jobless veterans will be able to get into the program, because of
underfunding.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STUDY FINDS SIGNIFICANT DROP IN FINANCIAL AID FOR STUDENTS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 566 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 15


After two decades of rapid growth, the amount of financial aid available for
college students has dropped by $2 billion in the last two years, the College
Board said today.

The decline from a peak of $18 billion in 1981-82 is even greater if inflation
is taken into account, according to ''Trends in Student Aid: 1963 to 1983,'' a
study prepared by the board's Washington office.

Allowing for inflation, the real value of student aid has dropped 21 percent in
the 1980's, the board said in the study financed by the Ford Foundation.

The report traced most of that decline to a decision in 1981 by the Reagan
Administration and Congress to gradually end Social Security benefits for
college students, to restrictions on eligibility for Guaranteed Student Loans
and to a drop in the use of veterans' benefits.

Federal Contributions Put at 80%

But that diminution comes after a period in which ''the Federal Government
became by far the largest contributor to student aid,'' the report said, adding,
''Almost 80 percent of total assistance now comes through Federal programs; less
than 40 percent of aid in the early 1960's was Federal in origin.''

The amount of aid from Federal, state and institutional sources surged from $546
million in 1963-64 to $4.5 billion in 1970-71, to $10.5 billion in 1975-76 and
to more than $18 billion in 1981-82.  It dropped to an estimated $16.1 billion
in the current academic year.

Even after adjusting for inflation, the growth in student aid has been dramatic.
In terms of what the dollar was worth in 1982, there was $1.7 billion in aid
available in 1963-64, $10.9 billion by 1970-71 and $18.2 billion by 1975-76, the
study said.

The value of student aid dipped for several years until Congress passed the
Middle Income Student Assistance Act in 1978, then ''fell off again at the
beginning of the 1980's,'' the report said.

Decline in Veterans' Benefits

Veterans' benefits began to decline in the mid-1970's as Vietnam-era veterans
began to exhaust their eligibility. The study noted that veterans and Social
Security benefits grew ''faster than other sources in the 1960's and early 70's
and have declined more precipitously in recent years.''

To provide outright grants based on need, Congress established the Basic
Educational Opportunity Grants in 1972. The law extended this aid to
middle-income students and also made students eligible for subsidized loans,
regardless of income.

In 1981, Congress made students from families with incomes of more than $30,000
prove need for loans. The Guaranteed Student Loan program still provides loans
of up to $2,500 to 2.7 million students, and 2.5 million students get Basic
Grants averaging almost $1,000 apiece.

The board said the annual cost of tuition, room and board at private
universities increased from $2,105 in 1963-64 to $8,537 in 1982-83. For public
universities, the cost went from $1,026 to $3,403.

The average amount of aid available per full-time-equivalent student grew by 378
percent from 1963-64 to 1980-81. In the 1980's, adjusting for inflation, aid per
full-time-equivalent student has dropped 23 percent.

The study was prepared by Donald A. Gillespie, a policy analyst for the College
Board, and Nancy Carlson, a former research assistant. The report can be
purchased for $8 from College Board Publications, Box 886, New York, N.Y.,
10101.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: STATISTICS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FAILINGS OF THE KISSINGER REPORT

BYLINE: By Arthur Schlesinger Jr.  ;
Arthur Schlesinger Jr., the historian, is Schweitzer Professor in the Humanities
at the City University of New York.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1671 words


The Report of the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America is a serious
document. It is literate, at times eloquent; it conveys much useful information;
it is reasoned in analysis and humane in values; and it represents a valiant
attempt to deal with intractable problems. It is also seriously deficient in its
sense of political reality.

The Kissinger commission's thesis is that the exploitation of Central American
unrest by the Soviet Union and Cuba threatens our security interests. The
answer, the commission says, lies in offering pro-United States regimes military
assistance to defeat externally supported insurgency and economic assistance to
overcome the misery and depression that set off insurgency.

1. The Soviet threat.

Moscow unquestionably aims to benefit from Central American turmoil. But how?
What goals are attainable? What risks is it prepared to run? What costs to pay?
Instead of rigorous analysis, the commission rests its case for a dire Soviet
threat on what Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan correctly calls a ''doctrinal
position,'' dressed up with perfunctory military arguments.

The report broods about the danger to our Caribbean shipping lanes. But in what
circumstances would Moscow try to ''interdict'' shipping? Only in the event of
general war - and, with nuclear missiles flying, the sinking of oil tankers
would be of small consequence, nor would Soviet military installations matter in
Cuba or elsewhere. And Moscow knows it cannot establish nuclear missile bases in
the Western Hemisphere in 1984 any more than it could in 1962. As for economic
aid to pro-Marxist states, why, as the Latin Americans put it, would Moscow
fatten a lamb in the jaws of a lion? For Moscow, Central America is a windfall,
a target of opportunity, not of deep strategic purpose. The Kremlin will keep
the revolutionary pot boiling, but it knows how vulnerable its investment will
be.

The report also uses the domino argument: Guerrilla victory in El Salvador would
spread Soviet influence through Central America. Actually, Communist success is
quite as likely to galvanize anti-Communism and to move countries like Mexico to
the right. In assessing the threat, Washington should listen to countries
directly threatened, such as the Contadora group (Mexico, Panama, Venezuela,
Colombia). It is too bad President Reagan did not assemble an international
bipartisan commission, in which Latin American democrats might have joined in
recommendations for multilateral action.

The commission's final argument is that failure in Central America will damage
our worldwide ''credibility.'' It may well be that the Administration's
determination to inflate stakes and invest a civil war with global significance
has made El Salvador a ''test'' of our ''resolve.'' This does not, however, lead
ineluctably to a military solution.

2. The commission's program.

The commission acknowledges the difficulty of combining military victory with
social reform. Its answer is the military-shield concept - the idea that, if we
help provide a military shield, we can persuade the regime taken under our
protection to make the changes necessary to win popular support.  But regimes
requiring military shields against their own people are under siege precisely
because they don't give a damn about poverty and exploitation. The shield
concept works when it helps governments already committed to agendas of
democratic reform; but Romulo Betancourt (Venezuela) and Ramon Magsaysay
(Philippines) were the exception, not the rule. Most of the time, the shield
approach only nourishes the arrogance of the regime whose repression created the
revolution. For, as soon as we insert the magic shield, we lose most of our
leverage.  The guarantee of military protection means that we renounce the
ultimate sanction - the withdrawal of support. Once we declare our commitment to
a regime's survival, it becomes increasingly hard to make a beleaguered
oligarchy do things it sees, probably correctly, as fatal to its privilege and
power. The military shield turns into a blank check.  The report invokes history
against alternative policies, like power-sharing. But when have we ever been
able to force a right-wing regime, confident of our continuing support, to take
action contrary to its own ideology and interests? We tried it in China, in
Vietnam. When we bind ourselves to a client regime, we become the client's
prisoner.  The report fails to note how skilled native elites manipulate their
patrons. We are being manipulated by oligarchies in El Salvador, Honduras and
Guatemala and by ex-oligarchs in flight from Nicaragua, using the
''credibility'' line to ensnare us into saving their property and power.  The
men who run El Salvador do not believe in the splendid reforms urged by the
commission - in civil liberties, in trade unions, in land reform, in
redistribution of income. Vice President Bush rightly said of the death squads:
''These right wing fanatics are the best friends the Soviets, the Cubans, the
Sandinista commandantes and the Salvadoran guerrillas have.'' They are also the
Salvadoran regime's best friends.Does the commission really mean it when it
conditions aid on ''demonstrated progress'' toward human rights? Does it expect
Washington to end aid after the report's own vivid

portrayal of guerrilla victory as a grave defeat for the United States? The
Administration, once it deepens its military commitments, will certainly heed
the footnote signed by the chairman and two other members and decline to
''interpret conditionality in a manner that leads to a Marxist-Leninist
victory.''

The commission's program is bathed in political unreality. Democratic economic
development depends on restoration of peace and on a domestic will to reform.
But militarism entrenches in power the people most opposed to social change.
Peace restored by giving military victory to a crowd whose survival depends on
the elimination of the democratic alternative - and who torture and murder their
own democrats - will simply reproduce all the conditions that drove peasants and
the middle class to revolution.

3. The United States' role. The commission's program requires our ''purposeful''
leadership. But the report's sanitized historical review does not adequately
suggest the credentials, or lack thereof, we bring to resolution of Central
American problems. Distrust runs deep, understandably: Why should any Central
American believe we have democratic interests at heart? Even Franklin D.
Roosevelt's Good Neighbor Policy co-existed cheerfully with Somoza (''Our own
S.O.B.'') and other Central American dictators.  While there should be due
consultation, the report says, ''the United States cannot use the Contadora
process as a substitute for its own policies.'' True enough; yet nothing has got
us into more trouble through the long years than the delusion that we understand
the interests of other countries better than they understand their own
interests. The Contadora nations know the terrain far better than we do, are
more directly threatened and are equally determined to protect themselves. If
they do not see the threat as apocalyptically as we do, who is to say that they
are wrong and we are right? If they still see possibilities in diplomacy, why
should we put our chips on military power?

4. And the alternative?

Victory for the revolutionaries would be an international setback for us. And it
would not lead to Central American regimes of sweetness and light.

Still, if the military solution makes social change impossible, and if social
change is impossible until peace is restored, what do we do? Negotiate. The
commission insists that only the prospect of military defeat will bring the
guerrillas to the table. ''A successful counter-insurgency effort . . . is a
necessary condition for a political solution.'' This may well be so, but it
sends us down the military road again. The Contadora countries still work at
negotiation. But if they fail, which seems all too possible, and if they refuse
to endorse our military solution, do we go it alone and back our own S.O.B.'s?
It is against the American grain to suppose there are problems we cannot lick
with sufficient arms and money. Moreover, abstention would disturb those, like
this writer, who feel an obligation to the many decent Central American
democrats who share our values and deserve our support. One can only say that a
military solution is problematic as a way of saving them, since it confirms
their enemies in power. And the international repercussions for us would be less
if we pursued a policy of accommodation to the inevitable, like the French
withdrawal from Algeria, than if we tried to enforce our will and failed, or
succeeded at protracted and grievous cost.

Civil war is a historical experience through which nations, including our own,
achieve national identity. History takes its own time. Its ways are inscrutable
and often tragic: People find their own paths to nationhood, and these paths
often run with blood. Reflecting on the itch to save other lands from their own
historical logic, a wise British Ambassador to Washington (Lord Harlech) said,
''Every country has a right to its own Wars of the Roses.''

Obviously, it would be wonderful to have in Central America a set of devoted,
tranquil, prosperous, pro- United States countries. Equally, it would be
unacceptable to let Central America become a Soviet base. Actually, both
extremes are beyond the power of either the United States or the Soviet Union to
achieve. We cannot attain the first, and we can prevent the second. We may well
face an anguished time in Central America (Costa Rica always excepted) for a
while to come. I believe we can live with that. It is conceivably better than
trying to beat revolution by installing - and it would probably take G.I.'s to
do it - a new generation of Somozas, who would only sow the seeds of later and
fiercer revolutions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
The Derby and the Rev. Dr. King

BYLINE: By Ira Berkow

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 910 words


In ''Baseball's Great Experiment:

Jackie Robinson and His Legacy,''

a recently published history, the author, Jules Tygiel, quotes Don Newcombe, the
former Brooklyn Dodger pitcher, who, along with Robinson and Roy Campanella, was
one of the first blacks in organized baseball:

''We were paying our dues long before the civil rights marches,'' Don Newcombe
states proudly. ''Martin Luther King told me, in my home one night, 'You'll
never know what you and Jackie and Roy did to make it possible to do my job.' ''

In his efforts to effect social change in America, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. also credited another athlete, Muhammad Ali, as an inspiring model.

When Ali refused induction into the Army because of his unwillingness to fight
in Vietnam - ''I ain't got no quarrel with the Viet Cong,'' he said - and had
the heavyweight championship stripped from him, Dr. King called Ali's stand
courageous.

Dr. King, a Baptist minister, said that regardless of what one might think of
Ali's religion - he is a Black Muslim - Ali ''gave up millions of dollars and
risked going to jail'' for his principles.

Dr. King applauded Ali because the civil rights leader believed that the United
States' military participation in Vietnam was wrong, took unfair advantage of
poor black youth, and represented the same kind of bureaucratic arrogance that
suppressed blacks in this country.

One was reminded of this yesterday, the third Monday of January, which was
celebrated as a holiday in honor of the late Dr. King in some states, and which,
beginning next year, will be a national holiday. The third Monday of this month
falls closest to Dr. King's birth date, Jan. 15.

I recalled a time when Dr. King, who had organized boycotts of buses and shops
and restaurants in order to bring equality to blacks, lent his support to a
movement that threatened the orderly running of an American sports institution,
the Kentucky Derby.


It was early May 1967, and I was

covering the 93d Derby for The

Minneapolis Tribune. It turned out that I'd be covering a drama that went beyond
the stables and the mint juleps.

I would, of course, report on the Derby hopefuls, such as Damascus and Ruken and
Successor, the favorites, and give less attention to a long shot like Proud
Clarion. And I'd report on the history and color and geniality of the Derby.

But then I began writing two stories a day, one for the sports page from
Churchill Downs, and one for the front page from the streets, at the request of
the city desk.

Demonstrators had been marching for several weeks in Louisville, with the
slogan, ''No Housing, No Derby.'' On the Monday that I arrived in Louisville,
May 1, several demonstrators, including the Rev. A. D. Williams King, brother of
Dr. King, were jailed after efforts to dramatize demands for an open-housing
ordinance.

On the Tuesday of that week, the day of the Derby Trial, a terrifying scene took
place.

During the running of the first race, five teen-age black males suddenly and
inexplicably appeared at the head of the home stretch. They sauntered down the
muddy track toward the finish line, their backs to the horses that would soon be
bearing down on them.

As the horses made the turn for the stretch drive, the youths began to trot. The
horses neared. The kids ran. At almost the last moment possible they leaped over
the inside rail as the horses pounded past. The crowd gasped in horror.

The teen-agers were chased by policemen, caught and arrested. It was obviously
another protest action by open-housing supporters. Although Dr. King disavowed a
direct connection with his group, the incident increased the atmosphere of
uncertainty and peril.


The annual Derby parade, scheduled for Thursday, two days before the Derby, was
canceled by the Festival Committee for fear of disruption.

The civil-rights group threatened a demonstration at Churchill Downs on the day
of the race. I remember attending a rally led by the civil-rights leaders,
including Dr. King, at a West End church in Louisville, and feeling the passion
and determination that was thick in the air.

On the Friday night just before Derby Day, I remember a group of about 40
open-housing advocates sitting in a light rain in front of the main entrance to
the empty, dark Churchill Downs. They burned candles and their faces were
partially in shadow. They sang freedom songs, and while they did, helmeted
policemen arrived and hauled them off to jail, charging them with disorderly
conduct.

Early the next morning, Dr. King spoke at a news conference. He said there would
be no march on Churchill Downs. ''The action would prove,'' he said, ''that we
did not want to disrupt the Derby for the sake of disruption. We hope that we
are proving our good faith, and that it will influence the people and the city
fathers to improve their flexibility.''

Derby Day had dawned gray and rainy. At Churchill Downs, there was an air of
tension. A security force of about 2,500 spread around the track.

The umbrella-dotted crowd was believed to be about 15,000 fewer than the 100,000
annually reported for the Derby. Whether the smaller crowd was due to
civil-rights concerns or the wet day could not be determined.

The Derby was run without incident, other than that the 30-1 shot, Proud
Clarion, with Bobby Ussery up, came from well back in the pack to win.

Dr. King did not attend the race. He had boarded a plane to Atlanta at 11 that
morning.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM GOVERNOR CUOMO'S BUDGET MESSAGE TO THE STATE LEGISLATURE

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 5664 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Jan. 16


Following are excerpts from Governor Cuomo's budget message to the Legislature:

In introducing my first budget, I said that the year ahead would ''test the
limits of our ability to govern equitably, decisively and compassionately.''
Together we were tested. Together we met those challenges and put this state on
the road to a more promising future. Yet we have taken but the first step along
the road to rebuilding this state; the remaining journey will require a resolve
at least equal to that of the last year.

The budget I present to you today represents a detailed anatomy of our
government. It proposes how we will choose to raise and consume our resources,
and, thus, describes what we think of ourselves as a government - the way we see
our mission, the values we live by.

I think we are at our best when we see ourselves as a family; that is, a
community of interest that has come together in order that we can give to
ourselves collectively what we could not provide for ourselves individually.

The major objective guiding this budget is clear. As a group we must provide for
those who through no fault of their own are unable to provide for themselves -
the old, the weak, those who simply cannot find a job.

I am convinced that the most effective way to meet this objective is to promote
a strong economy built on the private sector payroll. As more people work and
are paid for it by the private sector, more profits and wages will be generated,
resulting in less expenses for social services. In this environment, a
reasonable system of taxation will produce more revenue, providing government,
thereby, with the energy it needs to do the things we want done for us
collectively.

That is the main principle of this budget: reliance on our capacity to develop a
strong private sector that will put people to work and, out of the wealth that
is generated, give us the capacity to do for people the things we want to do as
a government.

Governments, like people, have styles. I have suggested that ours should be
characterized by an encouragement of self-reliance - that is, making the most of
our own resources.

Ours should be a government that looks beyond the moment, beyond the year,
beyond even the decade. This budget looks toward that vision while securing the
achievements of the past.


Balanced Budget

We are leaving this year with our program intact and our budget tightly but
securely rebalanced. There is no surplus.

We will start 1984-85 with a budget that contains no surplus, includes no tax
increases and tolerates no deficit. The revenues we realized from last year's
tax and fee enhancements will be used to offset the loss of one-time revenues
already exhausted and to fund education aid and other payments that were
unavoidably delayed into the coming fiscal year.

The budget before you today secures the achievements of the past and advances us
toward a future of growth and prosperity, guided by the principles of equity,
fiscal integrity and self-reliance. Within a secure financial environment we now
can begin modest but positive steps toward fulfilling our ongoing agenda of jobs
and justice.

Our past sacrifices permit us to anticipate a year of rebuilding - a year in
which we shall renew the principles and set in place the programs needed to meet
the future with ''compassion, common sense and competitiveness.''

But our optimism for the future must be tempered by the fiscal realities of
today. We are faced with a multitude of competing and compelling calls on the
state's resources. There are those who would cut taxes, and those who would fund
new programs or expand existing ones. And for each there is but one question:
What person shall we tax or what program shall we cut to finance your idea?

The budget before you has been subjected to the rigorous test of this
expenditure equation. It represents a sound, cautious and innovative plan for
the future that balances the breadth of what we must achieve with the limits of
what we can do.

And those limits are clear. The resources available to us are simply
insufficient to complete the work that must be done to rebuild this state. We
have set firm priorities and I believe this budget represents a beginning - an
opportunity, as I said in my annual message, to start the rebuilding of our
economy, our educational system, our criminal-justice system and our human
services.  The investments we make in this budget - toward support for our
needy, jobs for our unemployed, training for the unskilled, shelter for the
homeless, justice for the victims of crime and innovative partnership with our
private sector - are critical for the next year and for the next century.

If we build on the partnerships so carefully and productively forged over the
past year, if we embrace the principles of self-reliance and self- help, and if
we manage our resources prudently and responsibly, then we shall meet the
challenges of the future and rebuild the Empire State.

Fiscal Stability

Realism forces the recognition that of the $1.8 billion in growth called for in
this budget, a full $1.6 billion represents nondiscretionary, mandated costs
resulting from our joint agreements on last year's bipartisan budget. To
accomplish all that we like to do would require massive spending increases based
on new taxes. I have rejected that approach as unfair, unwise and
counterproductive.

New and higher taxes would discourage the growth in the private sector that is
our best hope for the future. The permanent rebuilding of our state's fiscal
stability requires that we strengthen our economy - not weaken it. This economy
- based on the private sector jobs - must be competitive nationally and even
internationally.

Since this budget rejects broad- based tax increases to finance our agenda, we
have had to look to the spending portion of the financial plan for opportunities
to shift resources in support of the programs needed to reinvest in the future
of this state.

Where possible we have set in place programs aimed at increasing productivity
and efficiency, and at streamlining governmental operations. Resources conserved
as a result of these efforts can thus be applied, within our current revenue
structure, to the areas of greatest need.

Accounting Principles

Fundamental to the continuing perception of this state as a fiscally prudent and
financially responsible government is the conversion of our budgeting and
accounting systems to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP).

As required for the first time this year, we have prepared an official financial
plan in accordance with GAAP. Those plans show that the deficits reported by the
Comptroller for the last two fiscal years, while abnormally large, were not
aberrations.

The structure of the state's pattern of taxing and spending has a built-in GAAP
operating deficit. This budget begins the process of reforming that structure.
We are budgeting timely payment of $125 million in income tax refunds as the
first step in a two-year program to achieve GAAP operating balance.

This is an objective I share with the Comptroller and I will welcome his support
for this initiative.

I also share with the Comptroller the desire to reduce the relative magnitude of
the spring borrowing. Last year we borrowed an amount equivalent to more than 20
percent of our general fund spending. This year our preliminary projections
indicate we will need an equivalent percentage to meet our first-quarter
obligations.

I have asked the Comptroller to join with us in working out a way to reduce this
year's borrowing: a reduction that would occur in the context of a longer-range
plan that insures that our borrowing requirements fall as a percentage of the
general fund.

The refunds we are reflecting in this year's budget are an indication of our
seriousness and willingness to sacrifice the attainment of other objectives in
pursuit of this goal.

I believe that the most effective way to accomplish this is through a
constitutional amendment requiring the presentation and enactment of GAAP
balanced budgets. After consultation with all the appropriate state officials, I
intend to submit the appropriate language for your consideration.

This budget supports and expands our commitment to effective management of our
resources and efficient delivery of services.

I retain my commitment to allowing state managers to manage. This budget
contains measures that will build on the directions called for by the task force
I established in response to the concerns of the Chancellors of the State and
City Universities. Through experimental, lump- sum appropriation authority we
will permit a limited number of campuses in both the State and City Universities
to operate on a trial basis without constraints imposed by detailed
appropriation schedules.

Continuation of this approach through 1985-86 will provide us with concrete
information on the potential benefits of expanding it to other institutions.

I am committed to a streamlined, responsive and tightly managed state
government. This budget reflects savings of more than a quarter-billion dollars
resulting from the 1983-84 work-force reduction program. In the year ahead, we
will move on a variety of fronts to modernize our organizations and to assure
the effectiveness of state agency operations.

We will redirect our operations and redeploy our staff in ways that improve the
delivery of state services. A reinvestment of staffing resources in facilities
of the Office of Mental Health and Office of Mental Retardation and
Developmental Disabilities will improve patient care. A redeployment of the
state police similarly will strengthen the state's capacity to combat serious
crime by enhancing investigative capacity, training and forensic laboratory
services.

Organizational changes also will be made to strengthen and streamline state
operations. This year I will propose legislation establishing an independent
State Office of Rehabilitation Services composed of the vocational
rehabilitation responsibilities of the Education Department and the Commission
on the Blind and Visually Handicapped of the Department of Social Services. This
new state agency will provide the focus necessary to improve the delivery of
vocational rehabilitation services.

Additionally, structural reform will streamline the Public Service Commission
and help lower energy costs by increasing consumer participation and by
improving the efficiency of the utilities.

Five-Year Plan

This budget includes, for the first time, a five-year plan for our capital
expenditures. The plan encompasses all state agencies and certain public
authorities, and includes more than $15 billion in anticipated appropriations.
It will serve as a vehicle for assigning priority to our budgetary decisions,
and provide a more rational, long-term basis for making necessary and systematic
investments in the state's infrastructure.

Our continuing review of functions and services performed at various levels of
government has shown that the current system of supervising nonincarcerated
offenders is fragmented among a variety of state agencies, local governments and
private organizations.

To improve the effectiveness of probation programs throughout the state I am
recommending the creation of a new Division of Correctional Supervision which
consolidates the Divisions of Probation and Parole and other alternatives to
incarceration.

When coupled with my proposals for life without parole, and other actions in
this budget, this initiative will allow us to do much to enhance the security of
our citizens.

One of my paramount objectives has been to shift more of the fiscal
responsibility for Medicaid from localities, with their relatively stable tax
base, to the state, with its broader, more elastic revenue mix. In 1983, a
comprehensive plan was enacted to reduce the local share of the costs of
Medicaid's long-term care component over three years. This budget includes
funding to finance the first phase of the plan.

We estimate that the assumption of local Medicaid costs will save New York City
and the 57 counties over $400 million in 1984. Cumulative local savings after
full implementation of the program in 1986 are expected to exceed $1.6 billion.

This budget also continues the state's longstanding financial commitment to
units of local government. I recommend continuation of revenue sharing, Special
City, Town, Village Aid, emergency aid and Municipal Overburden, which together
provide more than $900 million in general- purpose local aid.

Localities will also continue to receive the benefits of past state assumptions
of costs that were previously local responsibilities. These takeovers -
including Supplemental Security Income, home energy allowance and court costs -
provide well over $400 million in annual local savings, and when combined with
unrestricted aid programs, provide substantial budgetary relief for local
governments.

Gains by New York City

New York City, in particular, illustrates the dramatic benefits that can result
when state and local leaders work in concert. State aid and takeovers, economic
development programs including tax reductions, the International Banking
Facility and the Urban Development Corporation's numerous projects, and diligent
city financial management have produced a dramatic turnaround.

Tremendous growth in financial services has led the city's economic recovery.
New York's return to financial and economic health is evidenced by budget
surpluses and its re-entry into the credit markets. The bleak economic and
fiscal prospects of the city in the mid-1970's have given way to a robust,
confident outlook that is fundamental to the state's anticipated growth.

Maintaining our financial commitments and recasting some state-local
responsibilities, however, is only a starting point. A mechanism must be
established whereby all members of the state's family of local governments -
counties, cities, towns, villages and school districts - can participate in
sorting out responsibilities and establishing priorities. Only in this manner
can we assure that full and careful consideration is given to crucial
intergovernmental issues.

For example, prior state assumptions of local costs have greatly increased state
resources targeted to programs administered by counties and the City of New
York. We now have an opportunity to examine other programs such as state revenue
sharing to assure that they meet the legitimate needs of those local governments
that have not directly benefited from state cost assumptions.

It was with these factors in mind that last year I proposed legislation to
establish a State Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, modeled
after the Federal A.C.I.R. Unfortunately, such legislation was not enacted. I
again call on the Legislature to pass A.C.I.R. legislation this session.

By harnessing the wealth of our private sector creatively and responsibly, we
can create jobs and enhance justice in this state without broad- based tax
increases and without deficits The innovations advanced in this budget
contemplate use of leveraged private resources where they are most appropriate -
support for economic development and infrastructure renewal - and use of public
funds where they are most required - our investment in human potential.

Investment in Growth

A prudent economic development strategy must recognize the limits of the state's
resources and productively harness the wealth available from the private sector.
This partnership requires participation from business, labor, education and
government to promote investment in growth and a technologically oriented
future.

This budget presents a program to target state resources and leverage private
funds in areas of development incentives for our economic future: high
technology, capital formation, agriculture and rural development and market
expansion for export of New York products - all designed to build a solid
foundation for growth.

To advance the state's leadership in high technology and innovation, this budget
provides $7 million to fully fund seven Centers for Advanced Technology in
addition to an expansion of the biotechnology program at Cornell University. To
concentrate efforts on both baseline industries and on a high-tech future, the
Science and Technology Foundation will initiate a Productivity Development
Program to expand technological innovation in the state's small and aging
industrial plants.

Increasing the amount and sources of capital for business in New York is
essential. This budget will recommend the expansion of the Business Development
Corporation's capitalization from $50 million to $250 million and the creation
of a privately financed venture capital operation - the Innovation Finance
Corporation.

This effort, combined with the expansion of the programs of the Urban
Development Corporation and Job Development Authority, will encourage new
private capital investment in New York. These initiatives will assist in
attracting and expanding new business and industries without substantial
expenditure of limited public resources.

This budget recognizes that affordable housing is essential to economic
development and the general quality of life. I will propose new bonding
authority of $1 billion for the Housing Finance Agency and $500 million for the
State of New York Mortgage Agency. Together these efforts will allow
construction of over 15,000 new multifamily units and availability of over 8,000
mortgages for first-time home buyers.

Additionally, the Division of Housing and Community Renewal and other housing
agencies will develop new programs to encourage the preservation and
rehabilitation of our existing housing stock. Such efforts will include a
statewide urban homesteading demonstration program and the creation of programs
to encourage private housing development using nonprofit organizations similar
to the Nehemiah program in Brooklyn.

Our rural and agricultural economy represents a great untapped resource for
expansion. Accordingly, this budget provides significant incentive for future
development of New York agriculture including a new food processing laboratory
at Cornell University. Additionally, funds are supplied to develop methods to
promote New York fishing and aquatic food products, and to establish beef,
poultry and kosher meat processing facilities in New York.

Finally, expansion and greater penetration of New York products in world markets
will be initiated in this budget with the Commerce Department's World Trade
Network to match and alert foreign buyers to the products available from over
40,000 New York businesses.

The World Trade Network will be augmented by the creation of a new World Trade
Council. The council will identify opportunities to increase the export of state
products and to attract foreign investment.

Highways and Bridges

In this budget I recommended the necessary resources to assure that the
Department of Transportation can implement the $7.4 billion Rebuild New York
program in a timely and effective manner and that the department can begin to
correct the effects of deferred maintenance on our highways and bridges.

In this session I will propose programs for investment, planning and maintenance
to help assure a sound infrastructure legacy for the next decade - and the next
century.

Vital among these initiatives is legislation I will introduce to create a
Regional Development Bank, supported by revenues from the Port Authority of New
York and New Jersey. This initiative, coupled with resources from the Municipal
Assistance Corporation, will provide as much as $700 million over the next five
years for capital projects in the New York metropolitan area.

I will soon send to the Legislature a bill to create the Municipal Water and
Sewer Authority along with a proposal to permit local water finance authorities.
Together, these initiatives will provide our cities and other local governments
with greater access to capital so that they may rebuild and maintain their water
supply and water quality systems.

This budget recommends more than half a billion dollars for new projects to
rehabilitate and maintain state facilities. Over $200 million will be devoted to
renewal of older buildings, while the remainder will be used for health and
safety improvements, increased access for the handicapped or to meet
environmental quality standards.

To assure that the facilities we build and rebuild in the coming years provide
the maximum years of service to future generations, and that we provide adequate
funds to maintain our capital facilities, I will propose to the Legislature an
Infrastructure Maintenance Budgeting and Policy Act. To begin, this budget
recommends an increase of $11 million for the highway and bridge maintenance
program.

To protect and enhance the state's economic base, our infrastructure and natural
resources must be maintained. A prime concern is implementation of the state
superfund program that was initiated last year. I will take steps to assure that
the full $10 million is available for expenditure next year.

Additionally, during 1983 the Department of Environmental Conservation accepted
interim delegation of Federal hazardous waste law enforcement. In combination
with Federal grants, $200,000 is recommended to meet the cost of the hazardous
waste enforcement program.

In addition, this budget contains funding to allow the Health Department to
investigate the threat to public health of toxic waste sites and to develop new
air and water quality standards by which to gauge the threat to public health of
all environmental assaults.

Prison System

Perhaps the most explosive capital problem we face is the potential of
overcrowding in the prisons, as was dramatically demonstrated during the first
weeks of my administration. Overcrowding was the most critical problem facing
our criminal-justice system last year.

We reacted swiftly to this issue with a combination of a multiyear effort to
permanently expand the capacity of the system and a series of temporary actions
to meet immediate needs. We began the most extensive expansion of the prison
system in the state's history. Over the next three years, over 8,600 new cells
will be added at a cost of more than $700 million.

In 1984-85, over 3,500 new spaces will be added to the capacity of the system.
Since this exceeds the projected growth in inmate population of 2,600, it will
allow us to close the Long Island Correctional Facility during the next year and
eliminate several hundred emergency beds that were temporarily in service. The
population at the main facility at Attica will be reduced by 400 to its original
capped level of 1,700.

All of these actions will be taken in concert with a continued commitment to
insure the security of our facilities. To protect the public, the staff and the
inmates, a new ''maxi- maxi'' unit will be established at Wallkill II for the
most violence- prone inmates.


Human Resources

Successful investment in the state's economic future will also require a
commitment to human resources to assure that all of us - particularly our youth
and the disadvantaged - can participate in the future of a rebuilt New York
economy. In addition to my proposal to raise the drinking age to 21 to save the
lives of our youth, this budget contains a variety of initiatives that support
our commitment to the well-being of our citizens.

Our homeless population is, perhaps, the most vivid reminder of the need to
renew our commitment to equity for all. Last year, as a demonstration of our
commitment to justice and fairness, we embarked on a $50 million program of aid
to the homeless - the most ambitious effort of any state in this country.

This year, we will accelerate our homeless housing and assistance program
through a recommended increase in funding to $20 million for projects to provide
additional shelter for this population.

This appropiation is expected to leverage private sector and local government
funds sufficient to house over 4,000 individuals currently without permanent
residences.

I am also proposing that $37 million be made available to local governments to
operate temporary shelters during the construction or renovation of permanent
housing and that funding be made available to this population through the Office
of Mental Health's Community Support System.

We have an obligation to adequately provide for the nutritional needs of the
less fortunate members of our society. With the Federal Government questioning
the need for its commitment to nutrition programs, equity demands that the state
assume a larger role in promoting and insuring basic nutritional services by
establishing a state nutrition program.

This $35 million initiative, $15 million of which will be expended in 1984- 85,
will be carefully targeted to those most threatened by poor nutrition: needy
mothers and their children, the frail elderly, the homeless and the poor.

This new state program will also help us meet our responsibility to food stamp
recipients who may lose some of their benefits under rigidly defined Federal
food stamp regulations because of our recent effort to assist families in better
meeting their basic shelter needs.


Funds for EducationAs an investment for the future, few governmental endeavors
are as sound as the provision of high-quality elementary and secondary
education. In the upcoming school year, for the first time, state support for
public schools will exceed $5 billion - over one of every four tax dollars that
the state collects is returned to local school systems.

Our educational system must keep pace with rapid technological, scientific and
social changes. Public investment in discrete program areas offers the best way
to maintain overall educational excellence.

As part of the $300 million initiative contained in the budget, I am
recommending a comprehensive package of innovative programs tailored to meet
specific educational needs. This balanced program, totaling $100 million in the
next school year, will be selffinanced through a dedicated and growing revenue
source in the form of the New York Pro-Sports Lottery Card proposed in
legislation accompanying the budget.

Included in this package are important initiatives that will allow schools to
keep current with rapidly changing technology.

Student computer literacy will be encouraged through a new $10 million hardware
acquisition program and through increased funding for regional demonstration and
technical assistance centers. Funding will also be provided to improve school
curricula, especially in science, mathematics and foreign languages.


Teacher Programs

I am proposing a series of initiatives to attract the most qualified people to
the teaching profession. A State Teachers Corps will provide loans to college
students who pledge to teach in our public or nonpublic schools. These loans
would be forgiven as the new teachers fulfill their service commitment.

Funding is also included for a new in-service education program for teachers and
for teacher resource centers. We will provide demonstration grants for
mentor-teacher programs, where skilled teachers guide on-the-job training of new
teachers.

The second aspect of this aid package will increase general support for public
schools by $201 million. In addition to an operating aid increase of $117.6
million, higher funding is recommended for gifted and talented programs, magnet
school aid and public school handicapped students' programs.

Additionally, I will submit legislation to make our aid formulas more equitable
by proposing a manageable, multiyear reduction in the save- harmless provisions,
an increase in the operating aid ceiling and greater use of income data in the
aid formula.

I am recommending $11 million to assist students who are ineligible for Tuition
Assistance Program grants because their jobs and family responsibilities make it
impossible for them to attend school in a traditional full- time capacity.

Through this initiative, such individuals will be able to obtain retraining for
new careers as they maintain their current employment and continue to support
their families.

This budget also funds start-up costs for a child-care program for children of
students at the City University of New York.

Job Training

Expansion of employment opportunities through training and retraining will be
carefully targeted to those in particular need - the disadvantaged unemployed
youth, the older worker, dislocated workers and Vietnam-era veterans.

The foundation of this effort will be a new $25 million State Job Training
Partnership Fund financed without increasing unemployment insurance rates.

This fund will provide for employer-sponsored efforts, the special retraining
needs of existing workers and employment assistance to public assistance
recipients.

This budget targets $5 million in new state support for an employment and
training program for disadvantaged youth ages 16-17. This will provide training
and incentives for disadvantaged youths to return or remain in school while
gaining work experience through part-time and summer employment.

The future of those who will re- enter society after release from incarceration
cannot be ignored in our efforts to invest in the human potential of this state.
Many youth in the Division for Youth's care have severe deficiencies in the
basic skills of mathematics and reading which inhibit their ability to gain
marketable skills.

To break the cycle of dependency I am recommending a 25 percent increase in
teaching staff at D.F.Y. facilities. These educators will concentrate on
providing instruction in the basic skills for educationally handicapped youth
who require special educational intervention.

Similarly, this budget includes funds to expand adult inmate programming in our
correctional institutions to provide additional industrial, educational and
vocational programs.  This budget demonstrates our resolve to match our
investment in our economic infrastructure with an expanded investment in the
needs of the weakest and most disadvantaged of our family - the mentally ill and
the developmentally disabled.

We will expand special programs and services for the multidisabled, increase
resources for inpatient alcohol rehabilitation treatment and provide enhanced
patient care in our psychiatric and developmental centers through a reinvestment
of our resources.

For those developmentally and mentally disabled young adults facing a disruption
in care due to termination of their statutory eligibility for services, I will
request an appropriation of $1.8 million to continue transitional funding until
appropriate adult residential placements can be secured for these individuals.

This budget contains $3 million to implement initial recommendations of the
Select Commission on the Future of the State-Local Mental Health System.

We will establish an additional 300 acute inpatient beds in New York City to
alleviate overcrowding in its psychiatric hospitals, expand daytreatment
programs and increase mental health services to minorities and the homeless.

My budget also proposes an expansion of our community residential program. I am
recommending funds for the creation of 1,400 new community beds for the
developmentally disabled and 800 new community beds for the mentally ill. This
Budget also supports 500 residential treatment facility beds for children.

The magnitude of this expansion will be necessary, in part, since I am committed
to the orderly closure of Willowbrook. But with this action, our attention must
be directed toward providing the broadest and most flexible range of services as
we assist the disabled in their transition to community care.

Accordingly, I am recommending funds for the establishment of a pilot program to
provide personal care services to the developmentally disabled residing in
community residences.

Funding is also included for development of a new community residence program
model for the mentally ill who require a more structured living environment.


Health Care Costs

New and innovative health care approaches are our best hope for controlling
ever-increasing Medicaid expenditures while enhancing the quality of Medicaid
services. I will propose Medicaid reform legislation which will incorporate
initiatives such as primary care case management that encourage lower cost but
more effective health care services.

We must also develop new systems capable of controlling unprecedented levels of
health care spending while insuring the development of cost-effective, needed
capital projects. This year, I will submit legislation that establishes
reasonable limits on regional health care capital spending and authorizes a new
relative-need process for the selection of priority projects.

We are in a period of protracted challenges - fiscal, economic and humanitarian.
The priorities I put forth in my annual message and implemented as actions in
this budget are carefully constructed, modest but imaginative steps toward the
21st century.

The foundation for the future of New York State will not be laid in a single
year, but rather must be achieved through continued and dedicated progress. Last
year's spirit of cooperation between the Executive, Comptroller and Legislature
was just the starting point. The budget I propose today represents yet another
point along an increasingly clear and straight line toward our common future.

I look forward to the opportunity to discuss, defend and develop the choices
represented by this budget. I welcome our exchange of views and I hope that the
culmination of those discussions will demonstrate our responsibility as elected
officials as we did so convincingly last year.

If we again act as responsible partners, we can be assured of a rich future.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 18, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN A FOREIGN SERVICE AIDE TURNS SPY NOVELIST

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: MARSHALL, Va.


It is W. T. Tyler weather, with dark coils of hibernal cumulus hanging over the
Blue Ridge, the maples skeletal against the bare fields.

Weather plays a large role in the four W. T. Tyler novels of international
intrigue: the sleets and snows of Central Europe; the scorching heat of Africa
and, in the latest, due out at the end of the month the autumnal rains of
Washington. Indeed his first novel, ''The Man Who Lost The War,'' begins with a
panoramic description of a day's weather patterns across the entire European
continent.

W. T. Tyler is the pseudonym of Samuel J. Hamrick, 54 years old, who chose it
six years ago, rather casually, while still a career Foreign Service officer. A
British publisher had expressed interest in one of his manuscripts. ''I hadn't
made up my mind about leaving the State Department,'' he explained, ''and I
didn't want to be known as 'a diplomat-novelist.' So I told the publisher to put
it under a pseudonym. 'Tell 'em Wat Tyler wrote it,' I said.''

Wat Tyler had led a bloody peasant rebellion in England in the 14th century. The
London publisher said this pen name was unacceptable, so Mr. Hamrick, who admits
to a mild case of Anglophobia, settled for W. T. Tyler.

Several Unpleasant Englishmen

By the same token, Mr. Hamrick protested his publisher's use of jacket blurbs
quoting reviewers who compared his work to that of John Le Carre and Graham
Greene. He deplores both for what he called ''their deep hostility to
Americans.''

As if in response, there are several unpleasant Englishmen scattered about his
novels, including a deliciously foolish British ambassador in his Congo tale,
''Rogue's March,'' and a traitorous intelligence officer based on Kim Philby,
who had skipped from Lebanon to the Soviet Union shortly before Mr. Hamrick was
posted to Beirut. ''The atmosphere was very taken up with Philby,'' Mr. Hamrick
recalled; his British publisher refused to purchase ''Rogue's March.''

However, there are also disagreeable Americans in his work, especially in the
newest, ''The Shadow Cabinet,'' which he conceived as ''a legpull of this damn
Reagan Administration''; it contains some stingers for the Carter Administration
as well. Here is one of his characters on the current leadership:

''Now it's amateur night in Washington - four years of it. But no one has any
answers, just the same old bull. In a couple of years, that'll wash Reagan out
too.''

And a character apparently meant to resemble Zbigniew Brzezinski was, according
to W. T. Tyler, ''transformed over three years from a rumpled, fussy, indecisive
meddler into a frantic activist and busybody, a sorcerer's apprentice, obsessed
by the necromancy of the covert assets he controlled.''

Recognizable Washington Types

The author encountered the former national security adviser when he worked as
the State Department's expert on the Horn of Africa.

But these are merely asides in a tale woven by a cast of recognizable
middle-level Washington types: a Bible-belt senator with a criminal past; a
disenchanted Pentagon analyst; an out-of-work Government lawyer; some angry
ex-intelligence officers, and a wealthy Californian trying to fund-raise his way
into a prominent post.

W. T. Tyler also creates a new coinage for the capital, ''the Washington
multiplier effect,'' which he explains as follows: ''The flunky always wears the
big man's shoes. If he's a White House flunky he rules by right of the President
of the United States.''

While his work is somewhat more than slightly autobiographical in parts, Mr.
Hamrick says that much of what he has created resulted from being ''a good
listener.''

''When it comes to geography, to weather, to what someone said, I have almost
total recall,'' he said. Thus his cockney dialogue in one passage was drawn from
a radio operator he knew in the Congo, and his picture of a dacha on the Dnieper
was the recollection of ''a man I went hunting with,'' a Soviet diplomat with
whom he had conversed for many hours.

An Unwanted Promotion

''I've never been to Moscow,'' he said in talking about the sharp details in his
stories, ''But I absolutely cannot convince people that I haven't served in
those places.''

His attitude toward the diplomatic service in which he worked for 20 years,
reaching the second highest grade, seems ambivalent. Mr. Hamrick quit in 1978
when his superiors insisted on promoting him instead of sending him, as he
desired, to a second-rank post in Africa. His first novel was being published
and he offered to try the new post ''for a day.''

''I lasted a day,'' he recalled. ''I realized I didn't want to end up as consul
general in D"usseldorf, or Ambassador to Burundi.'' As for a proposed
book-autographing session at a Washington literary salon where former Foreign
Service colleagues would surely appear, he refused, saying, ''I have no interest
in seeing them.''

On the other hand, describing the chaos of the New York publishing scene, his
black eyebrows beetled as he remarked: ''I could take four Foreign Service
officers and take over Madison Avenue. They're crummy people up there.''

Americans and 'Humiliations'

Mr. Hamrick, a rugged six-footer, is sitting before the oak-lined hearth of his
150-year-old Virginia farmhouse in an old blue sweater. He lives within
commuting distance of downtown Washington but his rural setting is about as
remote as could be from the scenes and people he has created.

''All the books I write are about politics,'' he said, ''about our political
conduct.'' He said his first three concerned ''Americans reacting to the the
foreign experience, to humiliations.''

His American heroes - Plummer the covert intelligence C.I.A. operative; Reddish,
the agency man in the Congo, and McDermott, the bush pilot in Ethiopia - tend to
be loners and are capable of violence. They all come to realize the futility of
their missions.

McDermott, the pilot in ''The Ants of God,'' is apolitical, literally and
figuratively ''above the consequences of his actions'' until a good woman brings
him down to earth and tragedy. ''In a way,'' Mr. Hamrick mused, ''it's about
Vietnam.''

Mr. Hamrick, whose current publisher is Harper & Row, said ''The Man Who Lost
the War'' sold 50,000 hard-cover copies, with ''The Ants of God'' and ''Rogue's
March'' selling 15,000 each.

His most telling response from a reader, he said, came last summer when a
Zairean politician tried to get in touch with W. T. Tyler, saying he must speak
to the author of ''Rogue's March.'' The African explained that the novel gave
such a rich description of how to topple a military dictator that ''now we know
how to do it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Samuel J. Hamrick

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FOR THE AMERICAN CITIZEN TO READ, SEE AND HEAR AND EVALUATE

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 327 words


To the Editor:


I was shocked to read Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor's remarks on the press in the
interview you published on Jan. 4. He suggests in so many words that the press
was ''with us'' in World War II and ''against us'' in Vietnam.

I always thought the press was part of us. Furthermore, reporters were subject
to censorship during World War II and cooperated wtih the censors. But not
always. When there were things that the American people needed to know, things
possibly embarrassing to those in command but not capable of endangering lives
or operations, the working press managed to get the word back home.

If General Taylor is looking for examples of common interest of press,
government and a nation's high command, he need only look to Nazi Germany and
the Soviet Union. As for television bringing the battlefield into the American
living room, to which the General also objects, the distortions of television
may be preferable to the rosier visions of war offered by so many motion
pictures.

A democracy needs all the information it can get. A democratic press is supposed
to offer as much information as possible to citizens educated to exercise
critical intelligence and evaluate what they read, see and hear.  The
Constitution, in letter and spirit, does not require either reporter or citizen
to say ''my country, right or wrong.'' The men who wrote it expected the press
to be troublesome, make errors and report bad news as well as good news. When a
reporter is willfully irresponsible, there are laws of libel, espionage
statutes, etc., to enforce responsibility. As for inaccuracy or bias, no part of
the news media will successfully fool all of the public all of the time,
especially if honest and professional reporters set the record straight when
necessary.  A docile and cooperative press, while pleasing to those in power, is
certainly not what we need in 1984.

JAMES O'SHEA WADE Yorktown Heights, N.Y., Jan. 6, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
THE RIGHT TO 'NO'

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 795 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 18


In 1969 I was a White House speechwriter and had just finished banging out the
first draft of a Vietnam speech for the President. To keep every staff aide and
his brother from fiddling with my prose, I typed across the top the
impressive-looking words and acronyms that so frequently are used in the
national security world: ''TOP SECRET SENSITIVE.'' To give that a little
authentic zip, I added ''NOFORN, NOCONTRACT,'' which has to do with restricting
the distribution from foreign allies and defense contractors.

Then I sent it in to President Nixon and waited. And waited. Three days later I
called Bob Haldeman, the chief of staff, said the speech needed more work and
asked for it back.

''You bet it needs work,'' he replied, ''but we can't let you have it - you're
not cleared for Top Secret/ Sensitive/Nocontract/Noforn.''

Classifying material is easy and fun; declassifying it is a headache. Once a
document has been sprinkled with the holy water of official secrecy, bureaucrats
yet unborn will look it over and wonder: Maybe the classifier had a good reason.
Why assume responsibility for letting the public know this? Keep it secret.

That accretion of material unavailable to the public goes beyond information
that could compromise our security. As everyone in Government knows, ''limited
official use'' and ''administratively confidential'' is stamped on everything
from budgetary best-case scenarios to mash notes between bosses and secretaries.

One way this mountain of unnecessary secrets is broken up is through the
revelations of people who leave office. The dullest memoirs serve a purpose;
informed criticism lets information flow.

The Reagan Administration is determined to compound the problem of closed files
in an open society. Today if you are hired by the Government you are presented
with a ''security acknowledgment'' saying, ''I shall not publish, nor reveal to
any person, either during or after my employment, any classified or
administratively controlled information. . . .''

To most people, that sounds reasonable enough: we don't want our Federal
employees to go around blabbing genuine secrets, now or when they leave Federal
service. The question is: How to discourage improper disclosure without putting
a gag in a person's mouth for the rest of his life?

Now we come to Mr. Reagan's infamous National Security Decision Directive 84. In
a ferocious effort to plug The Leak That Never Was, N.S.D.D. 84 - numbered with
Orwellian aptness - not only inflicted the threat of unreliable lie-detector
tests on Federal employees (there goes the presumption of innocence) but made
mandatory the signing of a lifetime censorship oath.  Under directive 84, a
person willing to serve his Government must not only sign a legally binding
promise not to reveal secrets; beyond that, he must swear to submit whatever he
writes that is based on what he learns in his job to a Government censorship
board. He must submit to that censorship for life, which strips him of his
freedom to lambaste knowledgeably his successors in office.  For example, under
that damnable directive, a column like today's would have to be submitted to
censors before publication, because I talk about classification codes I learned
about in the White House. Mr. Reagan seeks to apply these C.I.A.-style
restrictions throughout Government, imposing his order on more than 100,000
employees.  Congress, at the instigation of Senator Charles Mathias, put a hold
on directive 84; in order to fund the operations of the State Department, Mr.
Reagan signed a suspension order. Next month the Senate Government Affairs
Committee will hold hearings on the lifetime censorship oath and more sensible
alternatives.  The best choice is to do nothing; any anti-free-speech solution
is worse than the imagined leak problem.  More likely to emerge is a secrecy
oath as a condition of access to really sensitive stuff (Noforn, etc.), combined
with a voluntary censorship board.  For those eager to avoid even inadvertent
disclosure of secrets, the censor's stamp would be available. But those who
rejected the censorship board would be subject to the more traditional
restraint: If present or former Government officials break their freely taken
secrecy oath, they would then face Government sanctions under contract law or
criminal law.  That would be better than the Draconian crackdown in N.S.D.D 84;
dissenters would still have the right to say ''no'' to prepublication review.
The prospect of punishment, not the practice of prior restraint, should deter
security lapses.  ''Protecting our secrets'' is a popular issue; neither
Attorney General Smith nor White House counsel Fielding is willing to talk to
the President about protecting the Constitution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MALL OWNERS' RIGHTS

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1025 words


On Christmas Eve 1943, a minister for the Jehovah's Witnesses, Grace Marsh,
stood on a sidewalk in Chickasaw, Ala., and tried to distribute copies of The
Watchtower Magazine.

Normally, such activities are protected by the First Amendment, which guarantees
free speech and the free exercise of religion. Chickasaw was a company town,
however, whose streets and sidewalks were technically private property. Miss
Marsh was arrested, convicted of trespassing and fined $50 - a sanction that
stood until her case reached the United States Supreme Court.

''Ownership does not always mean absolute dominion,'' Justice Hugo L. Black
wrote in the landmark 1946 decision of Marsh v. Alabama. ''The more an owner,
for his advantage, opens up his property for use by the public in general, the
more do his rights become circumscribed by the statutory and constitutional
rights of those who use it.''

In the last 40 years, the company town has largely gone the way of Burma-Shave
signs. Still, the tension between free speech and private property rights
persists in what may be the closest thing to its lineal descendant - the modern
shopping mall.

Similar to Other Gathering Places

On Tuesday, a divided Connecticut Supreme Court ruled that the owners of a
shopping center on the West Hartford-Farmington town line could bar groups
seeking to conduct political activities from entering the premises. The ruling
reversed an order by a lower court permitting the National Organization for
Women to solicit signatures at the Westfarms Mall, one of the largest in
Connecticut.

''We are unable to discern any legal basis distinguishing this commercial
complex from other places where large numbers of people congregate, affording
superior opportunities for political solicitation, such as sports stadiums,
convention halls, theaters, country fairs, large office or apartment buildings,
factories, supermarkets or department stores,'' Associate Justice David M. Shea
wrote for the court.

The case is the latest in a series of decisions throughout the country in which
courts have attempted to balance the First Amendment rights of people giving out
leaflets, demonstrators and petitioners with the rights of the owners of
shopping centers - collections of stores that have increasingly come to replace
the American downtown.

In 1972, the Supreme Court held that the First Amendment does not protect the
handing out of leaflets in shopping centers. Eight years later, though, it
invited the states to consider the issue under their own constitutions.

Effect of Anti-Klan Protest

A number of state courts have done that. Likening shopping malls to the town
squares, Main Streets and Greek agoras of days past, they have ruled in favor of
free speech.

The Connecticut decision marks the first time a state's highest court has held
for mall owner. Last May, anti-Ku Klux Klan activists tangled with the police at
Westfarms, leading several stores to close for the day, and civil libertarians
think the publicized incident may have affected the court's thinking.

''It's a truism of modern life in America that large shopping centers have
replaced urban downtowns as places where people gather,'' said Steven Shapiro of
the New York Civil Liberties Union. ''To deny all free speech in them is to cut
off a significant avenue of communication. And to allow an isolated abuse to
undermine so basic a right is a mistake.''

Mr. Shapiro represents a group of environmentalists who successfully sued for
access to the Smith Haven Mall, the largest retail center in Suffolk County.

Charge of Harm to Ambience

The owner of Smith Haven, the Prudential Insurance Company, is appealing the
decision. Like other mall proprietors, they said the presence of political
activists in their mall would destroy its ambience - what they call a ''relaxed,
pleasant, noncontroversial, family oriented place, which patrons will view as a
sort of refuge from the outside world.''

Justice Black acknowledged in the Marsh case an owner's property rights were
protected by the Fifth Amendment. But those guarantees, he wrote, are outweighed
by the rights of free speech and religion - entitlements that occupy what he
called a ''preferred position'' in the constitutional hierarchy.

No one has argued, however, that mall owners have the same stranglehold on a
community's commercial and social life as the proprietors of a company town. It
is this fundamental distinction that underlies the Supreme Court's reluctance to
extend the Marsh precedent to shopping centers.

In 1968, in Amalgamated Food Employees v. Logan Valley, the Court held that
union members were entitled to enter a mall and picket a Pennsylvania
supermarket using nonunion labor. But four years later, in Lloyd v. Tanner, the
Court held that right did not extend to activities unrelated to the shopping
center - in that case, distributing handbills opposing the draft and the Vietnam
War.

Looking to State Constitutions

''It would be,'' Justice Lewis Powell Jr. wrote in the Lloyd case, ''an
unwarranted infringement of property rights'' if mall owners were required to
''yield to the exercise of First Amendment rights where adequate alternative
avenues of communication exist.''

Still, the Court had not spoken its last word on the issue. In the 1980 case of
the Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins, it upheld the right of the California
Supreme Court to use its state constitution to require mall owners to grant
access to political activists.

Since then, the highest courts in several states, including Massachusetts,
Washington, New Jersey and Pennsylvania, have joined California in using their
constitutions to uphold such activities, either in malls or on college campuses.

The Connecticut Court declined to do this, to the regret of Associate Justice
Ellen A. Peters.

''State courts today,'' she wrote in her minority opinion, ''have the
opportunity as well as the obligation to begin to adapt state constitutional
provisions to the issues presented by a society dominated by large industrial
and commercial groups.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

OLD FIRING RANGE SWEPT FOR SHELLS AFTER 2 DIE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 602 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Jan. 19


Forty years ago an antitank crew sent an artillery round whistling deep into the
Camp Elliott firing range. Last month the ammunition exploded, killing two boys.

That practice round was just one of thousands lobbed into wide-open spaces, and
the fact that it failed to detonate on impact was of little concern at the time.

But part of the public land is now packed with homes, and today the Navy began
searching hundreds of acres for more old shells.

Meanwhile, the San Diego Fire Department has held seminars to warn
schoolchildren of the danger of handling old shells. A department spokesman,
Denis McNeill, urged parents to teach their children ''it's not a toy.''

Boys Had Been Warned

That is the same message that Charles A. Peake, a Deputy District Attorney, had
given to his sons.

''It's something I knew about, having been in the Airborne Special Services in
Vietnam,'' Mr. Peake said. ''Corey and Carl knew that stuff was verboten.''

Eight-year-old Corey, 12-year-old Carl and a friend, 8-year-old Matthew Smith,
happened upon an old artillery shell Dec. 10. They looked at it, turned it over
in their hands and hit it against a rock.

The explosion killed Corey and Matthew and injured Carl.  ''If I had known there
was a danger like this, I wouldn't have let him play down in the canyon,'' said
Robin Smith, Matthew's father.

The Smith family had lived for seven years in Tierrasanta, a neighborhood that
emerged in the late 1960's on part of the old Camp Elliot artillery range.

Postwar Expansion of City

According to Comdr. Paul Mallett of the Navy, who has spent hours poring over
the history of Camp Elliott, the 43- square-mile installation ''was way out in
country at that time.'' Far to the west, at the edge of San Diego Bay, was the
city of San Diego, then a community of about 200,000 people.

After World War II, Camp Elliott closed and San Diego became a boom town. As the
population rocketed toward one million, the city expanded inland.

Construction on Tierrasanta was halted many times when equipment unearthed an
old round.

Heavy rains eroding the large expanse of open country down the hillside from the
housing development have turned up more buried danger.

There had been incidents before. Three children were injured by shrapnel in a
1978 blast, but the deaths prompted action.

City officials have called for a sweep of the old impact area, and the Navy, at
the behest of the city, has organized four 10- man search teams under Commander
Mallett.

When the Navy turned the land over to the city in 1964, it said it could not
guarantee that ammunition would not turn up.

Uncertainty About Peril

Uncertainty, in fact, is central to the problem. Nobody knows how many rounds
were fired in the war years or how many failed to detonate.

A study conducted by the county found, ''It is probable, no matter how complete
and exhaustive the effort to locate and destroy stray military ordnance, there
will always be a potential for uncovering unexploded ordnance.''

''I hope there's not a lot of stuff out there,'' said Commander Mallett, but he
agreed it was conceivable more rounds could wash up next season.

A 1964 sweep turned up five live rounds; the Army recovered eight in 1973.

City Councilman Dick Murphy, whose district includes Tierrasanta, expects future
sweeps will be made.

''The natural erosion of the land, the effects of people illegally operating
off- road vehicles, occasional wild fires in the area, all tend to change the
terrain substantially enough so we would want to do sweeps every five years.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TRAN VAN HUU DIES IN PARIS; VIETNAM CHIEF FROM 1950-1952

BYLINE: By DAVID BIRD

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 432 words


Tran Van Huu, Prime Minister of Vietnam from 1950 to 1952, died Tuesday at the
Val de Grace military hospital in Paris. He was 87 years old and had lived in
exile in France for 29 years.

It was under Mr. Huu that Vietnam began assuming limited prerogatives of
self-rule prescribed in agreements reached with France in 1949. Vietnam was torn
by internal strife at the time and Mr. Huu tried to seek outside help to fight
the Communist Vietminh forces while at the same time pressing for fuller
independence from France.

Mr. Huu often asserted that granting full independence to Vietnam was a sure way
to fight the Vietminh. Mr. Huu steadfastly maintained that he was a friend of
France and was agreeable to France's retaining economic and cultural interest in
the country. But he inisted the Vietnamese must have the right to manage their
country's affairs.

''Many people are dying every day because Vietnam is not given independence,''
he said early in his Government. ''If we had independence the people would have
no more reason to fight.''

Appealed to Strong Nations

Mr. Huu sought to get broad aid for Vietnam among the strong nations of the
world to supplant the support and dominance that for so long came from France.

He saw an example in the Western democracies' coming to the aid of South Korea
and he urged them to do the same for his country. ''We consider the United
States has a duty not only to defend the democratic freedom of the people of
Korea,'' Mr. Huu said. ''We hope America and Britain will bring pressure on
France in order to achieve democratic freedom for the Vietnamese people.''

Although Mr. Huu said he wanted to unite all elements of the country against the
Communist threat, critics said he drew on too narrow a base. They said Mr. Huu,
a wealthy financier and property owner, based his Government on the small
well-to-do section of Vietnamese society, some of whose members were more French
than Vietnamese in culture and outlook.

Although he professed a desire for democracy Mr. Huu did not establish even an
appointed consultative national body that would have served to broaden
participation in the Government. His critics charged that his Government spent
large sums on empty ceremonial displays and did little to enlist popular support
through land programs or other measures.

Many anti-Communist nationalist groups said they felt shut out by the policies
of Mr. Huu, who tended to centralize control in his own hands. In addition to
being Prime Minister, Mr. Huu was also Foreign Minister and Defense Minister.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tran Van Huu

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Judge Anthony Julian Of U.S. Court in Boston

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 215 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Jan. 20


Federal District Judge Anthony Julian died Wednesday of a heart condition. Judge
Julian, 81 years old, was stricken at his home here and died on the way to the
hospital.

President Eisenhower appointed Mr. Julian United States Attorney for
Massachusetts in 1953 and to the Federal bench in 1959. He served for a year as
chief judge for the Massachusetts district and became a senior judge in 1972.

As a United States Attorney he conducted the income tax investigation of Bernard
Goldfine, the Boston industrialist who became known for his gifts to Sherman
Adams, the assistant to President Eisenhower. Mr. Goldfine was found guilty and
served a prison sentence.

Among Judge Julian's more notable bench decisions were rulings that the film ''I
Am Curious - Yellow'' was obscene and the enjoining of The Boston Globe from
publishing parts of the Pentagon Papers on the Vietnam War.

In his last major case, Judge Julian ruled Consumer Reports magazine liable for
damages for an article disparaging a stereo speaker system. The case is pending
before the Supreme Court.

Born in Italy, he immigrated to the United States in 1913. He graduated from
Boston College in 1925 and Harvard Law School in 1929.

Judge Julian, who never married, is survived by six nephews and six nieces.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT'S TEAM CELEBRATES ITSELF

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 614 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 20


The Reagan Administration celebrated itself today with all the verve needed for
a full-fledged re-election campaign: boastful oratory about its record, self-
confident denunciations of the opposition and flag waving on a grand and brassy
scale.

All that was missing was a clear and final word from President Reagan that he
would run again.

''We'll do what is best for the people and let politics take care of
themselves,'' Mr. Reagan said, addressing Administration workers on the third
anniversary of his incumbency, sounding as if the re-election campaign already
preoccupying some of the best talent in his Administration were still only a
theoretical possibility.

''Won't some of the people in this town be surprised,'' he added, maintaining
the tease about the re-election decision he is to announce Jan. 29, ''when they
find out that doing what's good for the people also turns out to be good
politics.''

'A New Beginning'

The President pronounced what amounted to a campaign motto to a buoyant throng
of political appointees gathered at Constitution Hall. ''We have made a new
beginning,'' he declared, reading a speech that had ''New Beginning'' in capital
letters.

The hall, filled with people who came by foot and limousine from their jobs in
surrounding Government offices, resounded with the fervor of politics. Reagan
Cabinet members accused Democratic campaigners of envying the Reagan tax cuts
and business recovery. The workers were entertained by marching songs from a
Marine band and a slide show on the Reagan record.

''The next gathering like this a year from now will be held outdoors,'' said
Craig Fuller, the President's assistant for Cabinet affairs.

The President's political strategist and chief of staff, James A. Baker 3d,
managed to frame his re-election plea as something bigger than politics: Both
parties need to see the Presidency, so subject to change in recent years,
stabilized by an eight-year incumbency.

Campaign Themes Stressed

The President led the rally of 3,500 loyalists in showcasing some of the
dominant themes of his presumed re- election drive. Mr. Reagan spoke in praise
of women, an area of considerable vulnerability, according to some of his
strategists.

The people themselves reserved their strongest applause, aside from that for the
President, for Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the United States representative to the
United Nations. She responded with praise for Mr. Reagan, saying his 1980
victory marked the end of ''a national identity crisis.''

She denounced unnamed opposition figures still ''stuck'' in what she
characterized as Vietnam-era willingess to criticize the Government. ''We've
taken off the 'kick-me' sign,'' she said, referring to Mr. Reagan's foreign
policy.

In praising his own record, Mr. Reagan stressed the twin themes of economic
recovery and what he called improved world stability, which he said resulted
from his military buildup. He made a pointed reference to the need to cut
Government spending further.

''What we came here to do and what we must remind ourselves and remind those
others in and out of Government is to run all those programs efficiently and
more economically than they have ever run before,'' the President said, urging
his workers to ''wring out more waste.''

Mr. Reagan pronounced himself especially pleased with a recent announcement by
Federal health officials on an increase in the average life expectancy. ''I'm
happy about that,'' said the 73-year President, as his audience laughed. ''I've
already lived about 20 odd-years longer than my life expectancy when I was born.
That's a source of annoyance to a number of people.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan,Edwin Meese 3d, William J. Casey,Bill Brock

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESSMAN ASKS AGENT ORANGE BE STUDIED ON INTERNATIONAL BASIS

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 560 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 20


The senior member of the House Veterans Affairs Committee today called for an
international study of whether Agent Orange, a herbicide used to defoliate trees
and kill crops in the Vietnam War, had caused harm to the Vietnamese who were
exposed to it.

Representative Don Edwards, Democrat of California, who recently returned from a
week in Vietnam, said an objective study conducted there could help resolve the
dispute over whether the herbicide caused long- term harm to American troops. It
was used to destroy vegetation that provided cover for the Vietcong.

''We can't resolve the problem here, apparently,'' Mr. Edwards said in a
telephone interview. ''I concluded that a study of what happened over there
would assist greatly in the American studies of our veteran population. It just
doesn't make sense not to go where the living laboratory is.''

Mr. Edwards said Vietnamese hospital administrators, scientists and doctors had
told of health damage to women who had apparently been exposed to the herbicide
as girls in jungle villages. He said he had been told there was a high rate of
cancer of the uterus and of abnormal births among these women.

''Maybe Agent Orange had nothing to do with it,'' Mr. Edwards said, ''but that
should be established. An investigation should be done.''

Vietnamese See a Link

Vietnamese scientists have conducted studies concluding that birth defects and
cancer appear related to Agent Orange. One group of scientists from Western and
Communist bloc countries that visited Vietnam a year ago said it found the
studies ''suggestive'' but not conclusive.

The group, of which Arthur H. Westing, an ecologist at Hampshire College in
Amherst, Mass., was the co-leader, called for cooperation between Vietnamese and
other scientists on the question.

The Federal Government is sponsoring more than 50 studies of Agent Orange in
this country. The key studies require accurate records of where people were at
the time the herbicide was sprayed and of subsequent health problems. Some
American scientists doubt that adequate records for such a study exist in
Vietnam.

Mr. Edwards said that in visiting hospitals in both Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi
he heard far fewer complaints of suffering among male Vietnamese veterans than
he had expected, based on complaints by American veterans.

Itching Skin and Sleeplessness

Some Vietnamese officials said male veterans were suffering from itchy skin,
inability to sleep and other health problems, he reported, and one doctor said
he was convinced that male veterans had chromosome damage. But Mr. Edwards said
that Vietnam was such a primitive country that it had made no real effort to
keep track of its veterans and determine their health problems.

Mr. Edwards said he would issue a report next week calling for an international
study. He said it should be conducted by a respected international organization,
perhaps the World Health Organization or the Food and Agricultural Organization,
both of which are specialized United Nations agencies, because studies begun by
either the United States or Vietnam alone would lack credibility.

He said he did not know if Agent Orange was connected with the genuine health
problems experienced by Vietnam veterans, but added, ''We have an obligation to
get an answer to this conundrum.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. OBTAINS CURB ON JUDGE'S ATTACK ON JUSTICE DEPT.

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1228 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 21


The Justice Department has obtained a highly unusual temporary order from a
Federal appeals court barring a law book company from publishing an opinion by a
Federal district judge in Colorado that was critical of the department.

Glenn L. Archer Jr., the head of the department's tax division, said in an
interview that the prior restraint on publication was necessary because the
''slanderous'' judicial opinion unfairly charged three of his prosecutors with
misconduct in a grand jury investigation in Denver into suspected tax fraud.

Lawyers involved in the case and other legal experts said they knew of no
previous instance in which a private publisher had been barred, on pain of
contempt of court, from publishing a judicial opinion.



'Frightening,' a Lawyer Says

It is not unusual, on the other hand, for courts to designate certain of their
own opinions as having no precedential value and thus unsuited for publication,
or for law book companies to refrain voluntarily from publishing those opinions.

James C. Goodale, a New York lawyer who has represented news organizations in
First Amendment cases, said in an interview that the order could not ''have
withstood the mildest breeze from the First Amendment'' and was ''frightening''
in its implications.

''If legal opinions can be as easily enjoined as this, any kind of publication
would be fair game for court injunction,'' Mr. Goodale said.



Order Still in Effect

The brief censorship order was issued Jan. 3 by Judges William J. Holloway Jr.
and Stephanie K. Seymour of the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th
Circuit and Federal District Judge Luther L. Bohanon, who was sitting specially
on the appellate court. The court has its headquarters at Denver, but these
three judges sit in Oklahoma.

The order required the West Publishing Company of St. Paul, Minn., ''to delay
temporarily'' publishing the Aug. 25 opinion by Federal District Judge Fred M.
Winner of Denver in the permanent bound volumes of West's series, Federal
Supplement, series, pending further consideration of the matter by the appellate
court. The order is still in effect.

West's Federal Supplement is the standard reference series for opinions of the
Federal district courts. But West is a private company and, like all other
private companies and individuals, it is normally free to publish any judicial
opinion it chooses.

Judge Winner's opinion, while stating that his views were preliminary because
not all the evidence was in, harshly criticized three tax division lawyers,
Steven L. Snyder, Thomas D. Blondin and Jared J. Scharf, for ''repeated
excesses'' in conducting the grand jury investigation.

Improprieties and Threat Charged

The prosecutorial misconduct alleged by Judge Winner included subverting the
grand jury's independence by improperly swearing in an Internal Revenue Service
agent as an ''agent of the grand jury,'' improperly telling grand jury witnesses
that they must keep their testimony secret, threatening a tax lawyer with
prosecution ''to persuade him to breach his ethical duty of confidentiality'' to
his client, and ''browbeating'' an expert witness for the defense.

At the request of Judge Winner, who retired from the bench in September, West
had already included his long opinion denouncing the Justice Department
prosecutors in a paperback ''advance sheet'' sent to law libraries around the
country before the order was filed. Such advance sheets are normally discarded
when permanent bound volumes containing the same judicial opinions are received.

The panel's action is to be reported in the forthcoming issue of The National
Law Journal, which provided an advance copy of its article to The New York
Times.

James Schatz, a Minneapolis lawyer representing West, which was not a party to
the tax fraud case, said it had not objected to the order and had ''voluntarily
determined to comply.''

He said it was the first such order he had encountered in 10 years as an
attorney for West. He said that he doubted the validity of the order, because
West was not a party to the case, but that the company was content to follow the
appellate court's wishes.

Attorneys for defendants in the tax fraud case, however, have urged the
appellate court to lift the interim order, which was still in effect as of
today, said William Waller, a Denver attorney representing one defendant.

Mr. Waller said such a ''prior restraint'' did violence both to the First
Amendment freedoms of speech and of the press and to the common law tradition
that judicial opinions be available to the bar and to the public. The interim
censorship order was issued without giving the defendants in the tax fraud case
or West prior notice or an opportunity to contest it, Mr. Waller said.

The Supreme Court has ruled on several ocasions, including its 1971 Pentagon
Papers decision rejecting the Nixon Administration's effort to bar newspapers
from publishing a classified Defense Department study of the Vietnam War, that
any ''prior restraint'' on publication ''comes to this Court bearing a heavy
presumption against its constitutional validity.''

A prior restraint is an order by a court or the Government barring publication
of material in advance, as distinguished, for example, from a lawsuit seeking to
penalize a publication after the fact for violating the libel laws. Judges and
those who publish their opinions are ordinarily immune from libel suits based on
those opinions.

The interim censorship order grew out of a grand jury investigation in which the
Justice Department obtained a 27-count indictment charging seven individuals and
the Bank of Nova Scotia, with tax fraud, conspiracy and obstruction of justice
in connection with a tax shelter scheme that was said to be illegal.

Judge Winner issued his opinion in connection with a defense motion to throw out
the conviction of Mr. Waller's client, William A. Kilpatrick, for obstruction of
justice, because of alleged misconduct by tax division lawyers from Washington
in the grand jury proceedings.

After Judge Winner had refused a Justice Department request that he withdraw his
opinion or delete the prosecutors' names, the department urged the appellate
court to order it withdrawn, and filed an ''emergency motion'' to bar the West
company from publishing it in its bound volumes pending the appellate court's
decision.

Mr. Archer, the tax division chief, said in an interview that Judge Winner had
taken ''a slanderous approach to our attorneys'' by including detailed
allegations that could injure their reputations without giving them an adequate
opportunity to defend themselves. The Justice Department disputed the
allegations, and the judge himself said some of them had not yet been fully
proved.

When asked whether he knew of any precedent for obtaining a court order barring
a private concern from publishing a judicial opinion, Mr. Archer said, ''I don't
have any comment on that.''

Mr. Waller said it was strange that the Justice Department would seek an order
''blocking publication of a judge's order just because he refers to three
Justice Department lawyers by name,'' in light of the department's own actions
in the case.

''When the indictment was filed, the Justice Department issued a press release
in order to get as much publicity as possible,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WAR IN EL SALVADOR: A CRITICAL PHASE

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


MilitaryAnalysis

SAN SALVADOR, Jan. 19 - Despite recent setbacks suffered by El Salvador's Army,
United States military officials say they expect that the Government's military
situation will improve in the first half of this year.  At the same time, the
officials, who include authorities here and at the headquarters of the Southern
Command in Panama, cautioned that El Salvador's war against the insurgents had
entered a critical phase that might mark the decisive point of the conflict.
They said this point had been recahed at a time when the army's numerical
superiority over the insurgents was insufficiently high.

Some Americans who work closely with the Salvadoran Army countered pessimistic
reports early this month by United States officials here who said army morale
fell sharply after two major defeats in three days at the end of the year. These
Americans said morale among soldiers and non- commissioned officers of the
regular forces was good.

After the two setbacks - the overrunning of an army base in the northern
province of Chalatenango Dec. 30 and and the destruction Jan. 1 of the key
Cuscatlan Bridge - the military officials said there had been a tendency by the
army to engage in ''defensive thinking.'' But they said that a shakeup in the
officer corps had assigned experienced and aggressive junior officers to
battalions that had suffered losses in recent operations.

'Only Bad Officers'

A senior American officer quoted the familiar military maxim that ''there are no
bad troops, only bad officers,'' adding that the conscripts had fought well
whenever they had been well led.

The officials said their hopeful assessment of the army's prospects was based on
the reorganization of the Salvadoran Army's command structure, the
revitalization of the high command, an expected increase in the forces'
mobility, and measures, contemplated but not taken, to eliminate some
traditional practices within the service.

But, they said, these expectations may be offset by the inability of the
Government to raise the army's force level to the point where the ratio between
Government forces and the guerrillas will be 10 to 1. Military authorities
estimate the Government's advantage now at from 3 to 1 to 4 to 1.

The experience of the British in Malaya and the United States in Vietnam
demonstrate, these authorities said, that the Salvadoran Army's present
advantage in manpower will not suffice to win a war.

Comparison of Forces

''What you need,'' one American said, ''is enough troops to move out behind any
military sweep and consolidate the area seized against counterattack.'' El
Salvador, at the moment, does not have such resources. A generous estimate is
that the guerrillas field betweeen 9,000 and 12,000 troops, depending on the
military situation, compared with about 37,000 Government soldiers and security
troops.

There are solid indications that the military situation in El Salvador can
improve despite recent setbacks, according to military officials here and in
Panama. During the last week fighting has been isolated and sporadic. Most
officers, Salvadoran and American, expect the conflict's tempo to rise as the
political campaign, culminating in the election of a president and vice
president on March 25, develops.

The most important and overdue change in the Salvadoran military has been the
reorganization of the high command by Gen. Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova, the
Minister for Defense and Public Security.

The first step was the appointment of Col. Adolfo Onecifero Blandon as Chief of
Staff of the Armed Forces. Plucked from a field command, Colonel Blandon has
broken with custom by visiting commanders in the field. He was described as
energetic and aggressive.

Command Structure Simplified

A year ago 26 separate commands reported to the Minister of Defense. With the
appointment of six brigade commanders, described by American sources as ''the
best they have,'' the number of subordinate commands has been sharply reduced.

He singled out Lieut. Col. Domingo Monterrosa, commander of the Third Brigade
and the Third Military Zone, as ''a first-class soldier.''

Encouraged by American advisers, the new command has attacked customs deeply
rooted in the Salvadoran military system.

One example is the rations-procurement system. By longstanding custom, when a
unit goes on field operations the commanding officer buys rations and
distributes them to the men. Americans say this is an invitation to corruption
but, more importantly, it breaches security. A rebel spy could estimate, from
the amount of food bought, the duration of the operation.

System of Promotion

A second example is the custom of promoting all the graduates of one class of
the national military academy at the same time. This, authorities said, slows
the promotion of exceptionally qualified officers and puts a premium on
unadventurous time-serving.

The present Government, American military officials said, intends to challenge
the prevailing promotion system by introducing a bill in the national
legislature. The rationing system may be altered if the Government is able to
buy and distrbute field rations purchased in Honduras.

Delivery of United States aid is another factor favoring a more active
Salvadoran strategy. The essentials, American officers said, are more trucks,
helicopters and improvements in command, control and communications mechanisms.
The addition of this equipment, they predicted, would increase the Salvadoran
infantry's mobility in the field and allow the army to employ artillery that has
been little- used because of a lack of transport.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. READY TO BUY COPTERS ITALY BUILT FOR IRAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 275 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 21


Italy is close to reaching an agreement to sell 11 Italian-made helicopters,
originally bought by Iran, to the United States, Italian Embassy officials said
today.

Discussions between Italian and United States negotiators on the sale of the
CH-47C Chinook transport helicopters, each worth several million dollars, have
''practically arrived at an end,'' the officials said.

The helicopters were part of a multi- million dollar order that Shah Mohammed
Riza Pahlevi placed with Agusta S.p.A., a major aircraft manufacturer in Italy.
Since the fall of the Shah in 1979, the Italian company has suspended further
deliveries because of United States-imposed restrictions on the sale of
American-licensed arms to Iran.

Agusta makes the aircraft under license from Boeing Vertol Company of Ridley
Park, Pa. The Chinook helicopters were used extensively in the Vietnam War to
transport soldiers and supplies.

Italy Complained to U.S.

Since Agusta made an American-licensed product, the company was bound to abide
by United States restrictions on sales to Iran.

Left with expensive aircraft it could no longer sell to Iran, Agusta and the
Italian Government complained to Washington.

''The reason why the Italians couldn't dispose of the helicopters was because of
the U.S. restrictions,'' said one State Department official familiar with the
negotiations. ''This decision would reflect the U.S. desire to try to help a
good friend on a particular topic.''

If bought by the United States, the helicopters would undergo modifications. The
Army is adding improvements to its CH-47C aircraft and calling it a CH-47D.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KY AND WIFE 'ENJOYING LIFE' DESPITE FINANCIAL TROUBLES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 434 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., Jan. 21


''We are enjoying life,'' said Nguyen Cao Ky, the former Prime Minister of South
Vietnam, who was sitting with his wife in the Saigon Deli.

Nevertheless, Mr. Ky said, life in exile has presented some problems. Last week
Mr. Ky held a news conference to discuss his recent bankruptcy petition and to
respond to news articles that linked him to groups of South Vietnamese
extortionists who prey on southern California businesses. The articles, by the
syndicated columnist Jack Anderson, also said Mr. Ky fled South Vietnam in 1975
with $8 million in gold, diamonds and currency.

Mr. Ky said he had sent a letter to Mr. Anderson demanding a retraction for the
articles, which he characterized as ''misleading and libelous.''

''I am not some secret society chieftain heading a collection of thugs,'' Mr. Ky
told reporters. ''I am a man who tried to serve his country as a soldier.''

$615,000 in Debts

Last November Mr. Ky, who is 54 years old, filed for protection from creditors
in Federal bankruptcy court. In the petition, which was amended Jan. 12, Mr. Ky
listed $615,000 in debts to businesses and banks around the country, including a
$20,000 gambling debt to Caesars Palace in Las Vegas. He listed nearly $700,000
in assets, including $27,000 income from a $400,000 liquor store he owns in
Garden Grove, Calif., and his house, which is assessed at $250,000.

Mr. Ky said that even though he was not insolvent he filed for bankruptcy when
an agreement could not be reached on an $18,000 debt incurred by a boutique
operated by his wife, Mai Nguyen.

Linked to Vietnamese Gangs

The financial problems are ''temporary,'' Mr. Ky said, adding that what really
concerned him were the allegations in Mr. Anderson's columns.

Mr. Anderson cited a confidential report from an Arizona-based organized crime
task force and interviews with police officials in 15 cities as sources for the
allegations.

Mr. Ky said he felt the allegations were an attempt to discredit him as an
anti-Communist spokesman and to pave the way for better United States relations
with Hanoi.

''Why else would this information come out now?'' Mr. Ky said. ''I am not a rich
man. I don't even have $100,000. But eight million? That's ridiculous.''

He said speaking engagements at colleges around the country and bank loans
enabled him to buy the house and liquor store.

The former Prime Minister said he viewed his recent troubles as ''just another
difficult step that we will take during our lifetime.''

''You try to do the right thing, but sometimes it's just your destiny,'' he
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mr. Ky in liquor store

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MORE THAN POLITICS CLOGS UP THE CONGRESS

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1096 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A few days ago, House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill was playing a round of golf in
Palm Springs, Calif., in a foursome with Bob Hope, Arnold Palmer and former
President Gerald R. Ford. As they finished, a reporter collared Speaker O'Neill
to ask about the second session of the 98th Congress, which begins tomorrow. The
Speaker tossed back the judgment that in the early weeks, ''it'll mostly be
Lebanon and Central America.'' More sweepingly, he added, ''Don't expect very
much new legislation.''

It was a candid acknowledgment that Congress has great difficulty being
productive in an election year, and in a political period such as this one. But
the problems of leadership predate the current period, with its division of
Government between a conservative Republican in the White House backed by a
Republican majority in the Senate, and a Democratic majority in the House. The
institutional reforms of the early 1970's and the more independent temper of the
post-Vietnam and post-Watergate legislators served to fragment power.

By the conventional wisdom, the deliberate assault on the old seniority system
and the opening up of the legislative process to public scrutiny has made
Congress more democratic but also more unwieldy. ''In the old days, an
Eisenhower could go up and make a deal with Lyndon Johnson in the Senate and
Speaker Sam Rayburn in the House,'' Tom C. Korologos, a legislative specialist
in the Nixon-Ford Administrations and a veteran lobbyist, says. ''Now there
really is no party discipline. You have to lobby 51 percent of Congress.''

Norman Ornstein, a former Senate committee staff director and political
scientist at Catholic University, says: ''It was a fallacy to believe that
Lyndon Johnson and Sam Rayburn were all-powerful. Their power came from their
ability to sweet-talk or play off their barons, committee chairmen. If you can
control what wins and loses and when, you can look awfully powerful. But now
it's much more difficult to regulate the legislative agenda. With open committee
sessions, you can't kill a bill quietly.'' Because members are now forbidden to
hold more than one chairmanship, half the House Democrats head committees and
subcommittees. Legislators' staffs have doubled, to 22 workers. ''That means
everybody can be an expert on everything,'' Dr. Ornstein said. ''They can make
speeches on the floor and offer amendments, and that means things can get
clogged up.''


Early in November, for example, a group of 24 House Democratic freshmen, mostly
liberals, revolted against and temporarily blocked the Democratic leadership's
omnibus spending compromise because it did not include a tax increase. And even
though the Democratic voting record was more solid than in any year since 1954,
72 Democrats broke with Mr. O'Neill and backed President Reagan on funding the
MX missile; 134 Democrats split with both the President and the Speaker on
keeping American marines in Lebanon for 18 months.

This year, the leaders' difficulties will be compounded by pressures for a short
session and the distractions of campaigning. More fundamentally, as Senator
James B. McClure of Idaho observed, members running for re-election will feel
the tug of loyalty to party and Congress and the pull of what plays best back
home. The interests of a Rocky Mountain conservative such as Mr. McClure, for
instance, are different from those of Senator William Cohen, with the East Coast
outlook of Maine.

''Holding the Senate Republicans in the corral this year will be Howard Baker's
greatest challenge,'' Senator Paul Laxalt, the Republican Party chairman, said.
Many politicians think Mr. Baker, the majority leader, handicapped himself
needlessly in saying last fall that he was not seeking re-election. Some say his
role may be complicated by maneuvering among the five declared contenders for
his post - Senators Bob Dole of Kansas, Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, Ted Stevens
of Alaska, Pete V. Dominici of New Mexico and Mr. McClure.

Differences and divisions within party ranks, let alone clashes across partisan
lines, reinforce the tendency to put off hard choices, especially on the prickly
task of fashioning a budget. In the Senate, the first awkward struggle may come
in the spring, on raising the national debt limit. Conservatives such as Senator
William D. Armstrong of Colorado are likely to attach a rider for a
constitutional amendment to balance the budget, thus pushing Republican
moderates toward the Democrats. Last year, on Lebanon, it took all of Senator
Baker's persuasive skills to hold 52 of the 54 Senate Republicans in line on
endorsing the marine presence for 18 months. This year, the task is likely to be
harder if any of the early withdrawal resolutions make it to the floor.

On the House side, Mr. O'Neill stands a good chance, his advisers feel, of
holding together a majority on tying tight conditions to more military aid to El
Salvador or opposition to covert American aid to rebels fighting the Government
of Nicaragua. On Lebanon, former Vice President Mondale's joining other
Democratic Presidential contenders in calling for withdrawal of the marines will
make it easier for the Speaker to follow the drift of his own rank-and-file. The
trickiest challenge will be to devise a Democratic position on the budget
striking a balance between the 130 liberals who lean to cutting deficits by
taxing and holding down military spending and the 45 Southern conservatives who
prefer cutting social programs and a moderate defense position.

Congressional leaders are not without levers of persuasion, of course. As
Majority Leader, Mr. Baker can push a pet project of one Senator, co-sponsor the
legislation of another, arrange a meeting with the President for others. To a
considerable degree, Mr. O'Neill can use committee appointments or the
legislative calendar to reward friends and punish adversaries.

But ultimately, in the more open, free-willing Congress of the 1980's,
Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin says, ''the leader's authority is largely
moral and depends on his agility and on his ability to position himself well
with his own majority.'' Tom Mann, executive director of the American Political
Sciences Association, adds that managing the new Congress requires that leaders
learn to recruit more of the younger members into the collective leadership. An
aide to Mr. O'Neill bluntly translates both of those propositions. ''The best
leverage Tip O'Neill can have,'' said the aide, ''is that what he says is going
help House Democrats in the fall elections.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LABOR'S GAMBLE ON MONDALE

BYLINE: By A.H. Raskin

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4301 words


A. H. Raskin, for many years The Times's chief labor correspondent, is writing a
history of the union movement since the New Deal.  By A. H. Raskin

 ANE KIRKLAND IS NO plunger. When the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. makes one
of his rare visits to a race track, he lines up at the $2 window with the truck
drivers, the ditchdiggers and the ribbon clerks. Attending a union convention in
Las Vegas or Atlantic City, he stops in at the casino just long enough to put a
single quarter in a slot machine. The big-money gaming tables are not for him.

But today the owlish-looking former research assistant who rode George Meany's
coattails to the top of the American labor movement is going for broke in a
gamble far more daring than any ever taken by his iron-willed predecessor. He is
engineering an effort to establish labor as the decisive element in nominating
and electing its favorite, Walter F. Mondale, as President of the United States.

Much more than Kirkland's personal fortunes is at risk in this venture into
kingmaking, labor's first-ever endorsement of a candidate before the nominating
conventions. There is no guarantee that the politician who has proved so popular
with union leaders can corral the votes of the rank and file in the state
primaries and caucuses leading up to the San Francisco convention in July. And
if Mondale gains the nomination and confronts President Reagan, the odds against
an overwhelming union turnout for the Democrat are daunting - Ronald Reagan
garnered more than 40 percent of the labor vote in 1980, and recent polls
indicate no slippage in his popularity in union households.

The near-unanimity with which the 800 representatives of 13.7 million unionists
endorsed Mondale at their Florida convention in October was a testimonial to
Kirkland's mastery, after four years at the helm, over the command structure of
the once-turbulent movement. But the failure of his initiative could leave the
61-year old Kirkland with his prestige shattered and the labor movement exposed
as a dragon breathing smoke but no fire.

Yet in labor's view, the risks manifest in investing so heavily and so early in
Mondale are insignificant when measured against the importance of ousting Ronald
Reagan - and replacing him with a time-tested friend of unionism like Fritz
Mondale, whose credentials are so impeccable that Kirkland declares he knows of
no labor issue on which they disagree. The unions' sense of urgency grows out of
their abiding fear that four more years of what Kirkland calls ''economic
Darwinism - the survival of the richest'' could prove lethal to some key unions.

Membership in the A.F.L.-C.I.O. has plummeted as smokestack industries have
crumbled, and workers in the new high-technology industries have derided
organizing slogans carried over from the 1930's. No amount of union concessions
at the bargaining table has stemmed the flight of jobs overseas. Employers,
encouraged by President Reagan's example in firing striking Federal air-traffic
controllers and demolishing their union, not only stand up to strikes but
sometimes provoke them in the clear hope of getting rid of union representation
altogether. Thus, the Mondale endorsement represents a desperate endeavor to
rescue through the political process a union establishment that is weaker than
it has been in a half-century.

Lane Kirkland has spent three years preparing the ground for labor's 1984
gamble, patiently convincing the often-fractious heads of the big unions that
political authority should be centralized under the parent federation's control.
He has dramatically increased the funds devoted to COPE - the Committee on
Political Education - and pushed the federation into a high-technology campaign
to sell the ideas of organized labor on television. He has effectively put
millions of dollars, tens of thousands of volunteers and a powerful,
sophisticated political apparatus at Mondale's service.

Next Friday, Kirkland will fly to Seattle to join Mondale in the kickoff of a
series of mass labor rallies. More joint appearances will follow in Boston, Des
Moines, Miami, New York, Chicago and Dallas. All the hippodroming will be linked
to regional workshops where COPE operatives will lecture union activists on ways
to ignite a grassroots union drive behind Mondale. The running of the
Presidential sweepstakes has begun, and for Kirkland and his legions, the
outcome could hardly be more critical.




 'M FOR FREE UNIONS,'' WALTER Mondale told the cheering delegates at the Florida
convention, ''not just in Poland but in the United States of America.  That is
why, when this Administration says what our nation needs is a union- free
nation, I tell them what we need is a nation of free unions.''

In Mondale, Lane Kirkland sees the candidate best equipped to design and carry
forward a 1980's embodiment of the New Deal-Great Society concept of government.
Gazing down at convention banners hailing him as ''Fritz the Winner,'' the
candidate let out all stops in identifying with the federation's priorities. He,
too, wants the Government to promote the revival of sick industries, protect
American products against ''unfair'' overseas trade competition, close corporate
tax loopholes, rebuild decaying cities and reform the labor laws to make it
easier for unions to win employee elections and negotiate contracts.

Mondale's panegyric to unionism, part of an oratorical sweep across the
mountaintops of social idealism and governmental compassion, had a familiar
ring. Essentially the same speech had been made at federation conventions in
other years by Mondale's patron saint, Hubert H. Humphrey, the last Presidential
candidate to receive anything approaching wholehearted campaign backing from
organized labor.  That was back in 1968. Humphrey, then serving as Lyndon B.
Johnson's Vice President, was all but drafted by the federation after Mr.
Johnson startled the country by announcing that he would not run for re-election
as President. George Meany instructed Kirkland, then his executive assistant, to
round up the heads of all the federation's unions as members of a labor
committee for Humphrey. The committee put full-page advertisements in major
newspapers calling on Humphrey to declare for the Presidency and assuring him
that he could count on virtually unanimous union support.  After Humphrey took
the nomination from his fellow Minnesotan Eugene J. McCarthy at the riotous
convention in Chicago, the Democratic Party - paralyzed by internal divisions
over Vietnam - went to sleep. The unions went to work. The Republicans weren't
the only foe. Labor had to repel a strong third-party appeal to its Archie
Bunker elements by George C. Wallace of Alabama. COPE claimed to have added 4.6
million voters to the registration rolls, mustering well over 150,000 volunteers
to work in the campaign. ''We did it all,'' Meany used to say. ''The Democrats
didn't do a damn thing. If we had had another week, we would have put Hubert
over the top.'' As it was, Richard M. Nixon's victory margin was held to less
than 1 percent of the popular vote.  The prominent role Kirkland played in that
campaign contributed to his elevation a year later to the post of A.F.L.-C.I.O.
secretary- treasurer - Meany's second-in-command. He moved into the top spot at
the end of 1979, just in time for the quadrennial jousting for the Democratic
Presidential designation.  The major unions within the federation were divided
almost evenly in support of President Jimmy Carter and Senator Edward M. Kennedy
of Massachusetts, and stayed that way right up to the convention showdown











 in New York. Meanwhile, Kirkland was keeping COPE's national political
apparatus in dead storage and its purse zippered. After Jimmy Carter became the
party's nominee, he got the federation's official support, but enthusiasm was
minimal among many who had been Kennedy partisans. The International Association
of Machinists, usually a front-runner in political activism, stayed on the
sidelines altogether.

The mass defection of the union rank and file to Ronald Reagan on Election Day
convinced Kirkland that the federation could not take a back seat the next time
around.

Kirkland's initial concentration was on revitalizing the Democratic Party and on
strengthening labor's voice in its policies and in the choice of its
Presidential standard-bearer. Even before Mr. Reagan entered the White House,
Kirkland was meeting in the offices of House Speaker Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr.




 with O'Neill, Kennedy and Mondale. Out of that Big Four meeting came
arrangements for working together on party reconstruction - and for a larger
union stake in the party's hierarchy. Among the Democratic National Committee's
25 members-at- large, 15 are now union representatives. Five unionists are on
the executive committee.

Labor's increased leverage within the party was promptly put to work undoing
many of the reforms initiated by the ''New Politics'' coalition of Vietnam War
resisters, minorities, feminists and other challengers of the status quo - the
groups principally responsible for the 1972 Presidential nomination of George
McGovern. (Meany had been so infuriated by their domination of the 1972
convention that he kept the federation neutral throughout the campaign, giving
the building-trades and maritime unions carte blanche to plump for Richard
Nixon.) This time, union chiefs were prominent in the commission, headed by Gov.
James B. Hunt Jr. of North Carolina, which was appointed by the party to draw up
new rules for selecting delegates to the 1984 Presidential convention. The new
rules favored front-running candidates with strong ties to old-line elements in
the Democratic establishment, candidates like Ted Kennedy or Walter Mondale. One
out of seven of the 4,000 delegate seats, for example, was assigned to an
elected official or other party professional - the kind of politician labor has
always been most comfortable with in the wheeling and dealing at a tight
convention.

Yet all such preparations could have gone for naught unless Kirkland avoided in
1984 the central error of 1980. The missing ingredient was a firm commitment by
the presidents of the individual unions to stand behind a single candidate,
centrally anointed, in advance of the primaries and the nominating convention.

It would be a hard sale, Kirkland knew, because it meant depriving labor's
nabobs of the limelight of media attention as the candidates vied for their
blessing - attention that contributed to their own job security as elected union
officials. But the federation president was uniquely equipped for the job. A
courtly scion of South Carolina's antebellum plantation aristocracy, Kirkland
relied on seemingly inexhaustible reserves of patience to weld a consensus among
the members of the all-powerful executive council.

''I am constantly amazed,'' says Thomas R.  Donahue, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
secretary-treasurer, ''at the single-mindedness with which Lane proceeds toward
his chosen objective, and takes the time to bring everyone along with him on it.
I used to think it was that he didn't have a watch, but he wears one all the
time. He just doesn't look at it until every aspect of a subject is dealt with
to the extent that anyone wants to think it out loud.''

At the February 1981 meeting of the executive council in Bal Harbour, Fla.,
Kirkland began testing the waters. It was evident even then that a majority of
the 35 council members believed that it was a mistake to padlock the COPE
machinery until after the major parties had completed the nominating process -
and labor found itself saddled with candidates its members would spurn.  But the
A.F.L.-C.I.O. head wanted something more - something close to unanimous
endorsement of the united-front concept. Accordingly, Kirkland called for
establishment of a Political Works Committee, whose makeup would touch every
political base in the federation, to consider the proposition.  The council was
still in session when President Reagan's first economic message was delivered to
Congress, and the union leaders used the occasion to denounce the President's
proposals as guaranteed to throw at least a million Americans out of work while
enriching the already overprivileged. The President's response was to dismiss
the council's criticism as a weary recital by union leaders out of step with the
millions of rank- and-file unionists who had just helped elect him President.

That Reagan taunt so incensed the normally unflappable Kirkland that he cast
about for some spectacular way to make visible the federation's mass
constituency. The upshot was Kirkland's decision to break with a taboo that had
been inviolable throughout the quarter-century of George Meany's reign: The
labor movement would take to the streets of Washington to lobby for changes in
Government policy. Some skeptics inside the federation's executive council
warned that the demonstration would be a bust or that the unionists in the march
would be overshadowed, in numbers and television notice, by homosexuals or the
radical left. Others argued that labor would be better advised to seek deals
with the Administration to protect such sacred cows as union wages on Federal
construction jobs, particularly at a time when even the Congressional Democrats
were in panicky retreat before the President's seeming invincibility.

But at Kirkland's insistence, Solidarity Day was scheduled for mid-September of
1981. The protest against President Reagan's economic policies brought more than
250,000 demonstrators to march in a political picket line that stretched from
the Washington Monument to the Capitol. The success of this bold break with
tradition was crucial in giving Kirkland extra personal capital to draw on when
he pursued an even bolder departure, his bid to put the collective political
resources of all the unions under the federation's direction. ''We've tried
everything else,'' Kirkland told one executive council session. ''Why don't we
try unity?''

At the federation's convention in November 1981, Kirkland took a giant step
toward his goal. In the past, the organization's political activities had
depended on a hit-and-miss funding system under which dollar quotas were set for
the various international unions - quotas they often ignored in favor of making
their own, independent sallies into political action. Now, the convention
approved a large increase in per capita dues, which guaranteed COPE a basic
allocation of $3.5 million a year out of the central treasury. The boost in dues
also assured another $2 million a year for politically oriented programs among
youth, senior citizens, women, blacks and Hispanics. Beyond all that, the
federation set up a budget of $3 million a year to create Labor's Institute of
Public Affairs to polish its public image with special programs on television,
cable, radio and satellite.



 Y THE TIME OF THE EXECUtive council's meeting in Washington in May 1982,
support for Kirkland's united-front proposal had crystallized. Gerald W.
McEntee, the ebullient president of the American Federation of State, County and
Municipal Employees, urged that all affiliates be asked to shun separate
endorsements of their Presidential favorites pending development of a process
whereby the endorsement question could be jointly addressed.

The McEntee resolution won immediate concurrence, but Glenn E. Watts, president
of the Communications Workers of America, raised a note of caution. He said
there were some ''mustangs'' in the council who had shown little disposition in
the past to stay inside the corral, no matter how united everyone else was on a
joint course of action. William W. Winpisinger, the self-styled
''seat-of-the-pants Socialist'' who heads the International Association of
Machinists, acknowledged with a grin that he was usually in the rebel category,
but this time, he promised, he would stay in line. That brought similar
commitments from everyone in the room.

When the council met three months later in New York, Kirkland invited three of
the announced candidates for the Democratic nomination - Senators John Glenn of
Ohio, Gary Hart of Colorado and Alan Cranston of California - to come to the
meeting to outline their platforms and be questioned by the council. A Senate
vote kept Cranston away, but the other two arrived and got polite, if somewhat
cool, receptions.

Kirkland informed the council that Mondale and Kennedy required no
get-acquainted sessions, but that he would invite the other Democratic
candidates. By way of indicating that labor was not irrevocably wedded to the
Democrats, he announced that a similar invitation would be extended to any
Republican who signified a desire to run against Mr. Reagan for the G.O.P.
nomination. That offer did not apply to the President himself, however. The
council knew all it wanted to know about him.

At the New York meeting, the Kirkland plan for early concerted involvement in
the Democratic Presidential choice was approved. It was agreed that the decision
on whom to back was to be made by the federation's General Board - the
presidents of the 95 A.F.L.-C.I.O. international unions - at a special meeting
in the first half of December 1983. The council accepted a Kirkland suggestion
that no endorsement be made unless leaders representing two-thirds of the total
dues-paying federation members agreed on a candidate.

At this point, everything seemed to be going swimmingly for Kirkland's game
plan, but a curious sense of unreality hung over the proceedings. Ted Kennedy
was still in the race, and many of the council members made no secret of their
fear that it would be impossible ever to get a two-thirds margin if the General
Board had to choose between him and Mondale. The split among the heads of the
dominant unions was very nearly as even as it had been when the choice lay
between Jimmy Carter and Kennedy in 1980. That Walter Mondale as the standout
candidate in a good field.'' That speak-no-evil policy applies even to the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, whose talks on the campaign trail have bristled with censure of
big labor. ''We're not going to get ecstatic about his candidacy,'' Kirkland
declares, ''but we won't say anything negative,''

Some areas of risk for labor in the Mondale gamble are ticked off in the
operating bible issued for COPE activists by John Perkins. One is that the media
will join with unionism's foes in writing labor off as a paper tiger if it is
less effective than it hopes to be in nominating and electing its favorite.
Paper tigers of that sort have trouble impressing either legislators or
employers. Another risk, the most dangerous in the COPE director's estimation,
is that labor's own solidarity could be shattered by recriminations if the
campaign fails.

There is a second factor in the risk equation. The endorsement of the AFL-CIO,
for all its advantages to Mondale, has its dangers, as well: The candidate may
be perceived by large numbers of voters to be in labor's pocket. At the White
House there is ill-concealed delight at the closeness of the ties that are being
forged between Mondale and the federation. In the Republicans' judgment, the
public will see Mondale as a union captive peddling labor's expensive blueprint
for the future - in the President's oft-used words, ''the same old economic
nostrums that got us into our economic difficulties in the first place.''

The charge that Mondale would come into the White House heavily mortgaged with
political due bills is also being made by his Democratic opponents. Senator
Glenn, for example, has gone so far as to offer an estimate of just what some of
the federation's principal objectives Mondale shares with the federation would
cost. His guess: a minimum of $90 billion and perhaps closer to $170 billion.
That ''big spender'' issue is certain to be a mainstay of the Republican attack
if Mondale captures the nomination.

The irony of labor's gamble on Mondale is that there are limits to what Mondale
or any President can do for the union movement. Unions have learned the hard way
that the adoption by a Democratic White House and Congress of labor-backed
legislative prescriptions does not always effect a cure. Only five years have
passed since President Carter signed the Humphrey- Hawkins Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act, a priority objective of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. It supposedly
required the President to send Congress a detailed annual plan for public and
private action to stimulate the economy and create jobs whenever unemployment
rose above 4 percent. But worries over inflation made it a dead letter almost
before the ink dried on the signature.

Moreover, some of labor's most crippling problems are internal, outgrowths of a
sluggishness of spirit that afflicts many unions. Tens of thousands of members
pay dues only because they must to hold their jobs under union shop contracts.
Many others are divorced from genuine involvement or rapport with their
organizations. The election of Walter Mondale as President will do nothing for
such alienation; the cure must come from within.



An observer who has spent almost a half-century chronicling the ups and downs of
the labor movement finds it hard to escape a sense that much of the uncertainty
surrounding labor's current political gamble stems from unionism's ambivalence
about its mission and its relationship with the corporate world. In the words of
an old labor battle song, the movement is groping for an answer to the question:
''Which side are you on?''

The core of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. indictment of the Reagan Administration is that it
has made itself subservient to business executives and bankers driven by an
insatiable lust for privilege and tax avoidance. Yet Kirkland is himself a
collaborator. He regularly joins with many of the fattest of the multinational
fat cats in search of cooperative approaches to the solution of basic economic
problems.

One triumph for the cooperative approach is known as the Labor-Management Group.
Kirkland and Clifton C. Garvin Jr., chairman of Exxon, are co-chairmen of the
panel made up of eight unionists and the heads of 10 big corporations. Two weeks
after the Mondale endorsement, the group announced its unanimous recommendation
that governmental spending to repair and maintain highways, bridges, water-
supply and sewage systems be boosted by $9 billion to $11 billion a year over
the next 15 years. Behind the accord lay a long process of give-and-take. The
unionists, for example, accepted the notion that highway tolls and other user
fees would increase, and the industrialists forbore any suggestion that
construction labor costs be reduced by wage givebacks or the loosening of
restrictive work rules.

An even greater triumph for business-labor consensus was achieved early this
month. A blue-ribbon task force reached basic agreement on a comprehensive
national industrial policy embracing many of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s bedrock
concepts. Kirkland is a co-chairman along with Irving S. Shapiro, retired
chairman of the rigorously nonunion Du Pont chemical complex, and the investment
banker Felix Rohatyn, the architect of New York City's fiscal rehabilitation.

Kirkland sees nothing contradictory in his inveighing against the corporate
world one moment and joining hands with it the next. ''After all,'' he says,
''we negotiate with them. We're not trying to put them out of business. I do
find that when you sit down with the chief officers of major outfits, they're a
good bit more open when you really explore a problem than the professional
flacks and hired guns that they employ or their lobbying agents in the Chamber
of Commerce and the National Association of Manufacturers.''

Some further indications of ecumenism have appeared as a beneficial by-product
of recent economic upheavals. In many battered industries both management and
unions hve recognized the need to reassess old relationships and practices in
the interest of mutual survival. Out of that reassessment have come novel
designs for increased shop- floor democracy and shared authority in the
workplace. In return for union acceptance of wage cuts and more flexible work
rules, some employers have given unions and their members a consequential voice
in management as well as profit-sharing and employee stock ownership. At
Chrysler and Eastern Airlines, the ultimate corporate sanctum sanctorum, the
company board of directors, has been opened up to union representation.

Kirkland and many other union leaders still have their fingers crossed about
these ventures into improving the quality of work life, principally because
employee sacrifices have not always been matched by sacrifices on the management
side. Often, in fact, the initiative has come from employers seeking to use such
programs as a shield against unionization.

For the moment, though, the possibility of future change in the relationship
between union and management must take second place to the Presidential campaign
and Kirkland's determination to put a man in the White House who he feels shares
the belief that this is no time for governmental retreat from the struggle for
human progress. The stakes do not faze Kirkland. He told the Florida convention:

''If we do not do what we propose to do, we shall be reviled as toothless and
irrelevant. If we succeed, we shall be condemned for daring to aspire to a share
of power in our society. Given that choice of slurs, I assure you that I much
prefer the latter.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Democratic caucus in New Hampshire page 32; photo of Lane
Kirkland and Walter Mondale

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE U.N. VERSUS THE U.S.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4166 words


Richard Bernstein is chief of The Times's United Nations bureau. By Richard
Bernstein



 EVERAL MONTHS AGO, IN AN EFFORT TO find out just what went on in the
multiplicity of meetings, commissions, committees and working groups that
together make up the United Nations, the United States Mission to the world body
made a quantitative study of the organization's activities. The examination
turned up some impressive numbers:

Each year, something on the order of 11,000 meetings takes place in Geneva and
New York. The cost to the world body for all of these meetings and conferences
comes to roughly $150 million a year. Each year, the United Nations circulates
7,000 to 8,000 reports as official documents. Stacked up, they would make a pile
120 feet high. There is a figure in the budget for the number of pages of
documents that will be printed in 1984. It is 1.1 billion.

It could, of course, be legitimately asked what good all this activity does.
And, indeed, there are many voices asking that question in tones of skepticism
and anguish. The answer, of course, is complex, considering that the United
Nations includes not only the deliberative bodies that deal with classic
political and diplomatic issues, but a host of independent agencies engaged in
such activities as feeding children and encouraging economic growth in well over
100 countries around the world. Yet, on political matters, there is a growing
sense that the United Nations has become repetitive, rhetorical, extremist and
antidemocratic, a place where the United States is attacked with apparent
impunity even by countries with which it maintains cordial bilateral relations.

Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, chief United States delegate to the world body, has
characterized the American position there as ''essentially impotent, without
influence, heavily outvoted, and isolated.'' According to a Gallup Poll last
fall, only 36 percent of Americans believe that the United Nations is doing a
''good job,'' a sign of the widespread belief that the organization, fostered
and promoted by the United States in its early years, has become hostile and
inimical to American interests.

American concern over the drift of the world body has been particularly intense
among conservatives, some of whom have challenged the validity of continued
United States participation. Midge Decter, the director of the Committee for the
Free World, has charged that the United Nations ''has been turned around 180
degrees into a center for the articulation and legitimation of tyranny.'' The
Washington-based Heritage Foundation has been attacking the organization for
about two years in reports and statements contending that the United Nations had
turned into a largely anti-American club dominated by the Soviet bloc, by
European leftists, and by radical countries in the third world.

Many Americans, including many who are critical of the United Nations, regard
these attacks as excessive and one-sided. Nonetheless, there can be little doubt
that, over the years, the United Nations has come to be dominated by what might
be called a third-world ideology. The main tendencies of this outlook are
sympathy for authoritarian government, deep suspicion of the West, a disavowal
of free enterprise, and - in an organization whose charter repudiates the use or
the threat of force - a belief in the legitimacy of ''armed struggle'' when
carried out by the world's generally Marxist ''national liberation movements,''
particularly the Palestine Liberation Organization and Swapo, the South-West
Africa People's Organization.

American isolation emerged, as usual, as a major theme of the 1983 General
Assembly that was completed last month. The United States voted alone, or almost
alone, on a host of resolutions on South Africa, Namibia and the Middle East,
some of which mentioned the United States by name as fostering ''aggression'' or
''collaboration'' with racism. Pro- Western countries in Latin America - and
only those countries - were criticized for basic abuses of human rights. In the
wake of the invasion of Grenada, both the Security Council and the General
Assembly voted by enormous margins for resolutions ''deploring the armed
intervention in Grenada'' as a ''flagrant violation of international law.'' In
the General Assembly, most of the NATO countries, Japan, the pro-Western states
of Southeast Asia, the pro-American democracies of South America, and such close
friends of Washington as Pakistan, Sweden and Austria either abstained or voted
for the censure resolution - even while many ambassadors of those countries said
privately that, in their opinion, the American action had been beneficial and
justified.

America's reverses in the United Nations have produced more than
disillusionment; last month, for the first time, they generated strong
retaliatory action, in the form of a decision by the Reagan Administration to
withdraw from UNESCO by 1985, unless that agency made major changes in policy.
UNESCO, or the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
had, in Washington's view, become the worst of the independent agencies.
Encouraged by the Soviet Union and radical third-world countries hostile to the
United States, the Paris-based body pressed for such antidemocratic programs as
tighter government controls over journalists, as embodied in the plan for a
''new world information order.'' At the same time, the agency had become a
platform for rhetoric excoriating Israel and blaming the West for virtually all
of the developing world's problems.

All this has taken the United States a long way from that day in 1949 when
President Truman, in his inaugural address, pledged ''unfaltering support'' for
the United Nations and seemed to place the organization at the center of
American foreign policy. For Washington these days, the United Nations at best
is, in Mrs. Kirkpatrick's words, ''a useful place to make statements that
resound throughout the world.'' The United States is on the defensive, trying
not so much to advance its policy goals as to limit the damage that can be done
to it by a hostile world body.

What went wrong? In the view of some diplomats and officials at the United
Nations, this American isolation is the product of American foreign policy - its
lack of sympathy, as they see it, with many of the causes of the United Nations
majority. Some United Nations diplomats talk about ''Mrs. Kirkpatrick's nyet''
as having replaced the notorious Soviet nyet of the organization's early years.
But there are strong reasons for believing that the powerfully anti-American
tone of the United Nations bespeaks something more profound than mere
differences of view. The question is not why American policy has diverged from
that of other member states, but why the world's most powerful democracy has
failed to win support for its views among the participants in United Nations
debates.

The answer seems to lie in two underlying factors. The first and dominant one is
the very structure and political culture that have evolved at the world body,
tending in the process to isolate the United States and to portray it as a kind
of ideological villain. The other factor is American failure to play the game of
multilateral diplomacy with sufficient skill.

 HERE ARE MANY WHO CONTEND THAT THE DECLINE of American influence at the United
Nations has been exaggerated. They make the point that if there are certain
automatic votes against the United States - on the Grenada invasion, for example
- there are counterbalancing votes against the Soviet Union. Demands for the
withdrawal of ''foreign,'' meaning Soviet, troops from Afghanistan have been a
regular feature of the General Assembly ever since the Soviet invasion of 1979.
The same is true of censures of Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia. After the
Russians shot down a Korean Air Lines plane last Sept. 1, the Security Council
voted 9-2, with four abstentions, to condemn the act. In casting one of the two
negative votes (the other being Poland's), the Soviet Union, of course, killed
the resolution with its veto power. But to be forced to use the veto is regarded
as a defeat for either Washington or Moscow. The Soviet Union has vetoed 115
resolutions, most of them during the organization's first two decades. The
United States has used its veto power 37 times.

A study done in the Secretariat last year disputed what it called a ''widely
shared misperception among Americans that the U.S. is consistently outvoted by a
coalition of developing and socialist nations.'' The study found that in the
1981 and 1982 General Assemblies, the United States voted with the majority 72.7
percent of the time.

A tabulation of votes on all resolutions, however, misses the essential facts of
American weakness. The United States casts many affirmative votes on such
routine and innocuous matters as financing, on the special ized agencies, and on
various, ever more numerous ritualistic statements in favor of economic aid,
peace and progress. A large share of the General Assembly resolutions are
adopted by consensus year after year without a vote at all. The crucial
questions are those bellwether political issues that the majority of member
nations themselves feel are important, and, here, there is powerful support for
the argument that, at the United Nations, American values are under attack and
the United States is isolated.

According to the United States Mission, which keeps computerized records of
voting patterns, the number of countries that vote consistently with the United
States on the key political questions is very small. During the 1982 General
Assembly, on the 20 issues deemed most significant by the American Mission, many
of the West European nations voted with the United States roughly 80 percent of
the time. Other countries more often than not voted against the United States.
One NATO country, Greece, voted with the United States in 1982 a bare one-third
of the time; such Latin American allies as El Salvador and Guatemala voted with
the United States well under half the time; and the vast majority of the African
and the Asian countries - including some recipients of large amounts of American
aid, such as Zimbabwe and Pakistan - took the same side as the United States
only 20 to 30 percent of the time. On an average, the nonaligned movement voted
with the United States on those issues 22 percent of the time.

This pattern presents a dramatic contrast with the early days of the
organization, when an automatic majority, consisting largely of the Western
democracies and countries friendly to them, controlled both the tone and the
decisions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. Since then, a number
of events have marked the dividing line between the eras of American strength
and American weakness. In 1971, the Americans lost an effort to keep a seat for
Taiwan in the General Assembly, even while favoring one for Communist China. In
1974, the P.L.O chairman Yasir Arafat received a standing ovation when he
addressed the General Assembly with an apparently empty gun holster sticking out
from beneath his jacket. The next year, the membership passed a resolution
declaring Zionism to be a ''form of racism and racial discrimination.''

It is often the tone and atmosphere rather than the results of formal votes that
most dramatically illustrate the relative weakness of the United States and its
values. Indeed, listening day after day to the speeches in the General Assembly
or one of its seven committees, it is difficult to avoid the impression that the
very notion of reasoned debate has fallen prey to a ritualistic and numbingly
repetitive series of slogans that often constitute attacks, direct or implicit,
on the United States. Meeting chambers are filled day after day with
prefabricated jargon about racism, colonialism and fascism.

There is also what might be called a ''trickle-up'' effect at the United
Nations, whereby the proliferation of committees, subcommittees, commissions,
special conferences and the like strongly shape the substance of matters that
dominate the time of the Secretariat and the agenda of the General Assembly.
Packed often with delegates from the Soviet bloc and radical third-world
countries, this group of committees and commissions has transformed much of the
business of the United Nations into what one Western European delegate has
called a ''huge propaganda jamboree'' directed against the West.

The United States, for example, is, along with Israel, the only country
specifically attacked for its trade and economic relations with South Africa,
even though virtually all the European countries and many of the African
countries have similar relations. Last year, the General Assembly passed a
resolution deploring Israeli-American military cooperation as a major
contributory factor to military conflict in the Middle East. There was no
mention in the resolution or the preceding debate of Syrian- Soviet military
cooperation, even though the Russians maintain some 7,000 troops and military
advisers in Syria and have helped Syria to occupy large sections of neighboring
Lebanon.

Then, there is the organization's preoccupation - some would call it obsession -
with certain bedrock issues, notably South Africa and Israel. Virtually every
committee and commission in the United Nations has created some sort of unit
whose main function is to condemn Israel and to express solidarity with the
P.L.O. There is a Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People; the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories. There
is a United Nations-mandated International Day of Solidarity With the
Palestinian People. In the Secretariat, there is a Division for Palestinian
Rights. Since 1967, the Security Council has voted on some 200 anti-Israeli
resolutions, which were either adopted or were defeated only by an American
veto.

These elements of United Nations behavior have remained largely constant no
matter who was carrying out American diplomacy at the organization - whether
figures generally accommodating to the third world, such as Adlai E. Stevenson
or Andrew Young, or more confrontational representatives like Daniel Patrick
Moynihan and Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Nor has this situation been affected by the
changes of Secretaries General. The present holder of the top United Nations
job, Javier Perez de Cuellar of Peru, is universally regarded as an astute and
independent diplomat. Yet, what is conspicuous even under a leader of his skill,
is that United Nations activities rarely generate genuine, sincere suggestions
for how to resolve conflicts. In the wake of the Six Day War of 1967, the
Security Council passed a resolution that envisaged a comprehensive settlement
of the entire Middle East conflict, one recognizing the right of all states to
live within secure boundaries. In recent years, however, resolutions have been
largely condemnatory, setting forth extreme demands but offering no realistic
frameworks for solutions.

Indeed, many delegates these days acknowledge that the organization has not
played a major role in resolving a conflict since the 1973 Yom Kippur war
between Israel and Egypt. Since then, there have been the crises in Afghanistan,
Cambodia and Cyprus; the conflicts in the Middle East between Iran and Iraq,
between Syria and a faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization, and
between Israel and the anti-Israeli forces in Lebanon; there has been the war
between Argentina and Britain over the Falkland Islands; and there has been the
civil conflict in Chad, and the fighting between Morocco and Algeria over the
Western Sahara. In none of these disputes has the United Nations, riven by
Soviet-American conflicts and lacking in consensus among its members, had a
measurable impact for the good. Moreover, the intemperate and sullen quality of
the debate at the United Nations, where hurling abuse often replaces sober
discussion, can be said to have done more at times to aggravate conflicts than
to compose them.

''What happens,'' a Western ambassador said, ''is that resolutions that seemed
very radical when they were first introduced become more acceptable as time goes
on. Gradually, as these resolutions gain larger and larger majorities, the
countries that have been voting against them begin to feel isolated, until,
eventually, it is only the Americans who oppose them.''

THERE ARE VARIOUS ways to explain how the United Nations turned into an
organization unfriendly to American aspirations. The growth of membership, from
51 countries in 1946 to the current 158, was bound to reduce American status.
While these new members differ in many respects from one another, a large number
of them, as Mr. Moynihan argued when he was the chief American delegate, share
certain values: a general belief in Socialism, a conviction that their own
poverty is an outgrowth of their earlier domination by Western colonialism, and
a suspicion of free institutions as both harmful to their own power and
unsuitable to their particular circumstances. ''There is a kind of Freudian
element in this,'' a Western delegate said, ''an anger on the part of the newly
independent countries at the old colonial 'father.' '' pages 24-26 UN JUMP





 her own explanation for what she has called the ''impotence'' of the United
States. While Senator Moynihan has stressed the political ''culture'' of the
newly independent states, she has emphasized the structure of the world body,
its division into powerful voting blocs capable of focusing attention on some
areas, like Israel and South Africa, and away from others, like the Syrian
occupation of much of Lebanon. In essence, she argues, most countries gain some
influence at the United Nations by being associated with one or another of the
many groups of countries that have been formed there, such as the Soviet bloc,
the 20-member Arab group, the 42-member Islamic Conference and the 101-member
nonaligned movement (which constitutes a voting majority in the General Assembly
all by itself.)

''Blocs,'' Mrs. Kirkpatrick told an audience at Georgetown University in June
1982, ''function in the United Nations very much like political parties in a
legislature,'' complete with alliances and trade-offs on certain issues. Thus,
she added, the ''Zionism is racism'' resolution ''symbolizes the alliance
between the African bloc and the Arab bloc, in which the African bloc supports
the Arabs on all matters attacking Israel, and the Arabs agree to support the
African bloc on all matters attacking South Africa.'' Within this scheme, Mrs.
Kirkpatrick said, the Russians are leaders of their own bloc, which includes the
states of Eastern Europe and such other Marxist states as Angola, Ethiopia and
Cuba; and these non- European members of the Soviet bloc in turn belong to and
influence other blocs such as the nonaligned. The other voting groups do not
vote together on every issue. Yet, there is widespread agreement that American
weakness at the United Nations stems from the fact that the United States,
enjoying the same single vote in the General Assembly as such tiny countries as
Vanuatu or the Seychelles, belongs to no voting group at all.

As Mrs. Kirkpatrick put it, ''In this system, the United States is like a
country without a party.'' It is an observer in a group called West European and
Other Governments (W.E.O.G.), which includes Japan, Canada, Australia and New
Zealand. But W.E.O.G. generally does not vote as a group, and, in any case, the
United States, as an observer, does not participate in decisions, such as
nominating delegates to committee posts, that are normally the business of the
regional groups. Thus, Mrs. Kirkpatrick told her Georgetown audience: ''We are
nonparticipants in all the key political decisions leading to the final
juridical decisions taken by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, and so forth.''

The one-sidedness of the United Nations' decisions may also be explained by the
organization's structure and culture. Human-rights violations in Communist
countries, for example, have never been placed on the agenda of the General
Assembly or any of its committees; at the same time, several of Washington's
strategic allies are annually condemned for human-rights abuses by large
majorities that include dictatorships whose own records in that sphere are
abysmal by any criteria. In the General Assembly last year, a vigorous effort,
led by Iranian exile groups, to place a resolution condemning Iran for
human-rights violations failed to gain a single sponsor, even though there was
persuasive evidence that thousands of political executions have taken place in
that country since 1981.

Western European countries backed away from sponsoring the resolution on Iran,
largely in the belief that, without third-world support, such a resolution would
either be defeated or amended out of recognition. As for the third- world
countries, the hesitation to take on Iran seemed to stem from the fact that it
is oil-rich and a member of the Islamic Conference. The human-rights debate
focused, instead, on three right-wing Latin American states, El Salvador,
Guatemala and Chile, that did not belong to any powerful bloc and thus seemed
good targets. They were singled out primarily because of the weakness of their
positions and only secondarily because of the seriousness of their human-rights
violations.

The human-rights debate indicates that, given the constellation of forces within
the United Nations, it is easier to attack American interests than those of
other countries, whether smaller and weaker ones, like Iran, or major, powerful
ones like the Soviet Union. It also illustrates that no change of policy in
Washington is likely to make the United Nations friendlier to the values and
interests of the United States. On many questions, delegates automatically vote
with the bloc they belong to. ''There are hundreds of questions coming up all
the time,'' a senior Western diplomat explained. ''Very few countries have the
resources to examine each of them on their merits and to make independent
decisions. In many cases, the ambassadors at the U.N. don't even get
instructions from their governments. So, the easiest and safest thing for them
to do is simply vote with, say, the nonaligned group. They can always justify
such a decision to their governments later.''

The United Nations' very powerlessness contributes to the huge majorities by
which many of the bedrock issues are decided. Many countries vote for
resolutions because they know there will be no real consequences. If, by some
miracle, these decisions were to acquire immediate and practical effect, their
very one-sidedness might give some countries pause.



The culture and structure of the United Nations weigh heavily against the United
States, but other factors, including American behavior, also contribute to
American weakness at the world body. Mrs. Kirkpatrick herself has argued that
American failures at the United Nation stem, at least in part, from what she has
called American ''ineptitude'' in multilateral diplomacy. ''We have not been
effective in defining or projecting in international arenas a conception of our
national purpose,'' she said at a Heritage Foundation conference in 1982. ''By
not really learning the rules, the players, the game, we have often behaved like
a bunch of amateurs in the United Nations.'' Until American diplomatic practice
improves, she said, it cannot be known if the world body can be made ''a
hospitable place for the American national interest.''

Inside the 12-story American Mission, just across First Avenue from the United
Nations' New York headquarters, a plaque listing all the chief American
delegates reveals an important part of this picture. The list of names,
beginning with Edward R. Stettinius Jr. and ending with Mrs. Kirkpatrick, shows
that only three of the 16 American ambassadors - Warren Austin, Henry Cabot
Lodge Jr. and Adlai Stevenson - remained at their posts for a full four-year
Presidential term. On the average, they stayed at their posts for 19 months, and
even then, because the American chief delegate is also a member of the
President's Cabinet, they have often been absent from New York. Mrs. Kirkpatrick
has been away, attending meetings in Washington or giving speeches or visiting
foreign countries, at least one-third of the time. Moreover, most of the top
people in the 57-member mission were brought in personally by Mrs. Kirkpatrick.
When she leaves her post - and she has made no secret of her desire to depart as
soon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Kirkpatrick with aides page one; photo of Security Council
meeting in 1950 page 20 ; photo of Jeane Kirkpatrick ; photo of Mrs. Kirkpatrick
conferring with Yehuda Z Blum p.20; photo of Oleg Troyanovsky discussing tactics
page 20; photo of third-world representatives at Unesco page 22; photo of
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar page 22; photo of U.S. vetoing
resolution in Security Council p.22; photo of Security Council passing
resolution 22 in 1967 p.22; photo of Yasir Arafat at General Assembly in 1974
page 23 ; photo of delegates walking out on Begin at U.N. in 1982, p.24

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A LIFE OF DUBIOUS BATTLE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2656 words


Kevin Starr is the author of ''Americans and the California Dream 1850-1915''
and the forthcoming ''Southern California - the Founding Era.'' THE TRUE
ADVENTURES OF JOHN STEINBECK, WRITER By Jackson J. Benson.  Illustrated. 1,116
pp. New York: The Viking Press. $35.

By Kevin Starr

FOR the past two decades or so, beginning with Mark Schorer's comprehensive
biography of Sinclair Lewis, Americans have been busy monumentalizing their late
great writers in massively detailed books - such as Jackson J. Benson's newly
published biography of John Steinbeck, more than a thousand pages long and 13
years in the making. What is this rage for biographical detail regarding the
departed literary great that now so besets us? Is it our awareness, perhaps,
that we have come to the end of a time when writers truly mattered in our
culture, when novelists and poets were capable - as Fitzgerald, Hemingway, Dos
Passos, Lewis, Eliot, Faulkner and Steinbeck were - of defining an American era
through their work?

Or is the process more ordinary - something symbiotic and continuous between
letters and the academy, so that those of us who survive into the decades ahead
may live to see equally monumental biographies of Saul Bellow and John Updike
produced over years of labor by scholars now struggling with their first term
papers in introductory American literature?

In any event, Mr. Benson, who teaches at San Diego State University, has labored
heroically; and the resulting biography (once the obvious complaint about its
length and price is made) does chronicle in total detail and accessible, solid
prose the life and times of a writer who, as Mr. Benson emphasizes, never (until
the end) lost faith in writing as his all-compelling calling, useful to his
fellow human beings, no matter what the critics might say.

The critics - here is the Ariadne's thread to take us through Mr. Benson's
thousand-plus pages. After the achievements of his crowded early years - ''The
Pastures of Heaven'' (1932), ''To a God Unknown'' (1933), ''Tortilla Flat''
(1935), ''In Dubious Battle'' (1936), ''Of Mice and Men'' (1937), ''The Red
Pony'' (1937), ''The Long Valley'' (1938) and ''The Grapes of Wrath'' (1939) -
Steinbeck spent another 30 years writing and living well by his pen (three
wives, an Upper East Side town house, a special table at ''21,'' frequent
travel) while never freeing himself from the critical insinuation that after
''The Grapes of Wrath'' he was a has-been.

In 1962, for instance, the editorial page of The New York Times, responding to
Steinbeck's Nobel Prize, asked whether it was proper for the Nobel Committee to
recognize a novelist whose best work was two decades behind him, while
neglecting other American writers of more continuing influence. The question
hurt Steinbeck deeply - as did the constant hostility of Time magazine, which
snidely pegged him as a proletarian writer and never let go. There was, in
addition, the general hostility to his post-''Grapes of Wrath'' work shown by
the critical establishment, as embodied in Edmund Wilson, whom Steinbeck loathed
for describing his novels as existing in a borderland between good and bad
literature.

Time and again, Mr. Benson returns to this establishment hostility and its
melancholy effect on Steinbeck's self-esteem, which was to drive him to abandon
novel writing altogether when ''The Winter of Our Discontent'' was lambasted in
1961. This hostility, Mr. Benson argues, was based on misconceptions that fixed
themselves in the literary-political establishment and were never reversed.
During the left-leaning 1930's, John Steinbeck, then in his own 30's, made an
astonishing debut as a writer of social protest. Even his severest critics
conceded that Steinbeck's last Depression novel, ''The Grapes of Wrath,'' would
always hold a high place in the canon of American literature. These novels,
unfortunately, created the impression that Steinbeck was on the left, perhaps
even a Marxist. Henry Luce thus ordered him excoriated, and during the war
Steinbeck was denied a commission in the Army Air Corps through bureaucratic
delay (despite his personal relationship with President Roosevelt himself)
because Marxist innuendoes kept showing up in his security file. And, Mr. Benson
argues, when the liberal establishment, political and literary, discovered that
Steinbeck was not on the left but was, if anything, a Jeffersonian individualist
with a populist-right orientation, nothing Steinbeck subsequently wrote could
ever satisfy it. The magnificent achievement of ''The Grapes of Wrath'' became a
convenient cudgel, a cheap-shot reference when dismissing Steinbeck's latest
work.

Mr. Benson overstates his case, of course, as any biographer of 13 years of
devoted involvement is entitled to do. Steinbeck kept busy at his desk for 40
years, and the resulting output ranges from great literature to good writing
(including excellent reportage during World War II) to work that even his
staunchest advocates might find disappointing. Like his fellow Californian, Jack
London, whom he modeled himself upon as an aspiring young writer, Steinbeck was
best - great, in fact - when he stayed close to experience and grew
progressively worse as he attempted to philosophize. Despite his vast personal
erudition, which Mr. Benson delights in documenting (as if in refutation of the
canards in Time), Steinbeck was not in his most powerful capacity a versatile
man of letters. Yet this is what he sought to become after ''The Grapes of
Wrath.''

Nor was he a literary intellectual or even a social philosopher - as he was wont
to consider himself - but rather a storyteller in the manner of his beloved Sir
Thomas Malory, great in narrative (as in the Depression novels) and falling away
whenever the primacy of narrative was forgotten, as in the forced allegory of
''East of Eden'' (1952) or the several failed attempts at theater.

In ''The True Adventures of John Steinbeck, Writer,'' Mr. Benson quite rightly
corrects the record, chronicling the diversity, energy and frequent
experimentalism of Steinbeck's post-''Grapes of Wrath'' output. But even a
sympathetic reader is only half-convinced. True, as Mr. Benson argues, Steinbeck
cannot be faulted for not rewriting, again and again, his Depression books,
which, Mr. Benson says, would have pleased the critics. Yet even Mr. Benson's
own narrative is pervaded, paradoxically, by a certain half-suppressed
melancholy as he chronicles Steinbeck's efforts to keep the momentum of his
career going after his early achievement.

But enough of these literary considerations! To dwell on them overlong is to
lose the impact of Mr. Benson's biography, which is, after all, an important
American life well told. John Steinbeck had great personal courage (he proved
this as a combat correspondent during World War II), and he lived a full
American life - with its promises and its paradoxes, its stimuli and temptations
- with appetite and bravery. And Mr. Benson has told the story with a narrative
force that in itself is the highest compliment he can pay to his subject.

Born in Salinas in 1902, Steinbeck was a product of the central California
valley inland and coast, a region that is perhaps most representative of
California in its components. Here are fertile plains, long valleys, coastal
ranges and spectacular seashore all within miles of each other. Overlaying this
heroic geography are the Indian, Spanish, Mexican and frontier American
heritages that include the state's first capital and longtime symbolic center,
Monterey. Throughout his life, Steinbeck sustained the usual American
ambivalence to his home town, and Salinas returned the antagonism in kind. But
his home country afforded him the scenes and settings of his best books.

The Steinbecks were not poor, but comfortably middle class; and it is from
Steinbeck's mother, a schoolteacher with social ambitions, that he absorbed a
passion for things literary that at once convinced him he would be a writer and
yet, oddly, marred his best writing in later years when he strove overmuch for
literary effect. Because of his novels, Steinbeck's home country - the Salinas
Valley, the Gabilan Mountains, the seaside town of Monterey - are now
universally recognized, transformed by the narrative magic of his memorable
books into places touched by myth.

Steinbeck attended Leland Stanford Junior University in Palo Alto, where he
studied intermittently over a six-year period without taking a degree. There he
consolidated a sense of his writer's vocation under such teachers as Margery
Bailey, a fierce dragon of a woman with a Yale Ph.D., and her contrastingly pre-
Raphaelite colleague Edith Mirrielees. At Stanford also - although Mr. Benson
does not develop this at length - Steinbeck absorbed an idiosyncratic species of
biological thinking that was a distinct aspect of the Stanford point of view as
molded by its founding president, David Starr Jordan.

This biologism - a disposition to perceive experience fundamentally in terms of
the encounter between man and his environment - had been established as a key
premise of California thinking since the era of the frontier. Even during
Steinbeck's youth, the natural environment of California was so abundantly
triumphant, and human society so contrastingly thin, that it is no wonder the
writers nurtured in this environment, from Jack London and Frank Norris onward,
were ever obsessed with what a fragile biological creature man is and yet how
enduring in his moral courage.

In the years that followed the Depression, Steinbeck was only an intermittent
Californian. In Mr. Benson's narrative, we find him progressing north from
Salinas to Stanford to the ranch-style home and adjacent swimming pool in Los
Gatos - the rewards of his first success - then further north to San Francisco
before quitting the Pacific Coast altogether, except for trips to Monterey in
times of crisis and to Hollywood for working stints. In Hollywood he dreamed of
scoring big as a screenwriter, just as he would try the theater in New York.

Steinbeck might write about California, but what he really wanted was New York
in all its glittering rewards of social and literary recognition. He got some of
this, Mr. Benson tells us, but not all that he wanted, or at least not as much
as he could have used to bolster his literary reputation. When at last he found
peace, it was in the seaside Long Island village of Sag Harbor, soreminiscent of
Pacific Grove near Monterey on the opposite coast, where in an unpretentious
cottage he had done some of his best writing.

Steinbeck contained within himself the perennial American contradictions of
solitude and society, of success and the corruptions of recognition, of the
rejected home country and the not-so-accepting chosen place. Of all the writers
of his generation who managed to earn a place in the forefront of our
literature, Steinbeck was perhaps the most low-key, the most middlebrow and
egalitarian. He loved kibitzing with the locals in garages and coffee shops. He
loved sweat shirts and chinos, jug red wine and late night meals of chili beans
and tuna fish on crackers. (He also liked evening dress, trans-Atlantic luxury
liners and good restaurants.) In ''The Grapes of Wrath'' he gave utterance as no
other American author had ever managed to do to the disenfranchised and hurting
people of the Depression, the migrant Oklahomans. Sensing in Steinbeck his
essential compassion and lack of snobbery, grateful for his understandable
middlebrow discourse, the American reading public made of Steinbeck a financial
success. He was their voice, proof positive that ordinary American people,
places and things could be touched by humor and epic intention.

This success brought him the many friendships and associations which Mr. Benson
describes with great fullness. There was not only President Roosevelt but,
later, President Johnson, who wooed Steinbeck with all the savvy of a kindred
spirit, a fellow populist at once inside and outside the establishment.
Steinbeck's involvement with Johnson and his advocacy of the Vietnam War, which
he covered as a combat correspondent just before his death in 1968 , served
further to alienate him from many of his readers.

In the course of his book, Mr. Benson manages to dispel a number of myths - that
Steinbeck was an alcoholic, for instance. He was not. But he was intermittently
a heavy drinker, as were most of the other great writers of his generation, such
as Steinbeck's good friend John O'Hara or William Faulkner, who was incoherently
drunk during their first meeting. In the matter of marriage and divorce,
Steinbeck displayed an almost old-fashioned chivalry as his first two marriages
broke up. The supposed womanizer actually nurtured a rather high regard for
women, especially assertive, bookish women, who reminded him of his mother.

''The True Adventures of John Steinbeck, Writer'' will not prompt any major
reassessments of his achievement as an American writer. For all the controversy,
that reputation is secure. Mr. Benson has, however, provided us with the totally
American materials of Steinbeck's life and career. In both his life and his art,
Steinbeck was characterized by a certain irreducible American paradox, a tension
between instinct and mind, nature and history, civilization and its discontents.
This dichotomy accounted for great power when it was turned to the purposes of
narrative but proved less than satisfying when applied to a theoretical
position.

One does not judge him, finally, for his ideas or his failures, but for his
successful fictions - and these are many, more than the critics care to admit.
Innumerable Americans, and others as well, have been first introduced to the
power of literature through encountering the work of John Steinbeck at its best,
which is very good indeed.B

Hd. tk.  Because of last-minute editorial changes, the Steinbeck biography by
Jackson J. Benson was delayed for several months. Legal objections were raised
by the publisher's lawyers; family objections were also raised to certain
passages considered too personal. In all, less than one-tenth of one percent of
the biography was changed - some sentences and one paragraph, adding up to 20
altered pages in an 1,100-page book.  The touchiest paragraph concerned
Gwyndolyn Steinbeck, the novelist's second wife and mother of his two sons.
Originally, the biographer had reported - and it appeared in the page proofs
last summer - that Gwyndolyn had falsely impugned the legitimacy of their second
son. This was eliminated when family members objected.The changes bring to the
forefront an ambiguous literary matter: What is an authorized and what is an
unauthorized biography? An authorized biography might be defined as one that is
read and approved before publication by the subject or a concerned third party.
In the present case, while the book's copyright is solely in Mr. Benson's name,
there is a separate copyright for ''unpublished photos, writings and letters by
John Steinbeck'' in the name of Elaine Steinbeck, his third wife and widow. The
biographer does admit in his acknowledgements: ''Mrs. John Steinbeck not only
gave her authorization to proceed with the biography, but provided constant help
in directing me to sources of materials.'' The book's editor, Bill Strachan, a
senior editor at Viking, says that the Steinbeck estate did not have final
approval of the manuscript. But because of their cooperation, Elaine Steinbeck
and the Steinbeck sons were permitted to read the book in advance and offer
suggestions for the purpose of accuracy and, apparently, taste.  Nowhere in this
book is it called ''authorized.'' Yet it could be fairly described as a little
of both: an unauthorized authorized biography. - H. M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Steinbeck covering combat in Vietnam, 1966 page 32; photo of
Steinbeck in 1958 page one

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

APPETITES AND SYMPATHIES

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words


J. D. McClatchy is a poet and critic who teaches creative writing at Princeton
University. His latest collection of poems is ''Scenes From Another Life.''
FIRST LIGHT

By David Wagoner.  114 pp. Boston: Atlantic/Little, Brown.  Cloth, $14.95.
Paper, $7.95.  IF YOU CALL THIS CRY A SONG By Hayden Carruth.  107 pp.
Woodstock, Vt.: The Countryman Press.  Cloth, $12.95. Paper, $7.50.


By J. D. McClatchy

FOR his high school yearbook in 1944, David Wagoner noted down his job
preferences as ''1) Chemist 2) Stage Magician 3) -.'' Twenty years later, he
wrote a poem called ''Filling Out a Blank'' that broods on his old choices: My
preference was to be The shrewd man holding up A test-tube to the light, Or the
bowing charlatan Whose inexhaustible hat Could fill a stage with birds.  Lying
beyond that, Nothing seemed like me.


The third choice, the blank finally filled in, turned out to be the writer
concocted or conjured from his first impulses: ''It came to this brief line, /
This disappearing act.''

Now, with 13 books of poems and 10 novels behind him, Mr. Wagoner can hardly be
said to have disappeared. Nor is his work at all self-effacing. It bubbles with
personality. He can write with assurance about almost anything. Many poets have
a range; Mr. Wagoner has an appetite for subjects. There are poems in his new
collection about washing a rhinoceros, naval trainees learning how to jump
overboard and the breath test for drunk drivers. The results in these anecdotal
poems - about half of ''First Light'' - are never less than clever but rarely
more.

But even when he writes with his left hand, his poems pay strict attention and
attract it. Both the chemist and the magician, knowledge and illusion, are at
work. The abundance of novelistic detail that has marked Mr. Wagoner's poems
from the start is not an ornament but a passion - to observe, evoke, understand.
And at the same time, his verse in enchanting. In the poem ''Feeding,'' for
instance, he is casting his bread crumbs upon the water - first for fingerling
catfish, then for something bigger. Note in these stanzas how the diction
describes, the rhythms narrate: When I dropped more, what came Was an altogether
stranger Nature of moving slow, As though the elders knew They could be slow to
swim But would still be in time To take what was their own Into their own gloom
Of soft-barbed opening And closing jaws and turn Away in easy curves With a
sinewy suppleness, Undulant, fading down To what they might become Somewhere
still more dim.

''First Light'' is a full book, perhaps too full to avoid giving the impression
of repetitiveness - especially since Mr. Wagoner is here pacing off familiar
ground. There are seven sections, the poems in each clustering around a single
topic. Among the most vivid are the initial memory-poems - a series of
self-portraits, really, snipped from the family album, love focused by
nostalgia, things ''going on and on in the heart.'' The most startling and
affecting is called ''Their Bodies,'' addressed to the anatomy students at
Indiana University to whom Mr. Wagoner's parents had, against their son's wish,
willed their bodies: ''If you're not certain / Which ones are theirs, be gentle
to everybody.''

The book's centerpiece, a long poem called ''The Land Behind the Wind,'' is Mr.
Wagoner's finest achievement, drawing on his interest in the landscape of the
Northwest and American Indian culture. The story is simple. A man and woman are
lost in a snowstorm, dreaming of rescue, drifting into death. The woman's dream
begins: She had become a tree, and two dark birds Had built their nests in her,
had woven Moss and dead grass Into a shape no larger than cupped hands Where now
a single egg was gleaming Like a blackened moon In the cup of a half-sky, both
newly broken Out of the night. She was in the earth And above it, and all
weather Was hers alone now. Nothing could fall That had not already fallen. The
birds within her Sang their first song: silence. Then she saw Near the ground,
making its own small fire, The woodsman's glistening ax.


As they wander, a frail human presence amid looming natural forces, they drink
''from the source, their blue lips going numb / At that strange kiss.'' By now
it is clear we are out of the world of nature or dream and into myth. The couple
climb into the wind - ''a claim against earth'' - as the poem itself ascends
toward the sublime. The austere grandeur of Mr. Wagoner's vision here reminds
one of this poet's power - a power he too often shrugs off or muffles.



Coming so soon after the appearance of his major work, ''The Sleeping Beauty''
(1982), Hayden Carruth's new book will seem a disappointment. But then, this
book is not new. The poems gathered here, written between 1964 and 1979, had
been ''mislaid among accumulations of other paper or were intentionally omitted
from the books they might have gone into because there wasn't room.'' Some poems
would be best forgotten, even by their author. The instinct to retrieve them is
always tender but not necessarily good.

If Mr. Carruth had dated or ordered the poems, they might have helped sharpen
the profile of his career. Instead, the book is helter-skelter - good poems and
bad, occasional and sturdy prayers, epistles, Imagist lyrics, jeremiads, rural
character sketches and translations.

Among these scraps from the cutting room floor are poems that remind one of
qualities found in Mr. Carruth's better work. One is his moral canniness. ''On
Being Asked to Write a Poem Against the War in Vietnam'' recalls that poem and
others he had written against earlier wars: and not one breath was restored to
one shattered throat mans womans or childs not one not one but death went on and
on never looking aside except now and then like a child with a furtuve
half-smile to make sure I was noticing.


Mr. Carruth writes hauntingly about loneliness, as when: the high murmur in tree
crowns, far and near, tells human loneliness something about itself.


Perhaps it would be better to say that conscience and loneliness conspire to
make his true theme - isolation. It is a great theme, and it cracks apart many
of his poems, whose technical resources are insufficient to contain it. If
isolation is his ground note, there is a harmony line as well, the lure of
''remembered song.'' Jazz, blues, Proven,cal plaints - their rhythms pulse in
his memory and his poems.

Eclecticism has always been Mr. Carruth's motto. In one poem he celebrates a
neighbor's rock garden- ''no design, just swatches of color, bold / rough
splashes.'' But in them is the thought ''to bring art / to nature.'' The same
could be said of this book - of its troubled sympathies, its formal allegiances,
its reparation, such as the poor might make, whose sorrow had been done here.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WANTED: BETTER CITIZENS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words


Michael J. Sandel, who teaches political philosophy at Harvard University, is
the author of ''Liberalism and the Limits of Justice.'' THE RECONSTRUCTION OF
PATRIOTISM

Education for Civic Consciousness.  By Morris Janowitz.  220 pp. Illinois: The
University of Chicago Press. $22.50.

By Michael J. Sandel

FOR us Americans, patriotism has become a pale emotion. We pay our taxes - at
least most of us do - and every four years about half of us vote. When our
diplomats are taken hostage or when Marines are killed abroad, we summon up
patriotic indignation for a while. But most of the time, we live our lives as
''private'' citizens. We indulge in the consumption the market economy invites,
we claim the benefits the welfare state supplies, and we praise the nation, if
at all, for providing these things.

In ''The Reconstruction of Patriotism,'' Morris Janowitz, a professor of
sociology at the University of Chicago, surveys the condition of American
citizenship today and finds it wanting. Recent decades have seen an expansion of
citizens' rights, he points out, but a decline in civic obligations. We accept
the largesse of the welfare state but refuse the demands of compulsory military
service. We value the right to vote over the duty to vote, the right to a trial
by jury over the duty to serve as a juror. In the modern world, the nation-state
seems at once too limited and too vast to sustain the allegiance of its
citizens. Nuclear weapons and economic interdependence threaten to overwhelm it,
while ethnic and racial solidarities threaten to fragment it.

Mr. Janowitz sees in these developments a danger to democracy. In his view,
democratic government needs more than the passive acquiescence of its citizens.
It needs patriotic citizens, alive to their duties as well as their rights. But
patriotism must be cultivated; it requires a vigorous system of civic education.
And Mr. Janowitz contends that American civic education is in serious decline.

In recent decades, he argues, two traditional agencies of civic education in the
United States, military service and the public schools, have lost their ability
to inspire a sense of national belonging. Through most of our history, military
service was an instrument of nation-building. To bear arms for one's country was
the highest expression of equality and citizenship. Although the armed forces
were not desegregated until 1948, military participation served ultimately to
enlarge citizenship and ''to incorporate the citizen soldier into the larger
society.'' The public school performed a similar mission, he writes. From the
1890's to the 1940's, the school system acculturated immigrants and, through the
teaching of history and civics, transmitted national traditions and patriotic
sentiments.

But the Vietnam War eroded the edifying aspect of military service, and with the
advent of the all- volunteer Army in 1973, military service ceased to be a
lesson in civic obligation. Meanwhile, the schools lost much of their
nation-building character as well. According to Mr. Janowitz, the heightened
racial and ethnic consciousness of the 60's complicated their acculturating
mission. At the same time, the introduction of the social sciences into the
curriculum displaced traditional courses in civics, with their concern for
political traditions and obligations. The social sciences' claims for neutral
analysis and critical detachment further weakened the ties of national
citizenship.

Mr. Janowitz concludes, ''We need to reconstruct a sense of patriotism'' in a
way the schools alone cannot achieve. He proposes a program of military or
civilian national service, designed to meet public needs and also foster a sense
of national community. While he regards compulsory national service as
politically unfeasible, he favors making such service a condition for Federal
aid to college students.

Whether a program of national work would enhance our attachment to the nation or
further erode it is difficult to assess. No doubt it would depend in part on the
substance and spirit of the work and on the equality of participation. Theorists
of citizenship since Rousseau have warned that strong citizenship requires small
republics, and it may well turn out that most modern nation-states are too vast
and impersonal to inspire more than the episodic citizenship Mr. Janowitz
rightly criticizes.

It is, in any case, the notable contribution of this book to revive patriotism
and civic education as subjects worthy of contemporary debate. Unfortunately,
this contribution is diminished by two weaknesses. First, it offers little to
persuade those who view national service as a form of coercion or as a hidden
tax the state has no right to impose. Mr. Janowitz asserts that those, such as
the economist Milton Friedman, who make this objection are mistaken. But he
offers no sustained argument in reply. Nowhere does he state what he takes to be
the moral grounds for the obligations he invokes.

Second, Mr. Janowitz offers little to reassure those who share his concern for
civic education but wonder about the content of the education he has in mind and
the substance of the patriotism he hopes to reconstruct. What he has in mind is
not ''old-fashioned,'' unreflective patriotism or ''blind, mechanical
nationalism'' but ''an attachment to the state compatible with the realities of
the contemporary interdependent world community.''

More than this he does not specify. The few hints he offers imply a rather
narrow patriotic vision, with little room for patriotic dissent. The antiwar
protests of the 60's, for example, count as ''antipatriotic'' in his view. But
as Samuel P. Huntington recently pointed out in ''American Politics: The Promise
of Disharmony,'' much of the protest of the 60's was a protest in the name of
traditional American values, not against them. Mr. Janowitz seems not to
recognize this distinction or allow that dissent can sometimes be an act of
allegiance to the nation, not betrayal. A patriotism incompatible with protest
may not be a patriotism worth having.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing of a torn Uncle Sam poster

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MAN WHO WAS FRANCE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1561 words


Walter Lord's most recent book is ''The Miracle of Dunkirk.'' CHARLES DE GAULLE
A Biography.  By Don Cook.  432 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.

By Walter Lord

GEN. CHARLES ANDRE JOSEPH MARIE DE GAULLE was probably the all-time master of
the politics of intransigence. When he arrived in England in June 1940, a
castaway from the military disaster that was engulfing the French, he was a
virtually unknown brigadier urging revolt against a government headed by a
marshal of France. Not one member of the French diplomatic staff in London
answered his calls. Of the 2,000 French wounded who had been evacuated from
Dunkirk, only 200 joined him. Robert Murphy, the political counselor of the
United States Embassy in Paris, had never heard his name.

Four years later, I watched him ride down the Champs Elysees in an open car with
Winston Churchill, basking in the cheers of an adoring crowd. He was the
unchallenged leader of France. How did he do it?

The answer is contained in ''Charles de Gaulle,'' a highly readable biography by
the veteran correspondent Don Cook. This book does not rely on headline-making
interviews or freshly mined archival material but rather on long firsthand
experience. Currently Paris bureau chief of The Los Angeles Times, Mr. Cook has
covered the European political beat for 38 years. Like William Shirer on
Hitler's Germany or Robert Donovan on Harry Truman's Washington, he is a
seasoned authority on De Gaulle's France.

The publishers boast that this is the first popular biography of De Gaulle
''written by an American from an American perspective,'' but that doesn't seem
such a remarkable contribution. The book's real value lies in Mr. Cook's own
perspective. He rarely intrudes - I noticed only one reference to himself - but
he is always there. The pages are full of the kind of insight that could only
come from an old hand at what Churchill called ''the maze of French politics.''

Mr. Cook paints a vivid picture of an egotistical loner who showed a positive
genius for infuriating his British and American benefactors. He occupied the
French islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon off Newfoundland against the express
wishes of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. He deliberately delayed his arrival
at the Casablanca Conference in January 1943 to upstage Roosevelt and Churchill.
He torpedoed Gen. Henri Giraud, the President's handpicked choice to head up a
new government in French North Africa. On the eve of D-day, he even held up the
sailing of 170 French liaison officers assigned to the Allied invasion force. At
that point, an exasperated Churchill briefly ordered de Gaulle shipped back to
Algiers - ''in chains if necessary.''

Yet de Gaulle usually got what he wanted in the end. His Free French forces
played a respectable role in the final defeat of Germany. And he won a place for
France at the peace table far beyond that earned by his troops on the
battlefield.

At times, as Mr. Cook points out, a little tact and diplomacy might have
achieved the same results more quickly. Roosevelt, for instance, never accepted
the general and took far longer to recognize de Gaulle's Free France than the
French people did. But, generally speaking, the worse de Gaulle behaved, the
more he seemed to get. It would be easy to write off his success as just another
instance where the squeaking wheel gets the grease, but there's much more to it
than that. De Gaulle was loudly self-centered even when no one else was vying
for favors.

His own explanation of his behavior is unsatisfactory. He said he was only a
small man with a small following and his protests had to be ''louder and more
frequent than if he were recognized as the head of a great nation.'' That is all
very well, but he was intransigent not only in dealing with Britain and America
(which he lumped together as ''the Anglo-Saxons'') but in the brushoffs he gave
Giraud, the French Resistance movement and anybody who got in his way.

Mr. Cook rightly devotes most of his book to World War II, but the rest of de
Gaulle's life is by no means neglected, especially his extraordinary late
political career. At the end of the war, political power eluded him, and most of
the time during the 13 years of the unstable Fourth Republic - it had 19 prime
ministers in 12 years - he was out of power and often out of the public eye. But
he was a great presence in the minds and imaginations of many political and
military leaders in the 50's, when France was defeated in Vietnam and Algeria
broke into rebellion against French rule. And de Gaulle displayed great patience
as he occasionally reminded the republic of his past as a national symbol.

In July 1955, when he was 64, he told a Paris press conference, ''It is my
intention not to intervene any longer in what is called 'public affairs.' . . .
It may be that I would intervene again, but it would take a rather unusual shock
for this.'' The shock came three years later, when the French Government
collapsed under the pressure of the Algerian rebellion and the Fourth Republic,
in desperation, handed him virtually dictatorial power for six months. In May
1958 the National Assembly voted him absolute control of the Government and then
went on vacation until its next scheduled meeting in October. In fact, the
Fourth Republic came to an end before that.

Mr. Cook writes that ''the de Gaulle revolution of May 1958 ranks with the
storming of the Bastille in 1789 and the cataclysmic events of the Paris Commune
in 1871 as one of the decisive turning-point dramas of France.'' Whether one
agrees or not, de Gaulle did change France enormously and had a great effect on
world politics in the 11 years he held power. He established the far more stable
Fifth Republic. He cut Algeria loose from French control. He quelled the student
uprisings in 1968. He created a French nuclear capability.

Through it all, de Gaulle remained as intransigent as ever. No one could ever
say he mellowed with age. As usual, the Anglo-Saxons got their full share of his
scorn, but the rest of the world felt it too. He pulled out of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, attacked the Common Market, turned against Israel
and even lent support to the separatist movement in French Canada.  Basically,
Mr. Cook feels, de Gaulle was engaged in a calculated pursuit of power and that
drive for power explains everything he did. But the evidence suggests the
general's behavior sprang not so much from conscious tactics as from something
in his personality. He always had to have his way - whether as a little boy
playing soldiers, or a young major wearing his beret slanted differently from
everyone else's, or as a senior officer whose theories on armored warfare were
completely out of step with accepted French doctrine, or finally as an old man
devising his own rules for winning at solitaire.

The saving grace of this remarkable leader was his total, single-minded
patriotism. He was selfish and ambitious - but for France, not himself. When
things finally went against him in a national referendum in 1969, he did not
seize dictatorial powers; he went home.

Mr. Cook tells his story in an easy, colloquial style. Occasionally he seems a
little too chatty for the grandeur of his subject, but that is a small point.
''France throughout its history has moved in and out of national tragedy,
declared war and made peace, changed its constitutions, altered its foreign
policy and shifted its allegiances under the personal dominance and leadership
of one man who has usually emerged from nowhere,'' he says. Such a man was
Charles de Gaulle.B De Gaulle on de Gaulle Like Winston Churchill, Charles de
Gaulle did not wait for friends, enemies and biographers to assess his place in
history. He wrote his own story, full of gloire, providing an account of his
role in the rise of France from the ashes of German Occupation to the Fifth
French Republic.His three volumes of war memoirs are titled ''The Call to
Honor,'' ''Unity'' and ''Salvation.'' In addition, he completed two more
volumes, ''Renewal'' and ''Endeavor,'' under the general title ''Memoirs of
Hope.'' And like Churchill, de Gaulle wrote the books himself, without the
ghostwriters and teams of researchers used by modern American Presidents.  De
Gaulle was considered a stylist who put his personal grandeur and
self-confidence into his sentences, sometimes suggesting to the reader that
France and de Gaulle were identical. In ''Memoirs of Hope,'' he wrote, ''France
has emerged from the depths of the past. . . . Yet she remains herself through
time. Her boundaries may alter, but not the contours, the climate, the rivers
and seas that are her eternal imprint. . . . How could I not have learned by now
that what is good for the nation is not achieved without disapproval from public
opinion and losses in elections?'' A score of biographies have been written
about him, most of them laudatory, including Alexander Werth's ''De Gaulle
Revolution,'' Brian Crozier's ''De Gaulle'' and David Schoenbrun's ''Three Lives
of Charles de Gaulle.'' There are also portraits of him in works by such
colleagues in the French Resistance as Andre Malraux, who later became his
Minister of Culture. - Herbert Mitgang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing of de Gaulle

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS January 22, 1984Fiction 1112

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1283 words


PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  2221

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  3521

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  4331

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  545

BERLIN GAME, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $15.95.) Espionage on both sides of the
Iron Curtain.  6710

MORETA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  7810

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfilling a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  8910

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A detective from Earth
investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  9118

THE NEVERENDING STORY, by Michael Ende. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A lonely boy meets
challenges and finds his true self in a magical land.  10620

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  111225

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  121012

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
131318

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  141517

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.  15 19

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The five-year
relationship of two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.





 Nonfiction 1254

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  2118


MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  3563

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

4319

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  5812

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.

6421

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  7103

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random, $25.) Man's search to know
himself and the world over the centuries.  879

WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.  9614

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $22.50.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the recent PBS television series.  10143

APPROACHING HOOFBEATS: HORSEMEN OF THE APOCALYPSE, by Billy Graham. (Word Books,
$11.95.) The evangelist's interpretation of the Book of Revelation.  11940

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon. (Atlantic/Little, Brown, $17.50.) A
report on a trip through the back roads of America.  12115

THE KINGDOM BY THE SEA, by Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) A
novelist's journey around Great Britain.  13153

LATE NIGHT THOUGHTS ON LISTENING TO MAHLER'S NINTH SYMPHONY, by Lewis Thomas.
(Viking, $12.95.) Essays on a wide range of subjects by the physician-medical
administrator.  14 1

CORONER, by Thomas T. Noguchi with Joseph DiMona. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.)
The controversial Los Angeles County medical examiner discusses the deaths of
Marilyn Monroe, John Belushi and other celebrities.  151376

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.



Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 1116

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  226

THE HUMAN BODY, by Jonathan Miller. (Viking, $16.95.) A pop-up book illustrating
the workings of the human body.  3495

JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) An exercise book for
women, seasoned by the film star's philosophy of physical well-being.  4332

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  5 3

WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY , SECOND COLLEGE EDITION. (Simon & Schuster,
$14.95. Indexed, $15.95.) A standard reference work updated in 1982.



The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.  And Bear in Mind (Editors'
choices of other recent books of particular interest)

BLACK APOLLO OF SCIENCE: The Life of Ernest Everett Just, by Kenneth R. Manning.
(Oxford, $29.95.) This biography of a black biologist depicts the interplay of
his genius with a racist society.

THE BOURGEOIS EXPERIENCE: Victoria to Freud. Education of the Senses, by Peter
Gay. (Oxford, $25.) The first volume of this immensely ambitious work
concentrates on Victorian sexuality.

THE COLLECTED PROSE, by Elizabeth Bishop. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.50.)
Memoirs and stories, previously uncollected, by one of our greatest poets, who
died in 1979.

DOSTOEVSKY: The Years of Ordeal 1850-1859, by Joseph Frank.  (Princeton, $25.)
The second volume of a multivolume biography spans the decade of Dostoyevsky's
exile in Siberia.

FEMININITY, by Susan Brownmiller. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) An illuminating
step toward awareness of a subject at once instantly familiar and surprisingly
unexplored.

THE IDEA OF POVERTY: England in the Early Industrial Age, by Gertrude
Himmelfarb. (Knopf, $25.) A study that attempts to extract the concept of
poverty from the literature of 1750-1850.

IN SEARCH OF MIND: Essays in Autobiography, by Jerome Bruner. (Harper & Row,
$20.) A fun book by a serious man, giving a rare and engrossing picture of a
scientist at work.

STONES FOR IBARRA, by Harriet Doerr. (Viking, $14.95.) This first novel by a
73-year-old American who writes like a poet reveals a distinctive vision of life
in a Mexican village.

WHITE JAZZ, by Charles Newman. (Doubleday, $7.95.) A novel by an extremely
intelligent writer that tracks a young man through the emptiness of this
concrete-and-electronic world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: listlist

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER IN REVIEW;
AN ALMOST-PLAY AND A 'COLLAGE'

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 14, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1415 words


MONTCLAIR

 E RICA, a designer of stage costumes, is a resilient, ferociously independent
woman who has struggled to keep her family - an elderly mother and a teen-age
daughter - together in her Greenwich Village apartment. She also has thrown out
her husband.

She is purely practical - don't speak to her of the spiritual or the religious -
and she has great expectations for her daughter, a straight-A student who is a
year ahead of her class, has won admission to Harvard at the age of 16 and,
Erica insists, will become a lawyer.

But Phoebe, Erica's daughter, is not your typical teen-ager. Once, she left her
books on the bus to set them free, or maybe because somebody else might need
them.

''I'm weird,'' she explains.

Phoebe, who doesn't want to have a boyfriend, grows organic vegetables in the
city soot and is so clumsy that she keeps walking into the furniture. When she
flings her head back on a chair in a motion of frustration, she's likely to bang
it.

The antithesis of her mother, Phoebe does not want to go to Harvard or, for that
matter, any college.  She just wants to go to her guru.

Biesel, Erica's mother, is also at odds with Erica. They think differently, but
they're stubbornly alike and alike in their stubborness. Biesel would rather
just sit there and use a walker; she will not hear of being sent to a nursing
home, where Erica's has arranged a place for her.

In fact, Biesel can't hear anything without her hearing aid, which she refuses
to wear, but it is soon apparent that she uses senility, infirmity and hearing
impairment to her own advantage. They add up to a handy defense mechanism and a
super strategy for inflicting guilt and maneuvering others.

Helplessness is her act; control is her motive. Biesel can be the most lucid of
the lot. Here's her comment on drugs:

''When you're over 65, suddenly they're legal.''

The play is Leigh Curran's ''Alterations'' at the Whole Theater, which is
serving a useful purpose by providing a showcase for a new play, or what appears
to be the beginning of one.

Miss Curran is more efficient in her set-up than in her development or
denouement. She's also very adept at pulling off flashes of the absurd and
picking up on the contradictions and reversals in human behavior.

For example, Erica, a school dropout, keeps correcting her scholarly daughter's
grammar and encourages her to have an affair.

Clearly, the members of the three generations can't live with, and would be
better off without, each other. What the playwright ultimately gets at is the
need to make peace with a parent, the importance of forgiving and giving in
(whatever one's age), the possibilities of beginning when everything seems to be
ending and interchangeability of self-awareness and self-doubt.

Erica took in ''alterations'' to support her mother and daughter. On another
level, Miss Curran's title also refers to the changes that one must make to
accommodate others. Indeed, the play just as easily could have been called
''Accommodations,'' ''Alternatives'' or ''Animosities.''

Under any name, it's too bad that the second act deteriorates into a long
night's domestic squabble. Erica's estranged husband, Peter, has come to a party
that turns into purgatory, a pat playwrighting device. They bicker, dredge up
past resentments and come up with present grudges. It's lifelike in that one
loses track of what they're really screaming at each other about, but it isn't
all that gripping.

Rather than revelation, such moments lapse into digression, and one loses
interest in, and compassion for, Miss Curran's characters, who started out as
real people.

Under Tom Brennan's adequately tight but far-from-taut direction,
''Alterations'' is admirably acted all around. In her disarray and her desperate
desire to cope, Carlin Glynn endows Erica with an extra dimension of
believability and spice. Stephen Newman is an intense, fiery and loving Peter,
and Kate Purwin (Phoebe) and Dortha Duckworth (Biesel) are convincing.

Oddly, amusingly and finally to the disservice of the play, it is a captive
visitor who walks off with the evening. She's Adrianna, a spaced- out actress in
search of dialogue.

Having landed a silent part in the play for which Erica is designing the
costumes, Adrianna is there for a fitting and is relegated to being a bystander
and an observer.

However, she never fails to say what she thinks. In fact, she explains:
''Sometimes I think I know exactly what I mean.''

What with her constant use of contemporary colloquialisms (''far out,'' ''heavy
number,'' ''too much,'' ''unreal'' and ''wow''), the character could be a
cliche. But she's completely realized in Miss Curran's creation and in Alexandra
Gersten's performance, which is full of delightful insouciance and
all-too-shrewd innocence.

And she's fun to have around while the playwright searches for a real style.

''Alterations'' will continue through next Sunday.




PRINCETONCall them the survivors. In contrast to our ''high-tech'' plastic
culture, they live off the land (on unemployment insurance) or cater to the rich
tourists who come to ski in a mythical Vermont town called Judevine.

At times, they're referred to as the ''Judevine Uglies,'' those outcasts who are
driven to invisibility by poverty, ''the ghosts no one sees.''

Such characters have inspired the fourth annual McCarter Theater Stage Two
production. Called ''Judevine: A Vermont Anthology,'' it was culled from the
poems of David Budbill and adapted as a ''collage'' for the stage by Robert
Lanchester, the theater's associate artistic director.

In 1979, Mr. Budbill, who lives in Wolcott, a tiny town in northern Vermont,
with his wife and two children, angered his neighbors, who recognized themselves
as characters in his book, ''The Chain Saw Dance.'' They perceived the work as a
vulgarization of their lives, whereas it was Mr. Budbill's intention to extol
their spirits.

That's one of the free-verse volumes that inspired the current stage piece. As
Mr. Budbill put it in an interview:

''The characters speak rough language and use profanity. This is not a bucolic
dream. They're poor and tired and wretched, but full of life and pizazz and good
natural juices.

''And they're not stupid. They have a kind of genius that goes unnoticed, and
I'm trying to say, 'Look, it's there; notice it.' People are not what you think
they are and things are not what they seem. I see in it all something more.''

In evoking an area and an era, the poems have been compared to Edgar Lee
Masters's ''Spoon River Anthology'' and Dylan Thomas's ''Under Milkwood,'' both
of which were successfully transformed to the stage.

The time of ''Judevine'' spans 200 years - from the first settlers to a vision
of the future. However, Mr. Budbill refuses to have his work labeled as
''regional.''

''It comes out of a specific place, but so did Chaucer and Yeats,'' he said.
''Within that, I see the universal human condition.''

Against an abstract setting depicting mountains in the back and a river out
front, and with assorted logs, boxes and tools to add local color, four actors
portray 23 characters, among them four woodcutters, ''a priestess of junk'' and
a veteran of the Vietnam War.

''It's our mini-'Nicholas Nickelby,' '' Mr. Lanchester observed.

The work evolved from a reading in the ''Playwrights at McCarter'' series to a
stage presentation that involves characterization, interaction and acting out of
the characters' fantasies. In one scene, a welding shop is transformed into a
Gothic cathedral and the welder becomes a medieval priest.

Mr. Lanchester explained that some 600 scripts were screened each year. Six of
them wind up as readings - this year, there will be seven - and one is chosen
for a full production at Stage Two.

Reathel Bean, an actor currently appearing in the Broadway musical
''Doonesbury'' and who has been seen in McCarter Theater productions, first
brought Mr. Budbill's poems to Mr. Lanchester, perceiving them as playable.

''There's a spiritual side to these taciturn and tenacious people,'' Mr.
Lanchester said. ''They find their solace in nature and in a way of life based
on sharing, cooperation and love, not power plays, aggression and violence.
David has wheedled his way into their souls.''

''Judevine'' will be performed at the 200-seat Theater Intime on the Princeton
University campus through next Sunday. The box office number for ticket
reservations is (609) 452-5200.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Carlin Glynn with Stephen Newman

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DOWN IN THE SUBWAY, IT'S (OOF!) A DIFFERENT JAPAN

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 978 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Jan. 22


The people who run Tokyo's subways have begun a campaign to tidy up the habits
of their passengers. Again.

Every now and then the subway management gets the idea that manners are not what
they ought to be on the trains, especially during rush hour, and they put up
posters or devise some other method to try to get the message across. Please
don't hog seats, they say. Please don't smoke on the platform during rush hours.
Please think of the next person.

Sometimes the exhortations work, but most of the gains are probably better
measured in millimeters.

In this city - not to mention this country - of unfailing private courtesy, it
is widely acknowledged that the subway system, one of the busiest and most
heavily used in the world, represents the epitome of public rudeness.

No Need for 'Excuse Me'

People who bow to one another above ground shove when they are below. If pushing
were an Olympic competitition, Japan would have no shortage of gold medal
contenders. Not only is it acceptable to bump people who are in one's way but it
also seems to be regarded as unnecessary to say ''excuse me,'' except in rare
instances when someone has been knocked to the floor.

A subway seat, once found, is held on to as though it were the last available
space in a lifeboat. Often, the more sturdy the man, the more likely he is to
keep sitting resolutely while a bent- over elderly woman stands unsteadily
before him.

At night, the drunks take over. One subway official estimates that after 11
P.M., about an hour before trains make their final runs for the night, 90
percent of the passengers have been out drinking. Many - more often than not men
in business-suits heading home - pass out and sprawl across seats and other
riders. Watching where one steps is critical.

The mood is never menacing, and the trains could not be safer. But they can also
be disorderly at night. Judging from conversations and letters that appear
occasionally in newspapers, the departure from customary Japanese decorum is a
surprise to many visitors and a source of frustration for more than a few
residents. ''I will only take taxicabs at night,'' said a Government official
who does not have access to one of his ministry's chauffeured cars.

'Etiquette Line' Introduced

In its latest campaign, the Teito Rapid Transit Authority has painted an
''etiquette line'' on the floor of subway cars operating on the Ginza Line, the
oldest of the 10 subway lines and the only one dating back to before World War
II.

Men, in particular, have a habit of stretching their legs well into the aisle
and reducing the space for people wishing to pass to a width best suited for a
tunnel rat. On the rumbling old Ginza Line, the aisles are narrow enough as it
is.

The etiquette line was laid down on a few Ginza cars at the start of the year,
and gradually other trains will have their floors painted, too.

''We want to suggest to people, in an uncompelling way, to put their legs inside
the line,'' said an official of the transit authority, a quasi-public agency
that supervises seven of the 10 lines. The other three fall under the
jurisdiction of the Tokyo Metropolitan Government.

Subway riders say the idea may be a noble one, but they smile knowingly when
asked if it will work.

Jostling Often Unavoidable

One frequently cited explanation for public rudeness is that Japanese are
governed by so many personal obligations in their daily life that there is no
room for unessential attentiveness to strangers. Thus, pushing someone you do
not know is not ncessarily bad manners. You owe him or her nothing.

Besides, the trains often are so crowded that jostling and even hard shoving are
unavoidable.

With 2.2 billion passengers a year, the Tokyo system carries 50 percent more
people than New York's with far fewer than half the number of cars - 2,464.
Rush-hour riders stand patiently in neat lines waiting for a train to enter the
station, but once the doors open they form a flying wedge that surges into the
cars, sweeping up everything in its path like the tide.

Always Room for More

Few trains are considered so packed that they cannot accommodate several dozen
more riders.

Given all this, civility can easily take a battering, as do transit authority
attempts at change.

On platforms, rush-hour commuters smoke alongside signs telling them not to.
Inside the trains, many men have a habit of sitting with legs so far apart that
they occupy two and sometimes three spaces - and then refuse to budge when
someone tries to squeeze in next to them.

These men are a favorite target of the subway managers' behavior-modification
attempts. Posters go up periodically, such as one a few years ago that showed a
Charlie Chaplin character imitating Hitler in ''The Great Dictator'' and
spreading across subway seats the way the Nazis occupied much of Europe.

Cleanliness and Safety

Most New York subway riders probably would settle for headaches like these. In
most respects, the Tokyo system - the world's fourth largest with 129 miles of
track - earns its reputation for efficiency, cleanliness and safety.

If the prominently displayed schedule says the train is due at 9:03, it arrives
at exactly 9:03. The next one is certain to be there at 9:06, as billed. There
is little of the frantic racing that New Yorkers put themselves through, knowing
that this could be the last train they will see for half an hour.

For his or her 50 cents, the approximate cost of a typical ride, the passenger
gets no graffiti, no doors that refuse to open, no lights that have not worked
since the Vietnam War, and no crime.

''As far as I remember,'' said a transit authority spokesman, Shichiro Yoshino,
''there have been only two cases of police-handled incidents on subway cars in
the last three years.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of man sleeping on subway seat; drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE AIDE VISITS NICARAGUA REBELS

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 765 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


The chief administrative assistant to a Republican Senator from Idaho said today
that he made a secret trip into the Nicaraguan jungle last month to meet with
Eden Pastora Gomez, the leader of one of two main rebel factions seeking the
overthrow of the Nicaraguan Government.

A Congressional official who was informed about the trip after the aide's return
in mid-December said the aide carried a rifle at times while inside Nicaragua.
The aide to Senator Steven Symms, Samuel T. Routson, is a 34- year-old former
Marine officer who commanded a rifle company in Vietnam and now holds the rank
of major in the Marine Corps reserves.

Mr. Routson said he did not take a weapon with him. But he declined to answer
questions on whether his escorts on the secret trip, soldiers in Nicaragua's
insurgent Democratic Revolutionary Alliance, provided him with a weapon.

Although Mr. Routson said he was in situations where it was possible that he
could be drawn into a battle, he said, ''I was very aware of the dynamics of the
situation, the sensitivities in terms of any ramifications on U.S. foreign
policy.''

He added: ''I tried to use discretion because I could just imagine the
headlines, 'Senate legislative assistant kills 30 Sandinistas.' ''

During his two-day trip, however, Mr. Routson said he encountered no fighting.

'Impressed With His Outfit'

Mr. Routson said he ''visited with Mr. Pastora's field commanders and saw their
training camps.''

''I discussed training and personnel and funding. They are not well funded.''

''Pastora was very open,'' Mr. Routson added. ''I was impressed with his outfit.
But I promised him absolutely nothing. I simply told him I was interested by
what I saw and would share it with individuals in the United States.''

Mr. Routson, who was named administrative assistant to Senator Symms last
summer, said the Senator knew of the trip in advance and was enthusiastic about
it. However, he said, ''We did not consult or seek approval of the State or the
Defense Department or anyone in Washington because at that point they hadn't
been dealing with Pastora, at least in the area I was seeking information on.''

Efforts to reach Senator Symms by telephone over the weekend were unsuccessful.
A spokesman said he was traveling in Africa.

''The trip was not an official trip,'' Mr. Routson said. ''It was a private
trip.  It was privately funded.''



2 Days With the Rebels

At the same time, he said Mr. Pastora's group invited him into Nicaragua because
he was a United States Senator's assistant. Mr. Pastora spent two weeks in the
United States last November, appealing to Administration officials and others
for aid, and Mr. Routson said his invitation to the Nicaraguan jungle ''was an
extension of Pastora's trip here.''

Mr. Routson said several of Mr. Pastora's followers met him in Costa Rica and
took him by boat into southeastern Nicargua, where he spent two days and one
night living with the rebels. His purpose, he said, ''was to see if the United
States might be missing a bet by not pushing harder to get Pastora and the
others to join together.''

Mr. Pastora has said he will not unite his Democratic Revolutionary Alliance
with Nicaragua's other principal insurgent force, the Honduran-based Nicaraguan
Democratic Force.  unless it is purged of former followers of Gen. Anastasio
Somoza Debayle, the Nicaraguan leader who was deposed in 1979 and assassinated
in 1980.

Senator Symms does not sit on ''any particular committee related to this,'' said
his spokesman, Kenneth E. Thompson. But Mr. Thompson said the Senator ''has a
strong personal, political interest.''

''He has visited the region twice in the past year, and he is a hard-line anti-
Communist.''

Trip Called Highly Unusual

On Capitol Hill, members of Congress and senior staff members said Mr. Routson's
secret trip was at least highly unusual. But opinions were divided on whether it
was improper.

A senior staff member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee said: ''I think
any Senator is entitled to pursue any foreign relations matter he wants to. But
I would certainly hope he would clear a trip like this with State and Defense
first.''

An aide to a senior Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee said:
''Basically, we think it's a stupid thing to do. Who knows how he might
complicate other initiatives that might be going on.''

A ranking Democratic member of the House Foreign Relations Committtee said,
however, that ''Symms is entitled to send his aides anywhere he wants to.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SAFETY ISSUES RAISED AT HEARING ON ACTORS' DEATHS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 630 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 22


Questions about a movie director's orders and the safety of special effects used
for a film are key issues in a preliminary hearing on three deaths, those of the
actor Vic Morrow and two child actors.

All were killed last year on the set of the movie ''Twilight Zone.''

The purpose of the hearing is to determine whether there is enough evidence for
the director, John Landis, and other people involved in the filming to stand
trial on involuntary manslaughter charges.

An assistant cameraman testifying about the deaths said Mr. Landis had ignored
warnings about safety.

But an attorney for Mr. Landis argued that the director could not be held
accountable for the deaths. He added that this week's testimony on the deaths
would be ''crucial.''

Rotor Killed 3 on Set

On July 22, 1982, the main rotor of a damaged helicopter killed the three actors
as they fled across a river in filming of a Vietnam war scene for the movie. Mr.
Landis and the others said they could not have prevented the accident, which
occurred before dawn at Indian Dunes Park about 35 miles northwest of Los
Angeles.

In testimony Thursday John Gamble, a stunt pilot, told Municipal Judge Brian
Crahan he had turned down the ''Twilight Zone'' job for safety reasons.He said
he would not execute a stunt such as the one that led to the deaths, because
debris from special effects explosions could do ''severe damage'' to a
helicopter.

Safety Warnings Held Ignored

Randall Robinson, an assistant cameraman who was riding in the helicopter when
it crashed, testified Wednesday that Mr. Landis ignored warnings that the
conditions might be dangerous.

In a scene filmed three hours before the crash, the helicopter had been buffeted
by two explosions, including a bomb that drenched the windshield of the pilot,
Dorcy Wingo, and ''obliterated'' his vision.

Mr. Wingo, ''fuming'' and ''cussing,'' brought the filming to a halt after he
suddenly veered away to safety, Mr. Robinson said.

When told of the incident, Mr. Landis responded, ''That's just a warm-up for
what's coming,'' according to Mr. Robinson. He also said that in the final
scene, the helicopter pilot had been ordered by radio to go lower over the river
bank.

Copter Crashed in 30 Seconds

When the special effects explosives went off, the helicopter was nearly tipped
on its side by tremendous blasts, Mr. Robinson said. More explosions followed,
and the helicopter crashed about 30 seconds after the scene began.

The National Transportation Safety Board has ruled that debris from special
effects explosions damaged the tail rotor of the helicopter, causing it to spin
into a river bed on top of Mr. Morrow and the children, Renee Chen, 6 years old,
and Myca Le, 7.

However, Harland Braun, who represented Mr. Landis, said he would prove that
debris did not down the aircraft.

James Camomile, who controlled the explosions electronically, and Kevin Quibell,
who planted the special effects bomb that the safety board said caused the
crash, are scheduled to testify Monday.

Mr. Braun, saying that Mr. Camomile had been granted immunity in return for his
testimony, said his statements would be ''crucial.''

He added that Mr. Camomile testified before a grand jury in June that he was not
watching the helicopter when it was rocked by an explosion before crashing. The
attorney said that that testimony pointed the finger at the special effects
team, and not at Mr. Landis, who could not be held accountable because he merely
was relying upon experts.

''If the special effect goes off under the helicopter and you're not watching
the helicopter, you've done something wrong,'' said Mr. Braun, who asserted that
Mr. Landis never planned to detonate explosives beneath the aircraft.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 239 words


Banque de Paris Names Chief for California Unit


The Banque National de Paris, which took over the Bank of the West in 1980, has
named one of its senior executives to head the San Francisco bank. Directors
appointed Michel Larrouilh, who has served with Banque National in posts around
the world, to succeed Moss McKenzie as president and chief executive.

Bank of the West has 46 branches and $1.2 billion in assets. Banque National de
Paris calls itself the world's third-largest banking organization.

Mr. McKenzie, 53, resigned from the post he has held since 1975 to become
president and chief executive of the Monterey County Bank.

Mr. Larrouilh, 48, has worked for Banque National de Paris for 26 years. He
spent his childhood in North Africa and Madagascar, where he went to law school
before joining the bank in 1958.

Assignments have taken him to Nigeria, India, Senegal and South Vietnam. He is
now serving as general manager of the bank's operations in Australia and will be
on the job in San Francisco in February.

''He has strengths in both retail and corporate banking,'' Edouard Finot, Bank
of the West's Paris-based chairman, said in a statement. ''And that, combined
with his extensive international experience, makes him particularly suited for
Bank of the West, which has incresingly enhanced its long-term position as a
California consumer bank with corporate and international interests.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PITFALLS IN SHOWERING CENTRAL AMERICA WITH U.S. 'BENEFICENCE'

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 347 words


To the Editor:

The myth that massive aid programs patterned after the Marshall Plan failed to
yield similar results elsewhere in the world is a hardy perennial in American
political discourse. Tom Wicker not only perpetuates the myth, he strengthens it
by describing ''massive aid programs'' as the ''traditional post-World War II
U.S. response to crisis abroad.'' ''Massive aid,'' of course, is a relative
term, but if the Marshall Plan is the standard of comparison, very few other
U.S. aid programs could be so classified. During the Marshall Plan era
(1948-1952), U.S. economic aid to Western Europe averaged $13 per person per
year - mostly in the form of grants; if military aid is added, that figure rises
above $20 (and much higher for France, Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium and
Greece).

U.S. aid to non-European countries has rarely approximated the Marshall Plan
rate. Recipient countries that rank high in per capita aid include Israel,
Jordan, Laos, Vietnam, Taiwan and South Korea. It is difficult to identify
clear-cut lessons on the basis of these cases, but that ''massive aid'' always
results in unmitigated failure hardly seems to be among them.

Wicker cites aid to Chile in the 1960's as an example of failure and Costa Rica
as an example of a country that ''developed as a democracy without significant
U.S. aid.'' On the basis of raw aid totals, this appears to be true, but if
adjustments are made for population sizes, the aid levels are remarkably
similar.

It is true, of course, that promoting European recovery was an easy task
compared with that of stimulating development in the third world. There is good
reason to suspect that a greater and more sustained level of aid would have been
required to produce results comparable to those of the Marshall Plan in Asia,
Africa or Latin America. But it is a distortion of history to assert that the
Marshall Plan approach was tried and found wanting with respect to third-world
problems.

DAVID A. BALDWIN Professor of Government Dartmouth College Hanover, N.H., Jan.
11, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE ;
Ex-President of Yale Gets London Law Post Kingman Brewster Jr., former president
of Yale University and the United States Ambassador to Britain from 1977-81,
says he is ''extravagantly happy'' to be returning to London as an overseas
partner of the New York City law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam & Roberts.
The commitment is for two years, but Mr. Brewster said he and his wife expect to
remain in London indefinitely.

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 218 words


Before this appointment, Mr. Brewster was part-time counsel to Winthrop, Stimson
in New York. He replaces Robert W. Gray, who is returning to the New York
office.

Mr. Brewster, 64, followed in his father's footsteps and studied law, becoming
professor of law at Harvard from 1950 to 1960, specializing in antitrust law. He
became president of Yale in 1963. During his 14-year tenure, he gained
nationwide attention by participating in demonstrations against the Vietnam War,
welcoming Yale's first women students and increasing the enrollment of minority
students.

''Essentially the job here is practicing American law in London, being useful to
American clients in London and useful to British clients who are expanding their
American activities,'' Mr. Brewster said. Mr. Brewster, an expert on American
regulatory law, has written several articles on an especially sensitive topic,
the application of the antitrust laws to international business transactions.

Mr. Brewster and his wife, Mary Louise, who have five grown children in the
United States, have rented a house in the Knightsbridge section of west London.
They also hope to find a cottage in the Berkshire village of Combe, near that of
family friends, Sir Nicholas and Lady Henderson, former British Ambassador to
the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kingman Brewster

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

COURT REMOVES RESTRAINT ORDER ON PUBLICATION

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1094 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 24


A Federal appeals court today lifted its temporary ban on the publication of a
judge's opinion that criticized the Justice Department's handling of a tax fraud
case.

The same three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th
Circuit imposed the ban Jan. 3 at the request of the Justice Department's tax
division. In that ruling, the judges temporarily ordered a law book company to
delay publication of the opinion while they considered the matter further.

Today, after considering United States Supreme Court precedents ''broadly
banning prior restraints'' on publication, the judges said that ''we are not
convinced that the Government has shown a justification for delay of publication
of the opinion.''



Company Will Publish It

The tersely worded ruling means the West Publishing Company of St. Paul, Minn.,
is free to include the opinion, issued Aug. 25 by Federal District Judge Fred M.
Winner of Denver, in the permanent bound volumes of its Federal Supplement
series, a standard legal reference. Company officials said today that they would
publish the material.

Justice Department spokesmen said an appeal of today's order was unlikely.  The
opinion included criticism of the conduct of three lawyers for the tax division,
and the department's effort to bar the West concern from publishing which grew
out of its request to have the appeals court wipe out the opinion itself. The
court is still considering that request.

It is not unusual for a court to ''vacate'' its own temporary order, as the
appeals panel did today. But it is highly unusual, if not unprecedented, for a
court to prohibit a private company from publishing a judicial opinion, even
temporarily.



Earlier Order Was Denounced

The Jan. 3 order, and the Justice Department's action in seeking it, which were
widely reported on Sunday, have since been denounced by First Amendment experts
and the American Civil Liberties Union as a patently unjustifiable effort at
censorship.

Both today's order and the one Jan. 3 were issued by Judges William J. Holloway
Jr. and Stephanie K. Seymour of the appeals court, and Federal District Judge
Luther L. Bohanon, sitting specially on the appeals court. While the court's
headquarters are in Denver, the three judges sit in Oklahoma.

Thomas P. DeCair, the chief Justice Department spokesman, said today that
Attorney General William French Smith had not been consulted before Glenn L.
Archer Jr., an appointee of President Reagan who heads the tax division, asked
the appeals panel on Dec. 28 to bar the publication by West.

Neither Mr. Smith, who has announced plans to resign, nor Edwin Meese 3d, his
designated successor, nor any other high-level Justice Department official has
publicly repudiated Mr. Archer's action.

Robert N. Miller, the United States Attorney in Denver, said in an interview
today that he had not been consulted about the request for prior restraint. This
apparently represented a departure from Justice Department procedures.

The Jan. 3 order also was issued without prior notice to West or to the
defendants in the tax fraud case.

Effect as a Precedent

Now vacated, it will apparently have little force as a precedent to justify
prior restraints on publication in future cases, legal experts say.

But it is conceivable that some court in the future might cite the Jan. 3 order
as a precedent for a temporary prior restraint, pending further consideration of
arguments for and against continuing the restraint.

Before the Jan. 3 order, West had included the opinion of Judge Winner, who
retired from the bench soon after writing it, in a paperback ''advance sheet''
of the Federal Supplement that was distributed in November. Such advance sheets
are ordinarily discarded when the bound volumes of the same opinions are
received.

The bound volume was recently published without the judge's opinion. It would be
included in a future volumn, said an attorney for West.

West's Federal Supplement is the standard reference series in which the opinions
of the Federal District Courts are published. But West is a private company and,
according to its attorneys, has the same rights as any other private company or
individual to publish judicial opinions, unfettered by any contractual or other
legal obligation to the court system.

A Rejected Distinction

In today's order, the appeals panel noted that ''it is arguable that there is
some distinction between a restraint on all dissemination of an opinion and a
directive to a publishing company, as the reporter of a court's decisions, to
delay publication of the opinion.''

But the panel went on to cite the Supreme Court's landmark 1971 ''Pentagon
papers'' decision as a basis for denying the Justice Department's request. In
that decision, the Court rejected the Nixon Administration's effort to bar
newspapers from publishing a classified Defense Department study of the Vietnam
War, asserting that any prior restraint on publication ''comes to this Court
bearing a heavy presumption against its constitutional validity.''

The dispute over Judge Winner's opinion grew out of a grand jury investigation
in Denver, in which the tax division obtained a 27-count indictment in 1982,
charging seven individuals and the Bank of Nova Scotia with tax violations and
other crimes in connection with a tax shelter scheme.

Judge Winner issued his Aug. 25 opinion in connection with a defense motion to
throw out the conviction of one defendant, on an obstruction of justice charge,
because of alleged misconduct by tax division lawyers.

In his opinion Judge Winner said there could be no final ruling on the
prosecutorial misconduct issue until further hearings had been held. But, in
stating his preliminary views, he harshly criticized three tax division lawyers,
Steven L. Snyder, Thomas D. Blondin and Jared J. Scharf, for ''repeated
excesses'' in conducting the grand jury investigation.

Mr. Archer urged Judge Winner in September to withdraw his opinion or to delete
the names. The judge refused. In November, Mr. Archer asked the appeals panel to
overrule the judge, on the ground that the opinion contained false and
''defamatory'' statements. After the advance sheet was published, Mr. Archer
filed his Dec. 28 ''emergency motion'' asking the appeals panel to order West to
delay publication in its bound volumes, pending the panel's consideration of its
motion to wipe out the opinion or delete the names. The appeals panel has not
decided whether to grant that motion.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Uncle Cheap, Comrade Scrooge

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 505 words


Ashamed to appear callous about lending a hand to the world's poor, the Reagan
Administration pleads the governmental equivalent of ''I gave at the office.''

It blames a dearth of Congressional support for its decision to cut, by a
fourth, its quota of $1 billion a year for the International Development
Association. That shortfall gives other donor nations an excuse for shaving
their contributions too, thus compounding the loss to the I.D.A., the World
Bank's special agency for long-term, no-interest loans to the poorest countries.

Now a new American excuse - ''duplication'' - is offered to justify breaking a
pledge to the smaller International Fund for Agricultural Development. The
United States had promised $180 million over three years, but both the Treasury
and Budget Office want to give nothing.

The Agricultural Fund's stated purpose is to increase food production and the
income of small farms in the poorest countries. In the view of Millicent
Fenwick, the American delegate to the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization, the agency's program is ''one of the best.'' Agriculture Secretary
John Block warmly agrees.

But the fund also has an unstated purpose: to coax development money out of the
oil-exporting countries. Besides the United States, the major donors include
Saudi Arabia, Libya and Iran - all three, it happens, in arrears on their agreed
contributions. If the United States walks out on its pledge, it is not hard to
predict how others will treat theirs.  The crude rejoinder in Washington is that
helping the I.D.A. or I.F.A.D. is voluntary and, given America's deficits,
charity has to begin at home. But ''charity'' is a misnomer. Four of every five
dollars lent through the World Bank return to the United States in purchases and
other trade. And a better-fed world is a safer as well as better world.  It was
self-interest and not just altruism that led Americans to contribute a 1982
total of $1 billion to the United Nations and its special funds, not including
the I.D.A. Yet a Swedish study finds that in per capita terms, the U.S. ranked
only 18th among contributors, giving $4.36 compared with Norway's top-ranking
$37.83.  Trailing even further behind, in 59th place, was the Soviet Union,
whose $161 million amounted to a miserly 60 cents per citizen. That from a
nation that proclaims itself the ''natural ally'' of the world's poor. In truth,
the Soviet bloc gives a bare minimum to global efforts and includes as ''foreign
aid'' its security assistance to Communist nations like Cuba, Mongolia, Vietnam
and Afghanistan. The Soviet bloc has boasted of disbursing $44 billion in
foreign aid between 1976 and 1980, but a British study tracked disbursements of
only $8 billion, nearly all of it to six ''Socialist'' allies.  Here, surely, is
an opportunity for Americans to expose Soviet penury in ways that hurt. But by
cutting back on the I.D.A. and threatening the I.F.A.D., Uncle Cheap is in a
poor position to lecture Comrade Scrooge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ADVERTISING;
GOBOTS SET U.S. INVASION

BYLINE: By Philip H. Dougherty

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 642 words


Y OU thought you had enough

troubles, eh? Well, now get

ready for the invasion of the Gobots.

Gobots are robots that almost in the flash of an eye can become vehicles of some
kind: aircraft, cars, tanks, locomotives. There are good Gobots and enemy Gobots
and each is properly identified, thank goodness.

There are 24 different kinds of regular Gobots, who stand only 3 3/4 inches
tall, and there are six Super Gobots, who are a towering 5 inches.

Gobots, using a different name but made and controlled by Bandai of Tokyo, have
already invaded Japan, as well as Europe and Canada. Now they are poised for
their attack on the United States, set for Feb. 2, according to a well-placed
mole at Jordan, Case & McGrath, the advertising agency.



The invasion will be masterminded from deep inside America's heartland: Spring
Park, Minn. It is there that a multitude of marketing people, many of whom got
their marketplace combat experience directing the activities of Mattel's Masters
of the Universe, will be pulling the strings on the Gobots from comfortable,
well- protected bunkers at the Tonka Corporation, the United States marketer,
which was previously known mostly for toy trucks.

Yesterday, at a secret meeting at Jordan headquarters, Raymond E. McDonald of
Tonka disclosed some of his plans during a meeting with Kenneth R. Kaess, vice
president and account supervisor at the agency, and Mark B. Itkowitz, senior
vice president and creative director.

Gobots, intent on working their way into the hearts and confidence of the
5-to-11 set, are classified as male action figures or, as Mr. McDonald put it,
''dolls for boys.'' This is a category, started by G.I. Joe before the Vietnam
War, that suffered along with all things military because of that war and then
was revitalized by the success of the ''Star Wars'' characters.

Trade sources, according to the agent from Spring Park, estimate that total
retail sales in the category, put at $235 million in 1982, came to a fantastic
$325 million or more in 1983.



Mr. McDonald, who is also a bit of a psychologist, says that kids cannot just be
given fanciful things like Gobots, which can be quickly manipulated like a
Rubik's Cube from vehicle to robot and back again, and be told to go play. They
need a story line.

With a regular toy truck or plane, kids can merely imitate situations from life.
And with ''Star Wars'' characters they have the movies as a guide. With Gobots,
they will get some direction from the four 30-second spots being created by the
agency, using animation and live action. But more important is getting a regular
show on kiddy TV inspired by the Gobots, and Mr. McDonald said Tonka was working
on that right now with Hanna-Barbera, the Hollywood animators.

''We'd like a network series,'' Mr. McDonald said. ''If we can't get that, then
a TV special or our own syndicated show.''

It is just this kind of programming that recently caused consumer activists to
speak out in opposition on the ground that such programming was merely one long
commercial.



The Gobot's introductory ad budget is $2.5 million. And it will begin to find
its way into TV on Feb. 2 in 10 spot markets during afternoon kiddy shows. About
four weeks later, Saturday morning network television will be added to the din
and the battle will truly be joined.

But things could be worse. The regular Gobot's suggested price is only $3.49 and
not a low, low $99.95, as sometimes is popular with TV toys. Even the Super
Gobots are only $9.99, and for the most part there are no batteries and no
motors.

The exceptions are Zod, no kin of Izod even though it is a mechanical monster
shaped like an alligator, and the Gobot Command Center, itself a huge
robot-vehicle that can carry up to a dozen Gobots. Meanwhile, back in the real
world . . . .

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tonka Gobot

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 26, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. GUERRILLA DIES IN SALVADOR

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 318 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Jan. 25


An American who fought for two years with Marxist-led rebels in El Salvador was
killed in action last summer, army and rebel sources said today.

A Defense Ministry communique cited an ''extremist source'' as having said the
''American mercenary Carroll Ishee'' died fighting on the northeastern front.

The rebel radio Venceremos also broadcast a report that Mr. Ishee, 29 years old,
a native of Philadelphia, Miss., died, saying his last words were, ''Tell my
wife, my daughter and my American people that I have died fulfilling my
obligation.''

He was the second American reported killed with the rebels fighting the
Washington-backed Government. In May 1982, David Anderson, whose hometown was
not known, was killed in the same area.

The rebel radio said ''Comrade Carroll'' died last August in a strafing attack
from a Huey helicopter near the town of El Flamenco in Morazan province, but
offered no explanation for the delay in announcing his death.

The broadcast said Mr. Ishee left his wife and 12-year-old daughter in New
Orleans to go to Mexico to learn Spanish and work as a carpenter before coming
to El Salvador in 1981.

In New Orleans, his widow, Lavaun Ishee, said at a news conference that her
husband fought with the guerrillas so ''that the people of El Salvador did see a
different foreign policy than that of the Reagan Administration.''

Mr. Ishee had been active in the movements opposing United States participation
in the Vietnam War and in civil rights organizations.

Mrs. Ishee said she had been informed late last year of her husband's death but
kept the information private until today.

The army said the rebel announcement confirmed foreign meddling in the civil war
on behalf of the guerrillas. The communique listed the names of eight other
foreigners ''in key posts of the terrorist directorate'' from West Germany,
Belgium, Venezuela, Colombia and Mexico.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 26, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Frees 9 Chinese

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 24 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 25


Vietnam has released nine Chinese prisoners who were captured while intruding
into Vietnamese territory, the Hanoi radio reported today.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR AIR FORCE AND NAVY GAINS ARE EXPECTED IN MILITARY BUDGET

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 28


The Air Force and the Navy would make large gains in a proposed $305.7 billion
military budget President Reagan will submit to Congress Wednesday, according to
Defense Department documents.

The proposed budget for the Air Force has been set at $108.7 billion, a 15
percent growth in real terms, after accounting for expected inflation. The
Navy's budget proposal for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1 will be $101.3
billion, a 13 percent increase, the documents say.

In addition, according to the documents, the Defense Department will ask
Congress to permit the Air Force to enlist 15,000 more airmen for a total of
610,000. The Navy would add 10,000 sailors to reach 575,000 and the Marine
Corps, which is part of the Navy, would expand by 3,000 marines to a corps of
200,000.



10% Gain in Money for Army

In contrast, the Army's proposed budget would grow 10 percent, to $77.9 billion,
and the Army would be allowed to enlist 1,000 more soldiers, bringing its
strength to 781,000, just slightly larger than the Navy and Marine Corps
combined.

The trend in the Air Force's budget has been steadily upward. The 1985 budget
proposal would reverse a turn downward in the Navy budget for 1984. Its budget
was skewed in 1983 when Congress approved construction of two nuclear-powered
aircraft carriers at a cost of $6.8 billion. That drove the shipbuilding account
up to $16 billion. If the carriers were subtracted, shipbuilding would show an
increase of about $2 billion each year.

The Army, however, has run consistently behind the other services in expansion.

Biggest Since World War II


The proposed military budget, if adopted intact by Congress, would be the
nation's largest military budget since World War II, including budgets at the
peak of the Korean War and Vietnam War, when measured in dollars of the same
value.

That reflects President Reagan's strategic priorities. He has called on the
armed forces, largely the Air Force, to prepare for a protracted nuclear war,
should deterrence fail. In the event of a conventional conflict, the President
has instructed the services to be ready for a prolonged global war, especially
at sea.

The budget proposals also reflect the increased cost of military readiness, even
without accounting for inflation. Worldwide deployments of American forces,
weapons with advanced technology, extensive training, and higher costs of
munitions, fuel, and supplies contribute to that cost.

The military budget has become the focal point of an increasingly intense debate
in the last two years as Mr. Reagan has proposed cuts in almost all other
Federal spending. Critics of the military budget also assert that it adds to the
Federal deficit.

Fuel for the Campaigns


This year the military budget will most likely be vigorously debated in the
Presidential and Congressional campaigns. It has already become highly
contentious among the eight major candidates for the Democratic Presidential
nomination.

The $305.7 billion the Administration plans to request would represent a 13
percent increase in the military budget. In the 1982-83 period, the first full
fiscal year of the Reagan Administration, Congress voted a 12 percent increase,
then an 8 percent increase in 1983, and a growth of 4 percent for the current
fiscal year.

Those figures are measured in terms of the total authority Congress gives the
Defense Department to order weapons, begin construction and recruit people.
Budget specialists say the trend in that account is the best gauge of military
strength.

In actual spending, the 1985 military budget is said to envision outlays of
$264.4 billion, an increase of 9.3 percent over this year's spending. That would
be 29.1 percent of the $907.3 billion in outlays for the Federal Government.
Budget specialists say spending is what affects the economy, including the
Federal deficit.

6.8% of Gross National Product


Military spending would be 6.8 percent of the gross national product, the
combined value of all goods and services in a certain period, as against 5.3
percent in 1981, when President Reagan took office. According to Defense
Department estimates, Soviet military spending runs to about 15 percent of a
much smaller gross national product, while most Western European nations spend
less than 3 percent.

The Defense Department documents show budget figures in a nearly final draft.
Officials said they could be changed before the budget was submitted to
Congress, but only by small amounts.

The Air Force's proposed budget for buying aircraft, the documents said, was set
at $28.7 billion, of which about $8 billion would provide for 34 B-1 bombers
that would be in full production. The Administration seeks to deploy 100 of the
new bombers by 1988.

$9.8 Billion for Missiles


Missile procurement was set at $9.8 billion, including about $4 billion for 37
MX's. The Administration's plan calls for deploying 100 of those missiles before
1990.

The Navy's budget calls for $13.1 billion in shipbuilding as that service
continues to expand toward the goal of 600 warships set by Mr. Reagan and
pursued by the Secretary of the Navy, John F. Lehman Jr.

From the perspective of outlays, the Defense Department will ask to spend $151.4
billion in 1985 for military operations. The figure includes pay for personnel.
An additional $82 billion will be spent on procurement and construction and $30
billion on developing new weapons and equipment.

The Defense Department, according to the documents, will also ask for 7,000 new
civilian employees, including 4,000 for the Air Force and 2,000 for the Army. An
additional 1,000 civilians would be hired by Defense Department agencies, while
the Navy would show no growth in that category.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PORTRAIT OF SPY AS GOLDEN YOUNG MAN

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1235 words

DATELINE: OSLO, Jan. 28


Only 10 days ago, with Secretary of State George P. Shultz here for talks, Arne
Treholt was, as usual, close to the action.

Mr. Treholt, as head of the foreign press section of the Foreign Ministry, was
in charge of press arrangements for Mr. Shultz's visit.

Personable, industrious and well connected, the 41-year-old Mr. Treholt was
widely regarded as one of the golden young men of public life in Norway.

Less than 24 hours later, he was under arrest, charged with spying for the
Soviet Union. The Norwegian security police said Mr. Treholt was detained at the
airport on his way to Vienna, where he planned to hand over secret documents to
his contact from the K.G.B., the Soviet secret police. A week later commentators
here were calling Mr. Treholt the greatest traitor to Norway since Quisling.

The case is expected to have far- reaching repercussions in domestic politics at
a time when Norway is at a critical stage of development, both as an
oil-producer and as a nation of growing strategic importance on NATO's northern
flank. American and NATO forces are stockpiling military supplies and installing
new electronic listening posts along Norway's 1,200-mile coast.

So far there has been no indication that Mr. Treholt had access to information
that could seriously compromise strategic planning in the region by the Atlantic
alliance.

But he had cast a long shadow of influence on the left wing of the Labor Party,
the dominant Socialist party in Norway that has governed for most of the postwar
period. So the investigation into his role in the party and in Government over
the last dozen years is bound to strengthen the hand of the ruling center-right
coalition.

Moreover, top Norwegian officials say the case has already strained relations
between Norway and the Soviet Union, which share a 120-mile border in the Arctic
that is NATO's closest position to the Kola Peninsula, headquarters for the
Soviet Northern Fleet.

The Norwegian Government is expected to announce reprisals against the Russians
early next week as a first result of the Treholt case. A sizable number of
Soviet diplomats and trade mission members are expected to be expelled,
according to high-ranking Government officials.

Of Anti-American Dogma

Some say the Treholt case also provides a disturbing look into the generation in
Europe that first came to political awareness in the 1960's.

''We grew up on anti-Americanism because of the Vietnam War,'' said a woman who
has known Mr. Treholt since they were student activists together at Oslo
University. ''For some reason, unlike the rest of us, Arne's dogmatic views
never mellowed.''

A Government official expressed a direct question that was on many lips: ''If
Treholt, who enjoyed the best of Norwegian life, could do it, how many more like
him are there who grew up in his generation, not only in Norway but in all of
Europe?'' Government security investigators say he has admitted his role as a
Soviet spy and is cooperating with officals.

On Friday, Attorney General Magnar Flornes said the security police had the help
of foreign counterintelligence agencies, including the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, in keeping the career diplomat under surveillance for up to five
years before his arrest.

Mr. Treholt was known among diplomats and politicians in Oslo as an idealist who
opposed tyranny in Greece and Czechoslovakia. He was also seen to share the
egalitarian interests of his father, a former Minister of Agriculture who was
known as uncorruptible. The speculation in press reports quoting Government
sources that he became a spy to pay off large gambling debts seemed to many to
be out of character.

''He was not a gambler who lost a lot of money, but he loved situations when the
outcome was not known,'' said Einar Forde, deputy leader of the Labor Party and,
like Mr. Treholt, a force in its radical wing. ''I can easily see him as someone
who could become fascinated with the espionage game.''

Mr. Forde, a close acquaintance since their university days, served as best man
at both Mr. Treholt's marriages, the most recent one in 1976 to an Oslo
television reporter.

A Cold-Eyed Appraisal

In an interview Friday at Parliament, he gave a cold-eyed appraisal of his
friend.

''Strangely, he had little ideology,'' Mr. Forde said. ''His strongest ideology
was anti-Americanism, but perhaps it was not any greater than what most people
felt coming out of the Vietnam days.'' In recent years, he said, Mr. Treholt
rationalized Soviet oppression by saying Moscow was forced to protect its
borders because of constant threats from the West.

But, he said, his friend always had an unprincipled side. ''I can honestly say
he was a person who was not very much ruled by ethical standards,'' Mr. Forde
said.

Much of the surveillance of Mr. Treholt took place in New York City when he
served as a member of the Norwegian delegation to the United Nations from 1979
to 1982.

Since his arrest it has been disclosed that in the last year, before he was
assigned to the press job in the Foreign Ministry, Mr. Treholt was allowed to go
through a one-year course at the Norwegian defense college that included access
to classified military information and tours of the top-secret NATO command post
deep inside a mountain outside Oslo. Moreover, Mr. Treholt's class was taken
inside the secret underground bunker designed for use by the Government as a
command post at time of a war emergency.

Government officials say that, despite the risks, Mr. Treholt was given his
recent assignments in the hope that his espionage activities would lead
investigators both here and in the United States to other Soviet agents and
rings.

There has been speculation that the five-hour Shultz visit gave investigators a
chance to set a trap for Mr. Treholt. Officials said that Mr. Treholt was
carrying classified documents when he was arrested but that the documents had no
connection with the talks Mr. Shultz held the day before with Foreign Minister
Svenn Stray.

Jens Evensen, a Norwegian expert on international law who was instrumental in
bringing Mr. Treholt, a former journalist, into Government, said the news of his
arrest was like losing ''a spiritual son.''

It is said here that Mr. Evensen could become one of the first casualties of the
Treholt affair. Mr. Evensen, who for two decades has taken up causes popular
with the left, is a leading candidate for a vacant seat at the Court of
International Law at the Hague.

Mr. Treholt was the older man's closest adviser when Mr. Evensen became Norway's
minister to the Law of the Sea Conference and when he negotiated in Moscow a
longstanding dispute over fishing boundaries in the Barents Sea. The interim
agreement accepted by Mr. Evensen is considered by some in Government and press
circles to be highly favorable to the Soviet Union.

In addition, a speech by Mr. Evensen in 1980 reviving the call for a nuclear-
free zone in the Nordic countries later spurred the Labor Party to adopt this
goal as policy. Reports have circulated that Mr. Treholt wrote the speech, but
Mr. Evensen denies it.

Opponents of the plan, which is based on a Soviet pledge of nonaggression to
Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark if they refused to permit nuclear weapons
within their boundaries, contend that it is a worthless pursuit since none have
nuclear weapons now.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Arne Treholt

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MYTHS, DREAMS, REALITIES-SAM SHEPARD'S AMERICA

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3571 words


''I drive on the freeway every day,'' says a

character in Sam Shepard's ''True

West,'' ''I swallow the smog. I watch the

news in color. I shop in

Safeway . . . there's no such thing as the West anymore! It's a dead issue!''
For the play's two heroes - Austin, an aspiring screenwriter, intent on making
it in Hollywood; and his brother, Lee, a desert rat who makes a living as a
petty thief - the West represents two very different places. There is the old
west, remembered mainly from the movies now, as a place where Manifest Destiny
was an almost palpable notion, a place which promised a way of life that was as
free as the land and the sky. And there is the new west, crisscrossed by
highways and pockmarked by suburbs - the west that Hollywood tycoons and
tract-housing developers built on the mortgaged dreams of the pioneers.

In ''True West,'' which is currently running Off Broadway at the Cherry Lane - a
television adaptation will be shown this Tuesday on public television's
''American Playhouse'' - Mr. Shepard uses these two disparate visions of
California not only to delineate the deep, contradictory craving in the American
character for both freedom and the security of roots, but also to explore the
gap between our nostalgic memories of the past and the bleakness of the present.
Mr. Shepard himself says ''if I'm at home anywhere, it's in the west - as soon
as I cross the Mississippi, I don't feel the same'' - but the idea of the West
that he cherishes exists only as a memory now in the swiftly receding landscape;
its romantic ideals, like the old american dream, vanished long ago with the
frontier.

At 40, Mr. Shepard has won a Pulitzer Prize and emerged as the preeminent
playwright of his generation. In an astonishing body of work - some 40
full-length and one-act plays, as well as poetry, short stories, and a volume of
autobiographical sketches - he has put forth a vision of America that resonates
with the power of legend. Surreal images bloom in his work - men turn into
lizards; carrots and potatoes grow miraculously in a barren garden; an eagle
carries a cat off, screaming into the sky - and strange, almost hallucinatory
transactions occur. And yet the work remains firmly grounded in the facts of our
own history and popular culture. Whether he is writing about rock-stars,
old-time gangsters or the contemporary family, Mr. Shepard's voice remains
distinctively American; his humor, dark; his language, at once lyrical and hip.

He has created a fictional world populated by cowboys and gunslingers, ranchers
and desperadoes, but these characters all find that the myths they were raised
on somehow no longer apply. Eddie the wrangler-hero of ''Fool for Love'' -
currently playing at the Douglas Fairbanks - finds that he has nothing better to
lasso than the bedposts in a squalid motel room. The Hollywood hustlers in
''Angel City'' look out their window and see not the fertile valleys of the
Promised Land, but a smoggy city of used-car lots and shopping centers - a city
waiting for apocalypse. And the old-time outlaws, who pay a visit to the present
in ''The Unseen Hand,'' discover that there are no more trains to rob, that
there is no place for heroics, that it is no longer even possible to tell the
good guys from the bad.

What happens when these characters are forced to face up to the disparity
between their lives and a heroic, if imaginary past, is almost inevitably
violent. Indeed violence - the emotional violence of people shattering each
others' dreams with verbal volleys, if not actual physical blows - is a
commonplace in Mr. Shepard's insistently male world. ''I think there's something
about American violence that to me is very touching,'' he explains. ''In full
force it's very ugly, but there's also something very moving about it, because
it has to do with humiliation. There's some hidden, deeply rooted thing in the
Anglo male American that has to do with inferiority, that has to do with not
being a man, and always, continually having to act out some idea of manhood that
invariably is violent. This sense of failure runs very deep - maybe it has to do
with the frontier being systematically taken away, with the guilt of having
gotten this country by wiping out a native race of people, with the whole
Protestant work ethic. I can't put my finger on it, but it's the source of a lot
of intrigue for me.''



As the frontier receded, so did the old values and dreams, and in its wake, says
Mr. Shepard, it has left a craving for belief. This hunger not only makes people
needy for self-definition, but also, as in ''Curse of the Starving Class,''
susceptible to the promises of fake messiahs. ''People are starved for the
truth,'' he says, ''and when something comes along that even looks like the
truth, people will latch on to it because everything's so false. People are
starved for a way of life - they're hunting for a way to be or to act toward the
world. Take anything - I don't see the punk movement as any different from, say,
the evangelist movement. They're both taken on faith - on one hand, faith in
costume, and on the other, faith in a symbolic Christ.''

Indeed the search for a role, for a way of acting toward the world, remains one
of the central preoccupations of Mr. Shepard's characters. Deprived of the past
and any sort of familial definition - in play after play, fathers do not even
recognize their sons - they try to manufacture new identities. They make up
remarkable stories about themselves, but in shedding various costumes, poses and
personalities, they often misplace the mysterious thing that makes them who they
are.

''Personality is everything that is false in a human being,'' explains Mr.
Shepard. ''It's everything that's been added on to him and contrived. It seems
to me that the struggle all the time is between this sense of falseness and the
other haunting sense of what's true - an essential thing that we're born with
and tend to lose track of. This naturally sets up a great contradiction in
everybody - between what they represent and what they know to be themselves.''

Victims of this contradiction, Mr. Shepard's characters live ''in at least two
dimensions - one has to do with fantasy, the other with reality.'' Some of them
have the ability to conjure up their fantasy life at will - as a result such
mythical heros as Captain Kidd, Mae West and Jesse James make appearances on
stage - while others are content to simply impose their fantasies on family and
friends. In some cases, the characters actually undergo bizarre transformations
on stage - they become, in a sense, who they think they are.

It is a peculiarly American notion, this sense that, like Gatsby, one can spring
from the ''Platonic conception of himself,'' that identity is not something
fixed by family or class, that one can grow up to become anything - the
President or a movie star. It offers, on one hand, the promise of self- made
riches and fame; and on the other, the perils of dislocation and anomie. Mr.
Shepard, himself, talks of experiencing ''this kind of rootlessness I don't
think will ever be resolved,'' and the facts of his own life suggest an ongoing
process of self- creation and re-invention.



An army brat, whose family had migrated during his childhood from Fort Sheridan,
Ill., to to Utah to Florida to Guam, the playwright spent his high school years
in Duarte, a small town east of Los Angeles, where his father had an avocado
farm. He was born Samuel Shepard Rogers - a name that ''came down through seven
generations of men with the same name'' - and nicknamed Steve to distinguish him
from his father. Years later, he would learn that Steve Rogers had been the
original name of Captain America in the comics, but by then, he'd dropped the
Rogers and the Steve and reincarnated himself as Sam Shepard.


As a boy, Steve Rogers had played at being a cowboy and a musician and a movie
star - for days he practiced Burt Lancaster's grin in ''Vera Cruz,'' ''Sneering.
Grinning that grin. Sliding my upper lip up over my teeth'' - and the Sam
Shepard who later populated his dramatic world with these same mythic figures
would also try on those roles in life.

The kid from California, whose exposure to cowboys had been limited to ''seeing
Leo Carrillo, the Lone Ranger and Hopalong Cassidy in the Rose Parade,''
eventually went East where, as the singer Patti Smith recalled, he became ''a
man playing cowboys''; he traded in his ''beat'' outfit of the 50's - a
turtleneck, peacoat and dark pants - for a flannel shirt, straw Resistol hat and
jeans. And while he'd never achieve the celebrity of his idols - Johnny Ace,
Jimmie Rodgers and Keith Richards - he would also become an accomplished
musician, joining the Holy Modal Rounders, a rock band, in the late 60's.

The movie stardom has come more recently: after several ''rural parts'' in
''Days of Heaven,'' ''Resurrection,'' ''Raggedy Man'' and ''Frances,'' Mr.
Shepard last year played the test pilot Chuck Yeager in ''The Right Stuff'' - a
role which not only conferred on him a kind of matinee idol status, but which
also coalesced, in a single image, the archetypes of Western hero and space-age
pioneer. Suddenly, he was up there on the screen playing one of those ''pilots
with fur-collared leather jackets'' he'd dreamed about as a kid, and being
acclaimed as the heir to Gary Cooper - strong, centered and coolly sexy.

Mr. Shepard's plays, of course, are filled with cinematic techniques and
allusions to the movies, but they also evince a contempt for Hollywood as a
place where people ''ooze and call each other 'darlings,' '' a place that
perpetuates ''stupid illusions.'' People have a need for ''somebody to get off
on when they can't get off on themselves,'' he wrote in ''Cowboy Mouth,'' but
while many of his artist- heroes aspire to fill this role, those who ''go
Hollywood'' usually end up being corrupted or destroyed. In ''Angel City,'' a
witch-doctor named Rabbit is hired by a studio to work his magic on a film and
he eventually goes mad. And in ''The Tooth of Crime,'' an aging rock star finds
that fame has trapped him in his image, and he is soon tumbled from his pedestal
by a mercenary newcomer named Crow.

Perhaps Mr. Shepard's own ambivalence toward the movie-business is best captured
by ''True West,'' in which Lee, the desert rat who despises ''Hollywood blood
money,'' exchanges identities with his brother, Austin, the successful
screenwriter. Like Austin, Mr. Shepard works for the film industry and is in
increasing demand as a star. And yet like Lee, he remains something of a
renegade.



Having got his start in the Off Off Broadway movement, he has always eschewed
the mainstream in the arts - he once called Lincoln Center ''a total bourgeois
scene'' - and even as a struggling playwright, living on grants, tried to avoid
publicity. Wary now of becoming one of Hollywood's ''promotional objects,'' he
spends as little time as possible in Los Angeles; rarely grants interviews, and
maintains that acting ''isn't a career - it's just something I do.''

''If you accept to work in a movie,'' he says, ''you accept to be entrapped for
a certain part of time, but you know you're getting out. I'm also earning enough
to keep my horses, buying some time to write and learning how to act - something
that really interests me.'' ''When you put yourself in the position of being an
actor,'' he goes on, ''you not only learn about your vulnerabilities, but also
about the ways in which you're not vulnerable. Those are probably the most
interesting areas. For me, it has to do with opening up, and there are certain
dangerous areas that are very closed.''

He has always written for the actor, says Mr. Shepard, and some of his work
actually owes a debt to the theory of ''transformations,'' an acting technique
practiced by the Open Theater. Actors using this technique would swiftly switch
personas from scene to scene - often without any apparent psychological
motivation - and such early Shepard plays as ''Angel City'' and ''Mad Dog
Blues'' featured characters who underwent just this sort of change. As Mr.
Shepard once wrote in a note to actors, ''Instead of the idea of a 'whole
character' with logical motives behind his behavior which the actor submerges
himself into, he should consider instead a fractured whole with bits and pieces
of character flying off a central theme. In other words, more in terms of
collage construction or jazz improvisation.''

The analogy with jazz seems particularly well chosen, for Mr. Shepard's writing
has clearly been influenced by his interest in music. The influence goes well
beyond his use of rock and roll in the plays - ''Cowboy Mouth,'' ''Operation
Sidewinder'' and ''The Tooth of Crime'' all featured musical interludes - but
extends to the actual form and language of the plays. Mr. Shepard has practiced
Jack Kerouac's technique of ''jazz- sketching with words,'' and the early plays
not only demonstrate the sheer delight he takes in playing around with words,
but also have the discursive, improvisational feeling of a jam session - they
are less plays in any traditional sense than an extraordnary succession of
emotional riffs. Many of these early works, Mr. Shepard recalls, had their
genesis in a sound - he says he would suddenly ''hear'' a character speaking -
or in a single image.



In a sense, it is easier to discuss Mr. Shepard's work in terms of music or the
visual arts than it is in terms of old-fashioned literary sources. Certainly one
can find the imprint of writers he admires in his plays - his gothic portraits
of the family recall Faulkner; the menacing atmosphere, Pinter; the sense of
absurd, Beckett. But the debt to popular culture - songs by the Rolling Stones,
ancient Indian legends, science-fiction novels and old Hollywood movies - is
equally pronounced.

In fact, what initially excited Mr. Shepard about the theater was its
flexibility, the fact that it was a ''form where you could amalgamate all the
arts.'' ''You can show film,'' he says, ''you can dance, you can incorporate
painting and sculpture. For a renegade artist who hasn't found his niche, it's a
way to engage all these things. It's very accessible and the rules are wide
open.''

The atmosphere in which Mr. Shepard began writing during the early 60's nurtured
these eclectic impulses. When he arrived in New York, the Off Off Broadway
movement was just beginning, and playwrights, actors, painters, poets and
musicians all seemed to inhabit an exciting new world. ''Everything influenced
me,'' he recalls. ''There was a great make- shift quality to those days. It only
existed for a few years, till Vietnam came along and everything shifted to a
very grim perspective. But for a while it was like a carnival, a mardi gras - it
made you feel you could do anything. Art wasn't a career or anything
intellectual - it was a much more active, playful thing, a way to inhabit a
life.''

Having had little formal exposure to theater in the past - the only ''audience
events'' he attended as a boy were rodeos, Spanish fandango dances and
basketball games - Mr. Shepard began writing plays with few preconceptions about
what they could or could not be. Much of what was applauded as innovative in his
early work - and also condemned as obscure - probably stemmed, he says, from
simple ignorance. In those days, Mr. Shepard wrote extremely quickly - he
finished ''Chicago'' in a single day - and rarely rewrote anything at all. He
was also taking a lot of drugs at the time, and while he never wrote while
''stoned,'' he says that ''maybe certain experiences from all that fed into the
work.''

In 1970, after a tempestuous affair with Patti Smith, Mr. Shepard left for
England with his wife O-Lan and their 2-year-old son. It was during a three-year
sojourn there that he first became aware that ''rhythmically I was an American -
the way I talk, the way I walk, everything was American,'' and the realization
seemed to galvanize his work. While living on meager grants in London, he
completed ''The Tooth of Crime,'' a savage fantasy about two rock stars fighting
for power and fame; and the play helped to consolidate his growing reputation on
both sides of the Atlantic.



There had always been critics who complained that Mr. Shepard's earlier work was
unwieldy and messy, and the playwright himself observes that he is ''a terrible
storyteller.'' ''The stories my characters tell,'' he says, ''are stories that
are always unfinished, always imagistic - having to do with recalling
experiences through a certain kind of vision. They're always fractured and
fragmented and broken. I'd love to be able to tell a classic story, but it
doesn't seem to be part of my nature.'' With ''Curse of the Starving Class,''
written in 1976, and ''Buried Child,'' written in 1979, however, a certain
change occurs - the writing has begun to grow more shapely and more
naturalistic. Though the language is still idiomatic, the imagery still poetic,
these elements are now grounded in narratives that demonstrate a new discipline
and a more traditional approach to character.

''I wouldn't call it a development,'' says Mr. Shepard, ''though it's some kind
of evolution. It has to do with moving inside the character. Originally, I was
fascinated by form, by exteriors - starting from the outside and going in, with
the idea that character is something shifting and that it can shift from one
person to another. You had different attitudes drifting in and out from actors
who are part of the ensemble. So in the past, it was the overall tone of the
piece I was interested in rather than in characters as individuals. That sort of
played itself out, and for a while I didn't know where to go from there. But
then I started to delve into character and it came about pretty naturally.''

As Mr. Shepard began to take a more psychological approach to character, the
plays also became less overtly epic and more personal. Whereas autobiographical
material in the early plays was either abstracted - as in ''The Rock Garden'' -
or mythologized - as in ''Cowboy Mouth'' - the later plays tend to deal more
directly with details from Mr. Shepard's own life. ''Starving Class'' and
''Buried Child'' - which both depict families victimized by their fantasies and
guilts - mirror the ''violent, chaotic family structure'' that the playwright
knew as a boy; and ''True West'' touches upon his ambivalence toward success and
his own complicated relationship with his father, who now ''lives alone on the
desert.''

Such male relationships - between fathers and sons, colleagues and rivals - have
tended to dominate Mr. Shepard's plays, and he acknowledges the special
fascination that the psyche of the American male has always held for him. ''You
don't have to look very far to see that the American male is on a very bad
trip,'' he says. ''American women at least have the pretense of being involved
in some kind of sisterhood, whereas men very, very rarely form a real strong
connection with one another. With men I think it happens only very, very rarely,
maybe with one or two guys in your lifetime - if you're lucky. It's like men
have to have sport or drinking or something like that in order to have an
exchange. Women don't seem to have that problem - they're willing to give people
the benefit of the doubt. It always seemed to me that there was more mystery to
relationships between men, and just now, it's coming to a territory where I'm
finding the same mystery between men and women.''

Indeed with ''Fool for Love'' - a fierce two-act portrait of a couple, who may
or may not be brother and sister - Mr. Shepard set himself a specific task: to
''sustain a female character and have her remain absolutely true to herself, not
only as a social being, but also as an emotional being.'' ''I tried relentlessly
to stick with that in the play,'' he says, ''and for my money it accomplishes
what I wanted to accomplish. It really does sustain both sides of the issue.
Neither one of them comes out heroic. They're just who they are.''



Having spent the last few months filming ''Country'' with Jessica Lange - whom
he has been living with in Sante Fe - Mr. Shepard has had little time recently
to devote to writing. This month, however, he plans to go to Boston to work with
the director Joseph Chaikin on another theater piece; though they have nothing
specific yet in mind, the project will no doubt resemble ''Tongues'' and
''Savage/Love'' - their previous collaborations, which combined music and poetry
in a loose dramatic form.

One day, says Mr. Shepard, he would like to write and direct a film, and from
now on, he also intends to direct all initial productions of his plays. As for
the actual writing, ''everything is wide open - I don't know where to plunge.''
''It's a hundred times harder than when I started,'' he says. ''For one thing,
it becomes more and more difficult to write something surprising or in a new way
because people now come with expectations - they expect it will be about 'the
myth of America' or something. Once you've cracked the beginning, you're on a
roll, but it gets more difficult to start. You've got to get rid of all the
stuff in your head that you've done before in order to start off from ground
zero, and for me, that's the only place to start.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sam Shepard; photo of Gary Sinise and John Malkovich

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
MANHANDLING THE CLASSICS, OR DIRECTOR 10, SHAKESPEARE 0

BYLINE: By Benedict Nightingale

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2723 words


W hat is that distant rattling being wafted into New York by the Atlantic
breezes these winter nights? Could it be the sound of Shakespeare turning in his
grave? If his ghost has visited ''King John'' at the Jean Cocteau Repertory,
where medieval armies range the cozy countryside with rifles protruding from
their jungle camouflage, the answer could well be yes. So it might be if he has
seen the City Stage Company's ''Hamlet,'' which launches at once into Ophelia's
funeral, ends with the gravediggers exchanging glum riddles about their trade,
and in between appears to have been torn up, shuffled, and then speculatively
glued back together by someone who sees narrative flow in terms of loops, twists
and dizzy backward somersaults.

Actually, there must have been a lot of creaking and rolling in the ossuaries of
Europe in recent months. Bernard Shaw, always fond of the sound of his own
voice, cannot have been pleased to see a whole character excised from the
current Broadway revival of ''Heartbreak House.'' Chekhov may have wondered, as
we all did, why Andrei Serban began his ''Uncle Vanya'' with the speech supposed
to end the play. Shakespeare (again) must have been surprised to learn from the
visiting Royal Shakespeare Company that he had set part of ''All's Well That
Ends Well'' in the Florence railroad station during the steam era. And if the
severer music critics are right, Bizet is still very, very angry about the
''Carmen'' presently at Lincoln Center. In fact, he isn't even on haunting terms
with Peter Brook, who concocted it.

Dead men cannot sue when their reputations are libeled, nor can they obtain
injunctions when their written works are perverted. But at least we survivors
can mount a protest in the courtroom of taste when an unjustified assault is
made on their integrity or that of their art. The difficulty, of course, is
establishing the precise point at which this happens. What liberties can
justifiably be taken with a classic play? When does direction become defacement,
interpretation vandalism? Or to put a question of principle in blunt personal
terms, can anything but whim explain why some of us would deplore the
manhandling of ''Heartbreak House'' and ''Hamlet'' while applauding the
dismemberment of ''Carmen''?

First, let's acknowledge the many and greater sins of the past and the many and
considerable virtues of the present. After all, mutilation of the classics is
not only a 20th-century industry. To have seen ''King Lear'' between 1681 and
1823 would have meant enduring the cosmetic surgery of Nahum Tate, who married
Cordelia to Edgar and sent the king to live serenely ever after in the English
outback. Every age has brought its biases to the staging of Shakespeare in
particular. The 18th century thought ''Pericles'' not bawdy enough, and expanded
its two brothel scenes; the 19th century reduced them to one ''without a
syllable,'' so a

critic reported, ''at which true delicacy

could conceive offense.'' In one late-Victorian company a major

confrontation between Othello and Desdemona was known as the ''notta'' because

the line ''What, not a whore?'' always

stopped before the last, unspeakable word.

And all along, lesser intrusions are to be

found: the New Hampshire ''Coriolanus'' of

1778, which informed its audience of discontented soldiers that the hero had
also suffered from ''his country's base ingratitude''; the Charleston ''Richard
III'' of 1796, which interpolated songs applauding Washington and liberty; the
Gold Rush Macbeth who stalked onstage in slouch hat and yellow gauntlets, with
which he menacingly patted his biceps.

If these last examples have their modern counterparts, many other excesses of
the past have been safely eradicated. Shakespeare, once invisible behind the
cluttered splendor of his presentation, is usually more sparely staged. Often
the cast is the set, to the benefit of clarity and fluency. No longer is a
classic production simply a showcase in which a great performer can strike
bravura attitudes. Nowadays we see plays as organic wholes, to which the least
may have something vital to contribute. No longer could a critic complain, as
one did as recently as 1952, that you only need ''give an actress a round
resonant voice and long Shakespearean part, and she'll have to enter smoking a
pipe to avoid being acclaimed.'' We have come to expect meaning, not music;
meaning unearthed by emotional and intellectual hard work.

Near the end of his one-man celebration of Shakespeare at the Ritz, Ian McKellen
launches into a brief lecture, anatomizing Macbeth's ''Tomorrow'' speech with a
care and rigor hard to imagine coming from an actor only 30 years ago. On both
sides of the Atlantic, greater scholarship, thought and intelligence is often to
be seen in classical revival. Yet one must ask, what use are these virtues, and
all those other improvements, if they're simply shoring up a fundamentally
misconceived production? We can patronize Tate and his fellow- spoilers, but our
generation has its own biases, its own ways of damaging the classics. One comes
from a hunger for novelty and surprise; another from a desire to be
''relevant.'' Both are the result of ceding vast power to that relatively recent
arrival on the theatrical scene, the director.

But what, you naturally ask, is wrong with either surprise or relevance? Surely
we don't want safe, soft classics mumbling their moribund truisms to bored or
uncomprehending audiences? Clearly not. It goes without saying that there's a
place for risk, theatricality, astonishment and, above all, the determination
that a play should speak to us here and now. A thoroughly unconventional
production may take us closer to the heart of a work than a more obviously
respectful one. Some of us felt and feel that to be the case with Brook's
''Carmen.'' But more often, one fears, surprise is a sterile end in itself, and
''relevance'' a buzz- word for superficiality.

At times it's almost a party game. Call it Shrink Shakespeare, after its
principal victim. Players must first choose a classic, then decide to emphasize
some partial or subsidiary aspect of it, the more unexpected the better. To this
end, they may relocate it in any period, make sweeping cuts, rearrange its
scenes, add lines of their own invention, pile in as much unlikely stage
business as possible. The winner is the player who concocts the most grotesque
production to be acclaimed as ''dazzlingly audacious'' by some critic. His prize
is a special pass to Trinity Church, Stratford-on- Avon, where he can personally
watch Shakespeare spinning in his tomb.



You think I exaggerate? In my time I've seen ''Measure for Measure'' transformed
into studies of power- politics, sexual frustration, and the so-called
''permissive society,'' by being set (respectively) on a Caribbean island after
independence, in Freud's office in Vienna, and amid the shiny bric-a-brac of the
swinging 60's. I've heard the gallants of ''Love's Labours Lost'' chorus ''a
small step for a man, a giant leap for mankind'' from beneath the spacesuits
they had whimsically adopted as an amorous disguise. I've heard a director argue
that there's no evidence that Hamlet delays his revenge, then proceed to
''prove'' the point by cutting the episode in which the ghost returns to rebuke
him for his ''almost blunted purpose.'' And, with many others, I have gasped at
Peter Brook's ''Midsummer Night's Dream,'' with its jugglers, acrobats and
sci-fi fairies.

That production, the rage of New York in 1971, has sometimes been described as
''epoch-making.'' A dozen not-so-veiled imitations have at least proved it
contagiously inventive. But America has its epoch-makers to remember, without
having to rely on one British import. As long ago as 1936 there was Orson
Welles's Haitian ''Macbeth,'' with its voodoo witches, and later his ''Julius
Caesar,'' which came without ghost, without Octavius, but with Benito Mussolini.
Four years before Brook's ''Dream,'' there was Joseph Papp's famous ''Hamlet,''
with Claudius a South American dictator, Ophelia a rock singer in a miniskirt,
the Prince killed by a member of the audience with a gun, and textual liberties
galore.

And what of Andrei Serban? No account of seminal tampering would be complete
without mention of his ''Trojan Women,'' with its chorus gutturally hiccupping
Aztec monosyllables, its Cassandra dancing bare- breasted with torches, and its
Helen enduring atrocities never contemplated by Euripedes. As this suggests,
Shakespeare has by no means been the sole obsession of hyper-inventive
directors. In 1982 Richard Foreman set Moli ere's ''Don Juan'' in a dreamlike
madhouse, with a chorus of keening corpses, and the same year Peter Sellars
played some distinctly odd tricks with Handel's pastoral ''Orlando.'' The
Kennedy Space Center and Mars turned out to be its locations, as wartorn Vietnam
was for Mr. Sellars's version of Haydn's ''Armida.''

But usually the object of imaginative attention is the Bard: an Edwardian
''Winter's Tale'' from Robin Phillips in Canada, complete with frock-coated
messengers returning from ancient Delphi by train; a Bismarckian ''Hamlet'' from
Liviu Ciulei in Washington, and, from the same director in Minneapolis, a
''Tempest'' about the torments of an Einsteinian Prospero in gold-rimmed
glasses; another ''Tempest,'' this time from Lee Breuer in Central Park, in
which the villains became mafiosi, Caliban a punk, and Trinculo a parody Mae
West.



One could add to the evidence; but it is already a confusing enough mix of
self-promoting nonsense and harmless fun, tendentious trickery and serious
exploration, butchery and (just conceivably) brilliance. The problem is
distinguishing each from each. One may say, for instance, that removing the
burglar Billy Dunn from ''Heartbreak House'' is unjustified, because he allows
other characters to display their traits and is himself the only working-class
voice in an upscale debate; yet we accept more damaging cuts in ''Hamlet''
because modern taste finds the play too long. And what of the coronation scene
added by Sarah Caldwell to her ''Macbeth'' at Lincoln Center? What of speaking
the ''To be'' speech directly to Ophelia, as Peter Coe's Hamlet recently did at
Stratford, Conn.? Here a clearer answer seems possible. The first business,
though hardly necessary, emphasized the play's Christian context; the second was
understandably regarded by its critics as forced and intrusive.

Then there's the question of costumes. There will always be something odd about
smooth executives slipping daggers from their business suits and stabbing the
boss, as happened in a Connecticut ''Julius Caesar'' recently; but we've come to
accept such updating as a new theatrical convention, and sometimes even to like
it. The 19th-century setting Trevor Nunn gave ''All's Well'' made that difficult
play more fun, more accessible: matters of class and honor became clearer,
sharper, for being removed from the Elizabethan twilight to the world of our
great-grandfathers. Brook's ''Dream'' forced us to reexamine our imaginations,
and ask if there was any reason but tradition why a phantasm should be a camp
thespian with nylon wings rather than a fugitive from Artaud, Asimov or the
circus at Madison Square Garden. Yet its big-top atmosphere did also deprive the
play of the unease, the lust, even the horror to be found in it. And I well
remember an inventively staged ''Tempest'' that ended as no more than a slim
parable about colonialism, with Ariel as Prime Minister Kenyatta clutching his
fly-whisk.



That search for relevance I mentioned, that hunger for surprise, often slants
and distorts more than is foreseen. Brooks Atkinson sensed that years ago when
he wrote that by identifying the enviously-murdered Caesar with Mussolini,
Welles came close to identifying Shakespeare with fascism. More often, however,
the result is shrinkage. If a director transports a play to a different period,
he risks emphasizing those aspects of the play which that period is particularly
fitted to illustrate, and so neglecting or omitting others of importance. A cut,
a piece of stage business, can obviously have a similarly distracting effect.
Too often directors nowadays sacrifice complexity for the simple
''interpretative line,'' ambiguity for ''messages,'' true relevance for
topicality, lasting human truths for transitory social ones, the play as a whole
to part or parts of it. The real objection to a swinging-60's ''Measure for
Measure'' or an ecological ''As You Like It,'' with Jacques turned into Ralph
Nader, is not what they do but what they do not do.

That is also the objection to Christopher Martin's stream-of-consciousness
''Hamlet'' at City Stage, with its jumps of time and concentration on the
gravediggers. It is meant to take us inside the Prince's reeling mind and focus
on what the theater's publicity calls ''the emotional fulcrum of the play, the
death and burial of Ophelia.'' But that isn't the play's fulcrum, only this
production's. And ''Hamlet'' concerns rotten Denmark as well as its hero's
perception of it. The production is well performed and, like others, might be
rated an interesting experiment, justified because another director will
doubtless arrive to give us something closer to Shakespeare himself. But that
argument rings hollow in New York, where the best-known classics are performed
too infrequently and the lesser ones scarcely ever.



Is a director necessary in classical production at all? That has sometimes
seemed a good question. Well, a guiding hand is helpful, if only to achieve a
minimal consistency, and ensure that Macbeth and Lady Macbeth aren't performing
in two quite different plays. The trouble is that many directors go on to make
inessential choices and decisions, forgetting their primary task, which is
surely to give their author as complete and vivid a showing as a sympathetic
reading of his intentions will allow. That means staging him in all his variety
and abundance, not selecting bits and pieces and packaging them in beguiling
shapes. As McKellen says in his one-man show, ''The most reliable director of
his plays is Shakespeare himself.'' Some such motto should be emblazoned on
every theater where great authors have been skillfully shriveled for public
consumption.

Yet it is difficult to translate this obvious wisdom into unswerving principle.
There are exceptions and, paradoxically enough, some of them appear to be the
worst offenders. The curious thing is that if surgery goes so far as to create a
completely new work of art out of the bones of the old, it is somehow less
objectionable than modest mutilation. No one could reasonably take exception to
Verdi's ''Otello'' or, to take a smaller example, Joseph Papp's musical of ''The
Two Gentlemen of Verona.'' Nor should anyone be pointing angry fingers at what
Brook and his collaborators have scrupulously rechristened ''La Tragedie de
Carmen,'' a title which confesses the chopping, the reshaping, the borrowing
from Merimee's original novella, and the other seeming savageries perpetrated on
Bizet himself.

It could be claimed that this restores the voltage that so shocked Paris back in
1875. A director of the Opera Comique resigned at the mere prospect of those
''thieves, gypsies and cigarette-sellers'' on his genteel stage; audiences,
critics and even Bizet's librettists were appalled by the realism of the
production itself. Celestine Galli-Marie, who created Carmen, was accused of
''accentuating the unlovely aspects of this dangerous role.'' It wasn't until
the Viennese inflated the spectacle, interpolated ballet and replaced dialogue
with recitative that the opera became the blander success most of us know today.
Perhaps only by returning to the original, and then toughening it up, can a
director make a less squeamish generation feel what those first spectators felt.

But that is a perilous line of reasoning, which could be used to justify many a
grisly assault on our sensibilities. Safer to report the simple truth: that
Brook's stark and terrible version of ''Carmen'' is a work of art in itself, and
a marvelously fresh one. Whatever Shakespeare may be doing, Bizet is surely at
peace in his grave.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW CHALLENGE TO PRESS FREEDOM

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4797 words


Martin Garbus is a New York trial lawyer who often represents libel litigants.
By Martin Garbus

 EANING FORWARD over the polished mahogany bench, dark- rimmed glasses low on
his nose, Justice William H. Rehnquist of the Supreme Court of the United States
posed the issue in its starkest terms. Why, he asked, should the law be any
different whether a person is damaged by a libelous statement or by a defective
train?

That seemingly simple, straightforward question, raised during oral arguments
before the crowded courtroom last November, is at the heart of a bitter
controversy within the law. And the manner and context in which Justice
Rehnquist spoke suggested that the struggle may be about to enter a new, more
fiery stage.

For most of the nation's history, the very question would have been irrelevant;
the law clearly made few distinctions between libel and other torts. Thus, a
person injured by the publication of a falsehood could sue for damages on pretty
much the same basis as one injured by a runaway train. But that was dramatically
changed by a Supreme Court decision just 20 years ago. In New York Times v.
Sullivan, the Court required that a public official prove that the falsehood had
been issued with actual knowledge that it was false, or in reckless disregard of
whether it was false or not. The Court's stated goal was to protect the First
Amendment freedoms of speech and the press from the effects of large damage
awards in libel cases.

Within the last few years, however, a rising tide of libel actions has been
battering at the 1964 protections. Jury verdicts against the press have soared,
as has the size of the awards. The first libel case to break the million-dollar
''sound barrier,'' as trial lawyers call it, was handed down in 1976, and there
have been 26 since that time. What has saved many publications and television
stations from bankruptcy has been the strong inclination of appeals courts on
both the state and Federal levels to reverse such decisions. That has happened,
for example, in more than 70 percent of the Federal libel-case appeals during
the last two decades.

Now, in the view of many authorities, Chief Justice Warren E. Burger's Court is
looking for a case that would enable it to restrict this appeals-court role.
Three libel cases - a record number - were argued before the Court last
November. Why, Justice Rehnquist asked the attorneys, shouldn't an appellate
court in a libel case behave like an appellate court in any other tort case? Why
shouldn't appeals judges be forced to accept the factual findings of the lower
courts and jury?

A decision to limit appeals courts' power would be of a piece with the Burger
Court's record: It has yet to find for the press in a libel case. That record,
together with the growth in libel cases and awards in the lower courts, has
already had a profound effect. Appeals-court judges have become more cautious in
abiding by Sullivan. Along with many other lawyers, I have seen book publishers
and small and marginally successful newspapers begin to censor themselves,
cutting back on investigative books and articles rather than chance an adverse
libel decision or even the legal fees and court costs required to defend against
a libel action. Larger organizations are also under pressure: Total legal fees
in one suit brought against Penthouse magazine have already exceeded $15
million.

Just when and how the Burger Court will let its views be known on the appeals-
court issue remains to be seen. Almost certainly, though, the press protections
of Times v. Sullivan will be further weakened; almost certainly, our freedom of
speech will be further eroded.



 THE NINTH-CENTURY LAWS OF King Alfred of Wessex provided that a person
convicted of libelous statements should receive ''no lighter penalty than the
cutting off of his tongue.'' And the traditional American legal attitude toward
civil libel, inherited in large measure from our British forbears, has been
tough and simple. A publication that printed a falsehood and thereby injured an
individual could be haled before a court and, if found guilty, forced to pay a
money judgment. Until this century, libel law was actually harsher than the
rules governing bodily injury:








 A person run over by a car has to prove that the driver of the car was
negligent - that he failed to exercise reasonable care - in order to collect
damages. In a libel case, the injured person could expect to collect simply by
proving that a falsehood had been printed; the fact that the editors could not
have known they were printing a falsehood was considered irrelevant.

Yet in spite of the relative ease with which libel could be proved, the number
of libel cases and the size of libel judgments were, by today's standards,
minute. Juries and judges were not inclined to award large amounts of money and
lawyers were not inclined to seek cases that did not involve large amounts of
money. It was not so litigious a society.

The Supreme Court's 1964 decision in the Sullivan case turned libel law inside
out. The facts of the case were these: At a time of heightened tension in the
South, The Times had printed an advertisement criticizing the manner in which
Montgomery, Ala., police officials were handling civil-rights demonstrations;
the advertisement implied the officials were racist. L. B. Sullivan, the city
commissioner in charge of the police, sued the paper, and a local jury awarded
him damages totaling $500,000.

As the Sullivan case was being tried, libel suits for nearly $300 million were
pending against news organizations active in the coverage of the civil-rights
protests. Among them: five suits against CBS for a total of $1.7 million. Such
moves by Southern courts had left the press vulnerable and nervous about
printing controversial news.

After the Alabama Supreme Court affirmed the Sullivan decision, the Supreme
Court agreed to review the case. The Court decided that states must require a
public official to prove that any lie published about him was published with
''actual malice.'' (The phrase inspired endless confusion. Under the Court's
definition, ''malice'' included both intentional use of a falsehood and the use
of a falsehood with reckless disregard for its accuracy. In most cases, though,
juries have voted for a ''malice'' libel award on the basis of reckless
disregard.)

Justice William J. Brennan made it clear that the members of the Court feared
for the survival of a vigorous, probing press in the face of high awards by
Southern judges and juries. Debate on public issues, he wrote, ''should be
uninhibited, robust and wide open,'' but that kind of debate was endangered when
the press had to guarantee the truth of its statements. Now, it seemed, any
public official who sought to rein in the press might think long and hard before
he sued.



The Sullivan decision was the Supreme Court's first pronouncement on the
Constitutional questions raised by civil libel law. It was, in legal parlance, a
''nice'' decision: It dealt narrowly with the issues at hand in the case and
left the loose ends to be resolved in time-honored fashion by the evolving law.

Thus, over the past 20 years, the unresolved aspects of the Sullivan decision
have been chewed over in thousands of cases and before hundreds of courts,
gradually working their way back up to the Supreme Court itself. Under the
leadership of Chief Justice Earl Warren, decisions continued to favor the media.
In one significant case, for example, the Court considered the claims of Wally
Butts, coach of the University of Georgia football team, who had been wrongfully
accused of fixing a game. A private citizen needed only to prove that the
accusation was false in order to collect damages, but the Court ruled that Butts
was neither a private citizen nor a public official, the two categories
recognized under the Sullivan decision. Instead, he was consigned to a newly
minted category of ''public figure'' - and as such had to prove that the
falsehoods were offered with ''actual malice'' as required of public officials
under the Sullivan decision.

Chief Justice Warren was followed by Warren Burger in 1969, but enough members
of the Sullivan majority remained to push the pendulum of media protection to
its outer limits. In 1971, the Court had to decide whether George A. Rosenbloom,
a distributor of nudist magazines, had been libeled in a radio news show
reporting his arrest and the seizure of 4,000 of his books and magazines. He was
described on the show as part of the ''smut-literature racket.'' Justice Brennan
declared in his opinion that even a private person, if he has become part of a
public controversy, must meet the ''malice'' test.

Soon after the Rosenbloom decision, however, it became evident that the parade
of new Justices nominated by Richard Nixon would change the Court's direction.
The loose ends of the still evolving libel law were going to be tied very
differently.

One major thrust of the Burger Court rulings has been to increase the types of
people who may sue as private persons and take the easier path to a libel
victory. A Chicago attorney engaged in high-visibility civil-rights cases, for
example, was held to be a private figure; so was a prominent Florida socialite.
Such rulings undercut the press protections sought under the Sullivan decision.
By putting the lower courts and members of the legal fraternity on notice that
the rigorous ''malice'' test would be applied in fewer and fewer cases, the
Supreme Court has made possible the filing of more libel claims. The number and
size of damage awards against the press have skyrocketed.

Two other Burger Court decisions have accelerated that trend. One concerned Col.
Anthony Herbert, who was suing CBS and Mike Wallace. Herbert claimed that ''60
Minutes'' had libeled him by suggesting that his criticism of his superior
officers in Vietnam was simply an effort to cover up his own shortcomings. In
pretrial hearings, Herbert's attorneys argued that, for them to prove ''malice''
on the part of CBS, they needed to explore the state of mind of the reporters
and editors who worked on the story and to have access to all of their notes and
unused interviews and to all drafts of their script. When this issue reached the
Supreme Court in 1979, opposing attorneys argued that such an inquiry would
violate the First Amendment and the privacy guaranteed by an ''editorial
privilege'' that was comparable to the lawyer-client privilege.

But Herbert won his point. The decision sanctioned an enormous lengthening of
the pretrial process, with endless legal haggling over what aspects of a news
article may be examined and then endless questioning of each document and
statement considered relevant to the case. One result: another major boost in
the cost of libel litigation and another reason for some media executives to
play the news safely, next time, rather than risk a libel suit. Consider the
Herbert case, itself. It was first filed just a decade ago - January 1974 - and
has yet to go to trial. The attorneys' fees for the defendants alone have
already soared to more than $4 million.

Perhaps the most far-reaching libel case of recent years, in practical terms,
was Hutchinson v. Proxmire, decided by the Supreme Court in 1979. In a news
release, Senator William Proxmire had announced that he was giving one of his
''golden fleece'' awards - designed to expose wasteful Government spending - to
Ronald Hutchinson, a research psychologist. Hutchinson had obtained $500,000 in
Federal funds to study why monkeys clench their jaws. Hutchinson responded by
suing the Senator for libel, and eventually the Supreme Court supported
Hutchinson's position. What proved to be most significant about the decision,
however, was Footnote Nine.

In that footnote, Chief Justice Burger may have sounded the death knell for the
use in libel cases of summary judgment, a traditional pretrial procedure.
Summary judgment, long accepted by liberal and conservative judges alike,
permitted media defendants to go to court before the actual start of trial and
ask the judge to throw out cases that were clearly without legal merit -
nuisance claims or claims of ''malice'' that could be easily shown to be
unsupportable.

Before the appearance of Justice Burger's footnote, approximately 75 percent of
all libel cases were dismissed by summary judgment before trial. Though exact
figures are not available, some legal authorities believe that the number of
summary-judgment motions sought and the number of libel cases dismissed before
trial have decreased dramatically.



The record of the Burger Court on libel law has been crystal clear: It has never
decided in favor of the media.  Thus, when the Court announced last year that it
would review four libel cases - a larger number than ever reviewed at one time -
press spokesmen felt they had cause for alarm.

Historically, the Supreme Court selects the cases it will hear because they
offer an opportunity to re-examine significant Constitutional questions. One of
the three new cases, for example, deals with the application of libel law to
nonmedia defendants. Another case, many legal scholars believe, was taken by the
Court in the hope that it would provide a chance to rule on the role played by
appeals courts today in reversing libel judgments of the lower courts.

Libel actions follow one of two tracks. Most are brought in state courts; a
decision may be appealed to a state appellate court and then on to the Supreme
Court. Actions that involve national publications and television networks make
up most of the libel fare for the more than 500 Federal district trial courts,
with decisions appealed to the 12 Federal appellate courts and then on to the
Supreme Court. On both the state and Federal tracks, plaintiffs overwhelmingly
seek to present their cases before juries rather than trial judges.

Federal appeals-court reversals of libel decisions in the years before the
Sullivan decision ran between 17 percent and 20 percent, according to Government
records. That was comparable to the reversal rates in all civil cases. According
to a study prepared last year, the libel reversal rate has reached to 70
percent. Now, the Supreme Court seems to be looking for an opportunity to
restrict these reversals, which could open the floodgates and swamp the press in
libel judgments.

The major case considered in oral arguments before the Court last November was
brought by the Bose Corporation against Consumers Union of United States. Bose
charged that an article in Consumer Reports magazine about its loudspeakers was
''product disparagement,'' and a Federal judge found that the magazine
researcher was too intelligent not to be aware that the article was a falsehood.
The judge said Bose had thus met the test of ''malice.'' An appeals court then
reversed the judgment, and now the Supreme Court was hearing lawyers for the
magazine and the corporation present the case.

The argument in the high- ceilinged chamber provided watchers with legal
fireworks. As frequently happens, the judges used their questions more to
express their views than to elicit information. At one point, Justice Brennan
addressed the Bose lawyer: ''As I understand the Court of Appeals, they said
this is a First Amendment case under New York Times against Sullivan. We have a
special duty to look at the record more closely than we normally would. Do you
disagree with that?'' In effect, Justice Brennan was simply underlining the
Sullivan ruling, which required that appeals courts must start from scratch,
re-examining the facts of the case, when considering libel cases because they
represented Constitutional issues.

At another point of the hearing, Justice Rehnquist asked of the attorney for
Consumers Union: ''What principle of the First Amendment suggests that it is
desirable to allow a Court of Appeals, such as it did in this case, to simply
second-guess a trial judge's finding that a witness, whom the trial judge heard
testify, was not credible?'' In effect, Justice Rehnquist was arguing that the
case - and by extension, all libel cases - should not be given full
appeals-court review.

By the time the dramatic, hour-long session was over, it appeared to some
observers that the Justices had changed their minds about the Bose case - that
it did not offer the legal prospects they had expected.



The recent swings in Supreme Court attitudes toward the libel law inevitably
affect and are affected by events within the larger society. Political changes,
for example. Presidential election results do not necessarily determine the
nature of the Court - Chief Justice Warren and Justice Brennan, for instance,
were both appointed by Dwight Eisenhower - but Republican Presidents are more
likely than Democrats to appoint judges who would place limits upon the freedom
of the press.

One reason for the rash of libel suits and claims in the last few years has been
the nationwide litigation frenzy. The public has come to believe that lawsuits
should solve all problems, and multimillion-dollar verdicts have become routine
in many areas of the law, from product liability to malpractice to negligence.

Another public attitude has had a major impact: increasingly negative feelings
about the press in general. According to a poll by the National Opinion Research
Center last year, 13.7 percent of the people had ''a great deal of confidence in







One reason for the rash of libel suits and claims in the last few years has been
the nationwide litigation frenzy. The public has come to believe that lawsuits
should solve all problems, and multimillion-dollar verdicts have become routine
in many areas of the law, from product liability to malpractice to negligence.

Another public attitude has

page 48





 had a major impact: increasingly negative feelings about the press in general.
According to a poll by the National Opinion Research Center last year, 13.7 per
cent of the people had ''a great deal of confidence in the press'' - down from
29 percent in 1976.

Such feelings have their greatest im- pact in the jury room. Under the law,
juries have nearly absolute discretion in deciding the merits of a libel case
and in determining how much money to award an injured party. And emotions rule
in the jury room.

The plaintiff comes into court claiming that his reputation has been ruined or
that his job has been lost because of words printed by an editor or author. In
many cases, the words printed are clearly false, and that is what jurors want to
know about. They find it hard to believe that freedom of the press is in peril
because one journalist is found guilty of libel and pun- ished for his sin. How
else, they ask, can the press be prevented from printing falsehoods? It comes as
little surprise when juries find for the plaintiff - 90 percent of the time.

Even the balance of legal talent in libel trials has been tipping toward the
plaintiff. The trial experience of most of the lawyers defending First Amendment
cases has often been limited to arguments before judges, not juries. More and
more, plaintiffs are being represented today by veteran trial lawyers who have
learned to appeal to a jury's emotions in negligence and criminal trials. They
have come over to libel cases because the potential rewards are so enormous.

Consider the CBS show ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' It charged
that Gen. William C. Westmoreland had countenanced the manipulation of
statistics to persuade the American public that the United States was winning
the war. The general sued CBS on Sept. 13, 1982, and CBS has since had three
lawyers working full-time on the case. According to Dan M. Burt, head of the
public- policy law firm representing Westmoreland, the cost of Westmoreland's
legal fees will reach more than $2 million by the time the suit comes to trial,
probably sometime this year.

Along with the legal fees, the damage awards are soaring. In 1981, after Carol
Burnett sued The National Enquirer for incorrectly reporting that she had been
''boisterous'' in a restaurant ''row'' with Henry Kissinger, her $1.6 million
award was close to a record. Last year, at least a dozen publications and
broadcasters were facing high judgments. Among them: Philadelphia magazine, $7
million; The Philadelphia Inquirer, $4.5 million, and KSAT-TV in San Antonio,
$1.6 million.

Many of these judgments are being reversed or reduced on appeal, but other
verdicts, totaling hundreds of thousands of dollars, are routinely being upheld
by appellate courts. It is also becoming increasingly common for a media
defendant, after a large jury verdict against him, to turn his back on a
time-consuming, costly appeal and settle the case at a stiff price.


The reality - and threat - of being sued for libel has left some of American
journalism in a state of siege. Supreme Court rulings and the attitudes of libel
juries have forced many newspapers to desperate efforts to avoid any error that
could possibly be used as the basis for a lawsuit.

The drastic cutback in summary judgments, which used to eliminate many nuisance
and harassment suits at an early stage, has brought down a blizzard of claims.
The Church of Scientology, for example, has filed dozens of libel claims. One
woman who has delivered speeches critical of Scientology has been sued for libel
17 times by the organization.

Most vulnerable are the nation's smaller publications and local television and
radio stations. They play a vital role in exposing private and governmental
incompetence and corrup



 tion, but they can easily be driven into bankruptcy if they are forced to
defend even a single libel suit.

In 1979, for instance, The Point Reyes Light, a 3,100-circulation weekly
newspaper in northern California, published a series of articles based on an
investigation of Synanon, the drug rehabilitation center. The series brought the
paper a Pulitzer Prize but led to four libel suits, seeking a total of more than
$1 billion.

The fear of libel has also spread to major publications and the television
networks. A major expansion has occurred in the number of libel-insurance
policies and in the total premiums paid by the media.  Press spokesmen routinely
deny that they kill articles because of the risk of libel, but the chilling
effect is well known to lawyers who work with the media. In my own practice, I
have found that publishers who once asked me whether the subject of an article
could win a lawsuit, now ask simply, ''Will he sue?'' More and more, I see
unflattering adjectives removed, incisive analyses of people and events watered
down, risky projects dropped.

Similar experiences are reported by attorneys when libel issues are discussed.
At a recent board meeting of the American Civil Liberties Union, for example, a
number of case histories were offered. Typical was the publishing house that
canceled the second printing of a book, and the paperback edition, after a libel
complaint that was eventually shown to have no legal base.

When judges and jurors make an award of thousands of dollars against a newspaper
in punitive damages, there is usually an assumption on their part that the award
will deter the paper from printing falsehoods. And such judgments, or the threat
of them, may indeed cause the media to go to even greater lengths to check their
facts. That option may not, however, be feasible for financially hard-pressed
publications or broadcasters, since it typically involves hiring larger staffs
and paying high fees to have lawyers screen articles for potentially libelous
statements.

Moreover, as a practical matter, the truth is hard to come by. It is nearly
impossible for a publisher of thousands of books, a television news program that
presents hundreds of facts daily or a newspaper that must meet daily deadlines
to determine the ultimate truth of most of the controversial facts they deal
with. And the operative word is ''controversial.''

By definition, those aspects of journalism that are most in need of being
defended under the First Amendment - the articles that expose wrong- doing or
offer critical judgments on the powerful - are the most controversial and the
most suceptible to litigation. The chief effect of the flood of libel judgments
has not been to make such articles more accurate but to decrease their numbers.
By that amount, free speech has been diminished.

The Burger Court's decision in the suit brought by Col. Anthony Herbert, giving
his attorneys access to the materials used by ''60 Minutes'' in the preparation
of the TV segment, has greatly added to the media's nervousness and confusion.
Some media lawyers, for example, suggest that reporters and editors throw out
their interview notes, first drafts and any communications dealing with
controversial stories. Other lawyers suggest that all interviews should be taped
and the tape carefully saved.  Investigative journalism has decreased in recent
years in large part because of the threat of libel awards. And the atmosphere
created by the awards has also changed the focus of investigation by many
journalists. Since, under current law, it is so much safer to print
controversial material about public officials than about private citizens,
publishers are rapidly becoming disenchanted with hard-hitting books and
articles about private citizens.

Much of the threat, however, comes from a certain class of private citizen: the
wealthy ones. Most private persons hire libel attorneys on a contingency basis;
that is, the attorney is willing to invest his time without fee on the chance of
victory and a one-third share in the money award or settlement. But one
often-overlooked result of the libel-law revolution has been that networks and
major publishers have hired sophisticated attorneys who know how to run up
litigation costs on a plaintiff and drive him from the courthouse. Only such
citizens as the owners of the Rancho LaCosta resort, currently suing Penthouse
Magazine - they claim they were wrongly identified as connected with organized
crime - can afford to pay the legal fees lawyers usually demand to take on the
likes of Penthouse.

A dramatic recognition of the problem comes from Mobil Oil. Following a libel
suit brought by Mobil's president against The Washington Post - the judge
overturned a $2 million jury award - Mobil began to carry a special kind of
insurance. It provides funds for certain company executives in case they find
they've been defamed and decide they want to sue.



Twenty years ago, when the Supreme Court decided New York Times v. Sullivan, it
was clear that the libel law as it then existed was not working. Because of the
uproar over civil rights and the response of the Southern states, juries were
using the law to hold the press hostage. Today, though the nation has changed in
so many ways, there is a certain similarity in the conditions confronting the
press. Once again, we see huge awards levied against the media by juries who
often see the press as an enemy of the people; once again, we see the Supreme
Court preparing to confront the issues.

The legal fraternity has not been shy about its own ideas. One proposal, for
example, seeks a law that would make an appropriate correction in an offending
newspaper acceptable as a substitute for a lawsuit. Other suggestions focus on
the role of the jury. One would eliminate punitive awards on the basis that the
Founding Fathers never envisioned that a jury would be deciding appropriate
behavior for an institution protected under the First Amendment. Another would
eliminate compensatory awards for ''mental anguish'' on the basis that objective
evidence is seldom available.

The most significant reform offered, though, addresses a question that has been
pondered by generations of judges: Is not the law of libel as it affects public
affairs inherently incompatible with the First Amendment guarantees of freedom
of speech? Justice Hugo L. Black, in his opinion on the Sullivan case, put it
this way: ''I doubt that a country can live in freedom where its people can be
made to suffer physically or financially for criticizing their government, its
actions or its officials.''

Those doubts, however, do not appear to be uppermost in the minds of the
majority of today's Supreme Court. Nor do American juries show much concern
about the effects their rulings have had on the press. As a result, one of
America's basic freedoms is at risk.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Justice Brennan; photo of Justice Rehnquist

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS January 29, 1984Fiction 1322

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1292 words


WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  2113

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  3222

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  4432

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  556

BERLIN GAME, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $15.95.) Espionage on both sides of the
Iron Curtain.  6711

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfilling a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  71021

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  8611

MORETA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  91319

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  10 1

THE STORY OF HENRI TOD, by William F. Buckley Jr. (Doubleday, $14.95.) Superspy
Blackford Oakes carries out a mission in Berlin at the time The Wall goes up.
11811

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A detective from Earth
investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  121126

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  1399

THE NEVERENDING STORY, by Michael Ende. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A lonely boy meets
challenges and finds his true self in a magical land.  141213

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler. (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.
151418

WINTER'S TALE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) Heroic
lives in Manhattan between the late 19th century and the year 2000.



 Nonfiction 1155

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  2219


MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  3622

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  4364

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

5420

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  6513

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.

774

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random, $25.) Man's search to know
himself and the world over the centuries.  8104

APPROACHING HOOFBEATS: HORSEMEN OF THE APOCALYPSE, by Billy Graham. (Word Books,
$11.95.) The evangelist's interpretation of the Book of Revelation.  9810

WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.  10915

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $22.50.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the recent PBS television series.  11126

THE KINGDOM BY THE SEA, by Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) A
novelist's journey around Great Britain.  12134

LATE NIGHT THOUGHTS ON LISTENING TO MAHLER'S NINTH SYMPHONY, by Lewis Thomas.
(Viking, $12.95.) Essays on a wide range of subjects by the physician-medical
administrator.  13142

CORONER, by Thomas T. Noguchi with Joseph DiMona. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.)
The controversial Los Angeles County medical examiner discusses the deaths of
Marilyn Monroe, John Belushi and other celebrities.  14 12

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley. (Dodd, Mead, $15.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  151141

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon. (Atlantic/Little, Brown, $17.50.) A
report on a trip through the back roads of America.

And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)


THE BOURGEOIS EXPERIENCE: Victoria to Freud. Education of the Senses, by Peter
Gay. (Oxford, $25.) The first volume of this immensely ambitious work
concentrates on Victorian sexuality.

CHARLES DE GAULLE, by Don Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A highly readable biography by
a veteran American journalist with 38 years' experience on Europe's political
beat.

THE COLLECTED PROSE, by Elizabeth Bishop. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.50.)
Memoirs and stories, previously uncollected, by one of our greatest poets, who
died in 1979.

FEMININITY, by Susan Brownmiller. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) An illuminating
step toward awareness of a subject at once instantly familiar and surprisingly
unexplored.

THE GREAT DEPRESSION: America, 1929-1941, by Robert S. McElvaine.  (Times Books,
$19.95.) How the American people learned to grapple with their greatest economic
crisis.

THE HIGH WALLS OF JERUSALEM: A History of the Balfour Declaration and the Birth
of the British Mandate for Palestine, by Ronald Sanders. (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $24.95.) The dramatic story of the gestation of the Zionist state.

STONES FOR IBARRA, by Harriet Doerr. (Viking, $14.95.) This first novel by a
73-year-old American who writes like a poet reveals a distinctive vision of life
in a Mexican village.

THE TRUE ADVENTURES OF JOHN STEINBECK, WRITER, by Jackson J. Benson.  (Viking,
$35.) This biography gives us the totally American materials of Steinbeck's life
and career.

WHITE JAZZ, by Charles Newman. (Doubleday, $7.95.) A novel by an extremely
intelligent writer that tracks a young man through the emptiness of this
concrete-and-electronic world.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 1117

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  2 59

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money: a 1980 book.  3433

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  4 1

THE PRITIKIN PROMISE: 28 Days to a Longer, Healthier Life, by Nathan Pritikin.
(Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A regimen by the operator of two ''longevity
centers.'' 527

THE HUMAN BODY, by Jonathan Miller. (Viking, $16.95.) A pop-up book illustrating
the workings of the human body.




The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET BUILDUP IN FAR EAST CAUSING U.S. CONCERN

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 672 words


Military

 Analysis


The Navy has stepped up its surveillance of Soviet military bases at Cam Ranh
Bay and Da Nang in Vietnam, according to United States and Asian military
officials and diplomats.  The action comes at a time of growing concern in the
United States, Japan and some Southeast Asian capitals over the expansion of
Soviet land, sea and air power from Vietnam north to Siberia.

The Soviet Navy, American officials emphasize, has maintained major forces at
Vladivostok and other Far Eastern ports since the end of World War II. But these
ports, while well positioned for operations against Japan or China, are distant
from the South China Sea and the shipping lanes that run from the Persian Gulf
and the Middle East to Japan.

The United States built extensive naval installations at Cam Ranh Bay during the
Vietnam War. Airfields there and at Da Nang are counted among the largest in the
region.

According to American and Asian reports, the development of these areas by the
Soviet Navy and Air Force has quickened in the last six months.

The expansion of Soviet power in Vietnam balances to a certain extent the United
States presence at the Subic Bay Naval Base and Clark Air Base in the
Philippines. Clark Field is important not only as the main base for the fighter
and transport aircraft deployed in the region but as a center for communications
and intelligence.

Base for Soviet Submarines

Soviet submarines as well as surface warships are now based at Cam Ranh Bay, and
the installations there are administered entirely by Soviet personnel. At the
outset the Russians were content to fly reconnaissance aircraft out of the
airfield in the region. Late last year, however, six Soviet TU-16 medium
bombers, code-named Badger by the North Atlantic alliance, were spotted at the
base.

The Cam Ranh Bay complex, American military officials emphasized, provides the
Russians with the means to strike at targets in southeastern China. The Russians
have already strengthened their positions facing the Chinese in Siberia by
upgrading the quality of some of the 52 divisions, seven of them armored, now
deployed along the Chinese frontier.

Over the last three years, one American authority reported, the Russians have
''dramatically increased their air and missile strength in Eastern Siberia.''
This includes the deployment of 50 to 60 TU-22M bombers with a range of 5,000
miles and the stationing of about 125 SS-20 mobile missiles.

The SS-20's are nuclear missiles while the TU-22M's, code-named Backfire, can
carry nuclear bombs or air-to- surface missiles with nuclear warheads.

Naval Patrolling Increased

One British expert estimated that naval patrols from Cam Ranh Bay increased from
7,000 ship hours at sea in 1975 to 11,500 in 1981.

From the standpoint of the balance of military power in the region, the Russians
have met two objectives.

Primarily, they have closed the ring around China with air and naval bases north
and south of that country.

In the larger field of world strategy, the Soviet Union's forces are now in
position to strike westward toward the Strait of Malacca and the tankers that
pass through it with oil for Japan. In the event of a confrontation in the
Persian Gulf area, Soviet submarines, cruisers and destroyers can operate in the
northern Indian Ocean under air cover provided from six expanded and modernized
airfields in Afghanistan.

The Russians also have a potentially powerful ally in Vietnam. Intelligence
estimates differ on details but it is agreed that the Vietnamese Army, numbering
about one million men, is larger than the combined forces of the six members of
the non-Communist alliance in the region - the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations.

Soviet policy has limited the quality of aircraft delivered to the Vietnamese
Air Force. The most modern planes in the inventory are MIG-21's and MIG- 23's
and some American F-4's taken from the South Vietnamese at the conclusion of the
war.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Air Force Retiring Plane

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 26 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 29


The Air Force is about to retire the last of more than 800 F-105 Thunderchief
fighter-bombers, which played a major role in bombing North Vietnam.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE OTHER CITY: NEW YORK'S HOMELESS

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3792 words


Mae Ash used to be a maid at the Waldorf-Astoria. William McKie can tell stories
about his cross-country travels. Ernest Alvizo taught school in Brooklyn. Donna
Gray grew up in foster homes and has spent time in six mental hospitals.

Though their pasts differ, they all have one thing in common: They are among New
York City's homeless men and women, people most often described in statistics -
in shelter counts and budget allotments and population percentages.

Behind those numbers are the names and faces and struggles in a world that
exists in every part of the city, in doorways and on park benches, in shelters
and church basements, in subways and train stations, on Park Avenue and on the
Bowery.

Meet them, and many will make a point of telling you who they used to be - a
husband or a wife, a father or a mother, an accountant, a welder, a high-school
champion swimmer, a soldier in Vietnam, a jazz pianist. Some would rather not
talk about lives that may have involved drug addiction, alcoholism or time in
prison. Others, their disturbed minds a jumble of fantasy and fear, can tell you
nothing illuminating.

The homeless can be elusive, their pasts hazy. Often, theyhave no identification
and are reluctant to give their names. How it happened that they have no place
to go is almost never one event, but rather a series of events - ''a long
story,'' as many of them say.

Their stories are necessarily about the bleakness of poverty and alienation. But
they are often also about resilience, about dignity maintained in a world that
has been reduced to the starkest details of survival - mandatory 6 A.M.
wake-ups, bus trips to shelters, lines for showers, toilets without seats.

It is a world with its own signs: ''Please check for lice before showering'' and
''Curfew 10 P.M. If you do not return by 7 P.M. your bed will be assigned to
someone else!''

''The main thing,'' said Tony, a 45-year-old man from Harlem who said he had
spent a month in Central Park, ''is to stay clean so you can look anyone in the
eye.''

In a world that is as boring as it is remarkable, with hours spent doing nothing
but sitting, pleasure is measured in cigarettes and Styrofoam cups of coffee,
diversion in bingo games and soap operas. Dreams and aspirations can seem at
once humble and inaccessible. ''I want a nice apartment and a bed that no one
else has slept in,'' Hilary Cummings, 25, said the other day at the city's Men's
Shelter just off the Bowery.

Surprises and mysteries abound. An old woman who has wandered the city's streets
for at least a decade - some might call her a bag lady - sits down at a
broken-down piano in a small shelter and reveals herself as a jazz and blues
virtuoso, with a voice meant for nightclubs.

It is a world far outside the city most people know, a city that can seem - and,
in fact, can be - almost impenetrable to those on the other side.

In the last eight years, Mae Ash has lost almost everything she once had - her
job as a maid, her health, her apartment, her family ties. The triumph of Miss
Ash, who is 56, is that she remains a woman of dignity.

To Miss Ash, there is nothing particularly remarkable about the six years during
which she spent most of her nights in the Port Authority Bus Terminal in
midtown.

''My mother always said, 'If you ever get put out of doors, don't ever give up,'
'' Miss Ash said the other day at the Moravian Church Coffee Pot at Lexington
Avenue and 30th Street, a drop-in center for homeless men and women over the age
of 40.

She was born in Newport News, Va., the eldest daughter of a railroad worker and
a seamstress. ''I stopped school in the fifth grade,'' she said. ''I had a
sister and a brother to take care of.''

Miss Ash, whose story has been documented by caseworkers at the Moravian center,
worked as a cook, as a nurse's aide and then got a job as a chambermaid at the
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. In her fourth year there, she said, she developed a
severe allergy to the chemicals in the cleaning fluids, which made it impossible
for her to work at one of the few jobs she could get. She also developed
diabetes and, somewhere along the way, a drinking problem that she later
overcame.

Eventually, she ended up in the Port Authority Bus Terminal. ''Some of the girls
said, 'If you ain't got no place to stay, you can stay in the Port Authority -
it's warm,' '' she recalled.

Last spring, Miss Ash went to the Moravian Church, a chaotic and overcrowded but
cheerful place where about 180 homeless men and women watch television and play
bingo and get meals, counseling and transportation at night to church shelters.

Each morning, Miss Ash, who sleeps in a shelter at St. Bartholomew's Church on
Park Avenue, volunteers to make breakfast at the Moravian Church - scrambled
eggs for 180.

The center's caseworkers helped Miss Ash apply for public assistance last March.
But her file apparently got lost, and her benefits did not come through until
three weeks ago. Even with a housing allowance of $191 a month, Miss Ash can
hardly afford a $60-a-week room in a midtown welfare hotel - if she can find
one, according to Jennifer Barrows, of the drop-in center.

''Whatever God sends down,'' said Miss Ash, ''you've got to take it.''

On the frigid night of Jan. 22, the population of the city's shelters reached
6,310 - more than on any night since the Great Depression, when it exceeded
9,000, according to Jack Deacy, a spokesman for the city's Human Resources
Administration.

Along with the ranks of the homeless, New York's shelter city is always growing.
There are now 18 city-operated shelters, in every borough but Staten Island, in
converted Y.M.C.A.'s, schools, hospitals and state armories.

Each shelter provides a bed, three meals a day, showers, clean clothing, medical
services, mental-health referrals and social services. Facilities often seem
overloaded - at the Fort Washington Armory in Washington Heights, for example,
800 men regularly share 10 showers and 20 toilets - and shortages are frequent.
Toilets stop up, seats mysteriously disappear. Linens and milk run out.
Officials acknowledge that there are not enough caseworkers.

''We're expanding faster than we can fill in the cracks,'' said Bonnie Stone, an
assistant deputy commissioner at the Human Resources Administration, which
oversees the shelter network. ''The most important question for us is: 'Are the
basics there? Are the doors open? Is it warm? Is there food? Are there beds?' ''

The limits of the shelter system are clearly defined. ''Our goals are very clear
- temporary shelter so no one freezes to death,'' said Robert Trobe, deputy
administrator of the Human Resources Administration.

''If we knew the homeless as human beings, doing the bare minimum would not be
our goal,'' said Robert M. Hayes, the attorney for the New York-based National
Coalition for the Homeless, which is working with groups in 40 states to get
govern ments to provide shelter for the homeless.

It was Mr. Hayes's lawsuit against the city that resulted in the 1981 Callahan
decree - an agreement under which the city must provide decent shelter for all
who request it.

Though much is heard about the Callahan decree, little is said about the
plaintiff behind it - Robert Callahan, a World War II veteran and short-order
cook who ended up as an alcoholic on the Bowery.

When he was first introduced to Mr. Callahan five years ago, Mr. Hayes was still
with the Wall Street firm of Sullivan & Cromwell. Last month, Mr. Hayes, who is
now 31, delivered a eulogy for Mr. Callahan at a memorial service for the
homeless who died in the city last year.

''He became my guide to the Bowery,'' Mr. Hayes said in his eulogy. ''There were
tricks to learn. If one sneaked into a mission at the right time, you could get
a bowl of soup and avoid the sermon. He knew about the bathrooms in the
courthouses. He knew which grates blew dry heat; he knew park benches that were,
well, pretty safe. He had the pride and the sense, back there in 1979, to avoid
the Men's Shelter except in the dead of winter. He liked to be called the mayor
of the Bowery, though to most of his friends he was Callahan.''

Shortly before the Callahan decree was entered in State Supreme Court in
Manhattan, Mr. Callahan, still homeless, was found dead on Mott Street - of
natural causes, according to the Chief Medical Examiner's office. He was 55
years old.


It was a Friday night at the Men's Shelter, the dispatch center at 8 East Third
Street that on these winter nights sends about 1,500 men to shelters all over
the city and to six hotels on the Bowery.

Some of the men had walked in off the street, others had come by van or bus.
Empty bottles of cheap wine littered the foul-smelling stairway that led to a
room on the second floor, where 60 or 70 men sat on chairs and on top of desks
waiting for their bus.

In the hallway, a staff worker yelled at an old man in a wheelchair who had only
one leg, accusing him of receiving more welfare benefits than he deserved.
''You're making too much money to be here, pop,'' he kept saying, as the old man
angrily shook his head.

Inside the room, another old man, ragged and gaunt, lay on his back on the floor
in what appeared to be a drunken stupor. The chairs around him were filled with
silent men, most of them young, black and Hispanic.

William McCaffery, 67 years old and from the Bronx, stood gripping his walker,
shouting for attention. ''Some nut downstairs broke my walker. Please call my
wife. I ain't no freak, baby! I was a longshoreman, I was a train conductor, I
was a waiter, I worked in the post office. And I can dance!''

James Plante, who said his story was too long to explain, wore the resigned
expression of someone far older than his 31 years. ''This,'' he said to the two
young men sitting next to him, ''is New York.''

At the Fort Washington Armory in Washington Heights, more than 900 men sometimes
sleep in rows of beds on a gymnasium floor the size of a football field.
Although guards patrol here, as they do at all the shelters, new arrivals are
warned to sleep with their shoes under the legs of the beds as protection
against theft.

The men have arranged the rows to form the remnants of boundaries that identify
the neighborhoods they once called home - Spanish Harlem at one end, Harlem at
the other, the Bronx and Brooklyn in the middle. In addition, the homeless men
who earn $12.50 for 20 hours of menial work at the shelters sleep in a row along
one wall that is known as Park Avenue.


''It's overwhelming,'' said Phil Parker, a deputy director of the Men's Shelter.
''We're just getting loads of people. It's hard to figure out who they are. All
we know is that they're younger and blacker.''

The young men seem the angriest. They say they can't find jobs, can't find a
place to stay, can't find a way to begin their lives.

One recent afternoon, 75 men sat watching ''Search for Tomorrow'' on the color
television that is bolted to the wall on the fifth floor of the Men's Shelter.

''All of us young men,'' said 25-year-old Hilary Cummings, looking around the
room, ''we're not going to get out of this bind. The only thing I think about is
why am I in this situation? What did I do wrong?

''People out there think it's chic to live in lofts. Four or five of us could
live in one of those lofts.''


The world of the homeless is a world of people without the usual connections.

''Nobody loves me,'' said Donna Gray, 44, who spent most of her childhood in
foster homes and most of her adult life in New York mental hospitals, according
to social workers.  ''They come from some situation of brokenness - whether it's
jobs or housing or families or something spiritual or psychological,'' said the
Rev. David Kirk, an Eastern Rite Catholic priest who welcomes everyone from
ex-drug addicts to battered women and their children at Emmaus House, a private
shelter in a brownstone at 160 West 120th Street.

At the city's shelter at the Seventh Regiment Armory one night, three friends -
Big Jim, Little Jim and Ernest Alvizo - said they were bound by a common goal.
''We're all here trying to get back into the mainstream,'' Big Jim said.

Big Jim, who said he was a welder by trade, said he had left his home in Florida
and come to New York after his wife had left him and taken their two children.
Little Jim, who said he had been a prison guard, said he, too, had become deeply
troubled because of family problems. Mr. Alvizo said he had had a nervous
breakdown while teaching at a high school in Brooklyn.

All over the city, in drop-in centers, shelters and churches, Regina - which is
not her real name - is known as the jazz virtuoso of the old street ladies. She
lives in a fantasy world of New Orleans jazz clubs and tours to faraway tropical
places. ''I'm about to go on tour to Tahiti,'' she said the other day. ''I like
to play where I can swim.''

She has no identification, no documents, no papers. But when Regina sits down at
the piano, she is exactly who she says she is - a musician.

About a year ago, Regina found her way to a private shelter in the city. A tiny
crooked-toothed figure swathed in layers of clothing, Regina carried all of her
belongings in two shopping bags and announced herself, as she always does, as a
jazz pianist.

The shelter can barely pay its bills each month, let alone afford to buy its own
piano. But for a time, there was a borrowed piano with a broken left leg in the
basement.

''I'm going to play Gershwin - 'Rhapsody in Blue,' '' Regina announced one
recent afternoon.

She then took off her shabby gray coat and placed a copy of the Manhattan Yellow
Pages on a chair so she could reach the pedals. For the next hour, she
mesmerized her audience, somehow eliciting beautiful music from an out-of-tune,
cheap piano. After Gershwin, she went on to ''Blue Moon,'' accompanying herself
in a throaty voice. ''Pretend it's midnight in a smoky room,'' she said. ''And
there's a blue light.''

Soon, the other people of the shelter began coming downstairs, applauding and
making requests. Regina just smiled and kept playing.

''Someone once said the blues are the story of a man's life,'' she said between
songs. ''Each year you add a chorus.''

William McKie, the 31-year-old son of bricklayers from Augusta, Ga., traveled
the country before finding his way to Emmaus House in Harlem, which receives
private donations and is part of an international poor people's movement.

''My I.Q. wasn't high enough to get in the Army,'' he said. ''So I went and
traveled. I went to Texas, Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Oregon, Arizona - all
those places. I always got a job.''

Mr. McKie said he had found work as a janitor, a heavy-equipment operator, a
construction worker. He has painful memories of his experience as a dishwasher
at the Piedmont Driving Club in Atlanta.

''There was a guy there who only had one arm, and he was a faster dishwasher
than me,'' he said. ''I was embarrassed.''

Mr. McKie's luck ran out when he came to New York two years ago. ''I couldn't
get a job,'' he said. ''I couldn't get no place to go. I just wound up sleeping
on the subways.'' Shortly afterward, he came to Emmaus House, where, like
everyone else, he pitches in, working in the kitchen.

''William is a very beautiful person,'' Father Kirk said.

To be homeless is to be a person without a key credential - an address.

''Everyone is obsessed with the idea of getting an address,'' said Father Kirk.
''You can't get a check without an address. You can't get a letter from your
uncle in North Carolina who might help you out.''

The lack of an address becomes part of what can seem an endless circle for
people who lack the ability, and often the will, to seek public assistance.

''If you can't get housing, you can't get welfare,'' said Mr. Hayes, of the
Coalition for the Homeless. ''If you're a single man or woman, and you go to
apply for public assistance, you're sent to a shelter as practice. If you can
find an apartment within the limits of welfare, and you can prove eligibility,
you can get assistance. But you can't find an apartment.''

Many homeless people also lack the documents - such as birth certificates - for
getting public assistance. But, said Mr. Hayes, ''you can't send away for a copy
of your birth certificate without an address to mail it to.''

Even in a city where the unexpected is part of daily life, the contrasts can be
jarring.  On one of the colder nights this winter, Dr. Marsha Martin, the
director of the city's Midtown Outreach program, drove down Fifth Avenue in a
van with two other social workers, looking for some of the homeless people who
say they are afraid to stay at the city shelters.

Carrying a bag of American cheese sandwiches, small packs of cookies and a
thermos of tea, they passed the Trump Tower, Cartier's, Saks Fifth Avenue.

At the IND subway station off 53d Street, they got out and discovered six men
and a woman on the floor of the station. All but one of the men accepted a
sandwich and thanked the social workers.

A heavyset man named Tom had a single request: ''A pair of pants - size 34, 29
long.''

In the heart of the Upper East Side, 160 homeless men are living in the city's
shelter on the third and fifth floors of the Seventh Regiment Armory, an elegant
building at Park Avenue and 66th Street that also holds a squash and tennis club
and a restaurant known for its prime ribs.

Sometimes the two worlds of the armory collide. The shelter's unofficial and
indefatigable vendor is a young man named Louis, who one recent night offered
for sale such items as batteries, chocolate bars and a glittery lighter engraved
''New York.'' Unfortunately for Louis, the men at the shelter usually do not
have a lot of spending money. One night he visited the restaurant on the fourth
floor in search of better customers and was promptly ordered out.

''Louis,'' said Oscar Mockridge, an assistant shelter superintendent, ''was
trying to sell Duracell batteries to generals.''

The Park Avenue shelter is considered by many to be the best in the system, and
a line to get on the daily waiting list starts forming at 6 A.M. One of the
things that sets the shelter apart is Mr. Mockridge, who prides himself on
knowing the names and bed numbers of almost all the 160 men who stay there.

One recent night, as Mr. Mockridge made the rounds of the shelter, one of the
men, 45-year-old Tony, was telling what had happened when he applied for
Supplemental Security Income and gave his address as 643 Park Avenue.

''The man said, '643 Park Avenue? What's your apartment number?'

''So I said, 'That's it - 643 Park Avenue.'

''He said, '643 Park Avenue, and you want S.S.I.?'

''I said, 'Hey, it's the American way. Get what you can!' ''


Fifteen consecutive nights spent this winter on the RR train: ''You're dirty,
you smell,'' said Ruben Perez, 29. ''You feel very bad, you feel very low,
you're embarrassed to look at a girl. In the morning, you see the people going
to work - clean and fresh. You smell the shampoo.''

Progress is Mr. Perez, a former heroin addict and father of two children, now
sleeping at a church shelter and attending a methadone treatment program.

It is a world of vulnerable and often deeply disturbed people who seem destined
to become victms.

Five months ago, a 25-year-old man who told social workers he had grown up in
foster homes took up residence near the band shell in Central Park. Around
Christmas, he was stabbed in the head and face.  He refused medical assistance
until three weeks ago, when social workers from Goddard-Riverside Project
Reachout persuaded him to go with them to Metropolitan Hospital. Both of his
legs, badly frostbitten and gangrenous, were amputated two weeks ago.

Last year, another man who lived in the park, known only to Goddard- Riverside
as Billy, died after being set on fire. Nobody seemed to know his last name, and
Billy was buried as John Doe.

''It's a sad story,'' said Cindy Scharf, of Goddard-Riverside. ''I could tell
you a lot of sad stories.''


It could happen to just about anyone, most of those who work with the homeless
say. But some people seem more anchored than others, their lives bolstered by
stronger and more numerous supports. As Dr. Martin said, ''I have a job, a car,
resources, skills.'' And if everything fell apart, she added, ''I could always
go home.''


No one can be sure how many homeless men and women there are in New York City.
Groups such as the Coalition for the Homeless estimate that there are at least
40,000 single homeless adults, a figure many city officials say is too high. In
1982, the city dropped a plan to count the homeless after consultants said it
would be nearly impossible.

A 1981 Community Service Society report on the city's homeless - ''Private
Lives/Public Spaces'' - defined the homeless as ''those whose primary nighttime
residence is either in the publicly or privately operated shelters or in the
streets, in doorways, train stations and bus terminals, public plazas and parks,
subways, abandoned buildings, loading docks and other well-hidden sites known
only to their users.''

In 1982, a second service society report drew a statistical profile of the men
in the city's shelters using data from five different studies commissioned by
the city's Human Resources Administration. Following are excerpts from that
profile:

Median age - about 40, with three-fourths of the men under 50. New clients tend
to be in their mid-30's; 25 percent are under 30.

Ethnic background - more than 60 percent black, between a quarter and a fifth
white, 10 percent of Hispanic extraction.

Marital history - 78 percent have never married.

Education - 28 percent have completed high school.

Residence - 38 percent are native New Yorkers; nearly three- fourths have lived
in the city for at least a year.

Drinking problems - only 14 percent attribute their arrival at, or return to,
emergency shelters to drinking problems. But nearly 25 percent will, on clinical
examination, show evidence of alcohol dependency.

Reason for seeking shelter - 25 percent say they have come to city shelters
because of loss of a job, 14 percent because of loss of previous residence, and
10 percent after release from hospitals, mental institutions or penal
institutions.

Compared with the shelter population, the homeless people living on the city's
streets tend to be older and more disturbed and are more likely to be white,
according to studies done by groups such as Goddard-Riverside Project Reachout.
In addition, many say they are frightened of the municipal shelters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of New York's homeless

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Cost of Servicing U.S. Debt Is Soaring



BYLINE:
By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr.

SECTION: Section D; Page 9, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1102 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 29


At a time of huge budget deficits, the national debt is growing so rapidly, and
the cost in interest has climbed so high, that members of both parties in
Congress are vying to record themselves as opponents of spending.

Last Tuesday, for example, 108 Democrats teamed with Republicans to defeat an
effort led by House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. to increase funds for
home-weatherization for the poor, the first effort of the new session to enlarge
a long-standing social spending program.

And it was sensitivity to deficits that prompted President Reagan to pre-empt
his own budget, due to go to Congress on Wednesday, in his State of the Union
address last Wednesday. Mr. Reagan proposed bipartisan talks to come up with
deficit-reduction measures, a proposal clearly intended to direct attention away
from the $180 billion deficit his 1985 budget will project.



Fast-Growing Item

One of the fastest-growing items in the Federal budget - faster even than
military spending as a proportion of gross national product - is interest
payments on the national debt. This year the Government will pay about $108
billion for debt service, more than five times as much as in 1974 and 13.5 times
as much as 20 years ago.

Moreover, this burden - accounting now for a peacetime record 14 cents of every
dollar the Government spends - is almost certain to rise even more because of
the huge deficits that loom for several years.

''The net interest bill on the national debt will grow and grow,'' Rudolph G.
Penner, director of the Congressional Budget Office, told Congress last month.
Eventually, he added, it could become so onerous that the Federal Reserve might
be forced to print money to pay it off ''and sharply higher inflation would
follow.''

Such interest payments also threaten to further diminish the Government's
spending options.

The Government debt, the cumulative total by which past spending has exceeded
past tax receipts, now amounts to $1,430 billion. Since the 1977 level was $709
billion, this means the Carter and Reagan Administrations have produced as much
budgetary red ink as all their predecessors combined.



Only One Surplus

In fact, only once in the past quarter-century - the $3.2 billion surplus of
1969 - has the Government been in the black. That surplus resulted partly from a
temporary tax increase related to the war in Vietnam.

For many years the steadily growing national debt was widely tolerated and often
defended. As President Reagan pointed out last week, ''We were told not to worry
- we owed it to ourselves.''

The main mechanism by which the Federal Reserve manages the nation's money
supply is buying and selling the Government's outstanding bills, notes and
bonds, in effect dealing in the country's debt.

It makes some difference whether the Government's debt securities are held by
Americans or foreigners. For one thing, that determines whether the interest
payments remain at home or whether they flow overseas. For another, debt held by
foreigners could be sold abruptly, perhaps for political reasons, thereby
unsettling the markets and raising the Treasury's borrowing costs.

But because of the increase in debt and interest rates, interest payments have
become a major budget expense, one that is regarded as ''uncontrollable''
because of its contractual nature.



$325 Billion Deficit?

The Congressional Budget Office projects that by 1989, under current law,
military spending, Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid and interest on the
debt will absorb virtually all of the Government's revenue - making the 1989
deficit as high as $325 billion.

The rising amount of debt and the cost of servicing it, some say, also tend to
undermine anti-inflation efforts since inflation allows debt to be repaid more
cheaply. ''It stimulates the juices of those who want to print money,'' declared
Donald L. Marsh, a senior vice president of Chemical Bank.

One way to relieve the debt burden, some suggest, would be to link Government
securities to inflation. Last year the Treasury paid 12 percent interest on
15-year bonds even though inflation had fallen to less than 4 percent. If
inflation remained this low the Government would be paying more than 8
percentage points more on these bonds than the inflation rate.

If bonds were linked to an index to protect investors from loss of buying power
from inflation, however, the Government could market its securities at much
lower cost. According to an estimate by the Heritage Foundation, the Treasury
could have saved more than $5 billion during the past two years if only half of
new Treasury debt had been tied to the Consumer Price Index.

It's hard to say whether the huge size of the debt will lead to disaster, though
this possibility may have inspired many of the more than 3,500 American
taxpayers who decided last year to accept the first formal invitation by the
Treasury to make a voluntary contribution to reduce it. They contributed over
$300,000.



Servicing the Debt

More important than the cumulative size of Federal deficits is how much will be
needed to service it. Such predictions are notoriously inaccurate because they
involve a forecast of interest rates. The cost of borrowing affects not only the
cost of financing a deficit but also how much must be paid when maturing
securities that financed earlier deficits are replaced with new paper.

''Everything turns on the future level of interest rates,'' asserted Edwin L.
Dale Jr., chief spokesman for the Office of Management and Budget.

Put another way, the cost of servicing the debt has risen faster in recent years
than the debt itself - 19 times and 4 times, respectively, between 1954 and
1982. However, if interest rates fall, the cost of carrying the debt could
decline even though the debt itself is still growing.

Mr. Penner provided an example of how important future interest rates are in the
debt-burden equation - and how onerous it has already become.

Even if rates declined, he says, the current net interest bill would rise by $73
billion, or 70 percent, between 1984 and 1989. If rates merely stayed at
late-1983 levels, the interest bill would rise by $131 billion, and if rates
rose by 1 percentage point, the bill would rise by $162 billion to nearly triple
the current cost.

These projections, in fact, seem conservative since they assume an average rate
for three-month Treasury bills of about 7.3 percent, well below today's 8.9
percent.

But in any event, Mr. Penner concludes, ''large current deficits limit future
spending options.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SCRANTON BISHOP REPORTED TO BE COOKE SUCCESSOR

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


Bishop John J. O'Connor of Scranton, Pa., a conservative theologian who helped
write the recent antinuclear letter of the American Roman Catholic bishops, will
be named today to head the Archdiocese of New York, church sources said last
night.Bishop O'Connor, who is 64 years old, spent 27 years as a Navy chaplain,
rising to the rank of rear admiral. He declined to talk to reporters last night.
But a news conference was scheduled this morning at St. Peter's Cathedral in
Scranton, the seat of the diocese he has headed since last June 30.

The official announcement is expected to be made this morning by Pio Laghi, the
Papal Nuncio in Washington, the official representative of Pope John Paul II in
this country.

Would Oversee Servicemen

Bishop O'Connor would succeed Terence Cardinal Cooke, his close friend and
mentor, who died last Oct. 6. He would become the spiritual leader of 1.8
million Catholics in the nation's third largest archdiocese and, by tradition,
would oversee the religious affairs of the 2 million Catholics in the United
States armed forces.

Some church sources said his appointment was a sign that Rome wanted the church
in America to continue a conservative course. But some also said that Bishop
O'Connor had recently softened his views on various issues, particularly
military affairs.

Bishop O'Connor was selected and notified of his appointment amid traditional
secrecy, the sources said. Many church officials were said to have learned
unofficially of the decision last week, but officials in the Papal Nuncio's
office in Washington and in the archdiocese in New York refused to comment on it
yesterday. Under church law officials are forbidden from discussing such changes
in church hierarchy until the appointments have been formally announced.

Before his assignment in Scranton, where he has been the spiritual leader of
360,000 Catholics in central and northeastern Pennsylvania, Bishop O'Connor was
auxiliary bishop to Cardinal Cooke in charge of the church's Military
Ordinariate.  In 1979, he was appointed the chief of Navy chaplains with
responsibility for all chaplains serving in the Navy, the Marine Corps and the
Coast Guard. By tradition, the chief naval chaplain also advises the Secretary
of the Navy and the Chief of Naval Operations on religious matters relating to
uniformed personnel and their families.

As one of the five members of a bishops' committee that drafted the antinuclear
letter, Bishop O'Connor was regarded by many Catholics as a hard-liner who was
sympathetic to the military. The letter, titled ''The Challenge of Peace,''
condemned nuclear warfare and, in effect, advocated a bilateral nuclear freeze.
It was also critical of various aspects of American nuclear strategy.

But during the debate last year, Bishop O'Connor, along with Cardinal Cooke and
a handful of others, moved to soften key sections of the original draft, with
the result that some critics considered him a ''hawk'' among bishops.

Calls MX Missile 'Unwise'

Bishop O'Connor has said, however, that that was an incorrect interpretation of
the role he played. ''I never felt that I was taking a Genghis Khan approach,''
he said in an interview published last week in The National Catholic Reporter, a
weekly newsmagazine based in Kansas City, Mo.

In the interview, he maintained that it ''would be unwise for this or any other
Administration to proceed with production of the MX missile.''

He added: ''I have to question the prudence of the enormous expenditures''
needed to develop and deploy the B-1 bomber and the Pershing II missile.

Tom Fox, the editor of the magazine, said that the thrust of the story ''was
that he was sounding much more like a mainstream bishop rather than what he has
been known as in the past, which has been more on the conservative side of
issues.'' The story was headlined, '' 'Hawkish' Bishop Turning 'Dove'?''

Bishop O'Connor, who has staunchly defended the bishops' letter since it was
adopted, was elected by the bishops last November to head their key social
development and world peace committee, which deals with pervasive matters of
social justice.

A Cooke Protege

The bishop was a protege of the man he would succeed as archbishop in New York.
On May 11, 1983, when the Vatican announced his appointment to the Scranton
position, Bishop O'Connor was at St. Patrick's Cathedral, assisting Cardinal
Cooke in the consecration of three new bishops for the Military Ordinariate.
During the service the cardinal announced the bishop's appointment to the
Scranton diocese.

Cardinal Cooke is said to have played a major role, too, in Bishop O'Connor's
move from the chaplain's corps to the church hierarchy.

In 1979, Bishop O'Connor was looking forward to retiring from the Navy and
returning to Philadelphia, where he was born on January 15, 1920. But Cardinal
Cooke told him that the Pope wanted him to become a bishop and serve in the
Military Ordinariate, and he went to Rome for his elevation to bishop on May 27
of that year.

Bishop O'Connor was ordained in 1945 and was elevated to the rank of Monsignor
by Pope Paul VI in 1966.  He began active duty as a Navy chaplain in 1952 and
served on Okinawa, in Vietnam, at the Marine Corps School Command in Quantico,
Va., and at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Md.

Since coming to Scranton, Bishop O'Connor has initiated a variety of new
programs and has expanded the church's outreach efforts. He also convened a
diocesan synod to rewrite the laws of the diocese, opened shelters for homeless
people and celebrated mass at the county prison.  He also ordered a study to
raise salaries of parochial school teachers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bishop John J. O'Connor

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 155 words


House Backs Payments On Veterans' Health


WASHINGTON, Jan. 30 (AP) - Veterans suffering from diseases presumed to be
related to exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange in Vietnam service or
radiation from open-air atomic tests would be eligible for temporary
compensation under a bill passed by the House today.

The measure, approved by a unaanimous voice vote and sent to the Senate, is
intended as a stopgap until the Federal Centers for Disease Control completes a
full study, by 1987 or 1988, on possible links between Agent Orange and health
problems.

The bill was the product of a compromise between those who were pressing for a
fuller, permanent program, and those who believed the jury is still out on the
effects of Agent Orange.

The Congressional Budget Office estimated the cost of the measure as $4.7
million in the current fiscal year, increasing gradually to $5.4 million in the
fiscal year 1988.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DEBATE IN BERKELEY FOCUSES ON SALUTE TO THE FLAG

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 949 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif., Jan. 29


In October, after the United States sent troops to Grenada, someone burned an
American flag at a protest here.

In the traceable and yet mystifying set of pseudopolitical events that followed,
this random act of protest by an unidentified person has led to the city's
elected officials' being deprived of a voice in spending $660,000 that is
Berkeley's share this year of the Alameda County allotment of $12 million in
Federal funds for job training.

It has been 20 years since the beginning of the political ferment that led many
people to associate this city with the radical left. In September 1964 the
placid University of California campus was disrupted when students insisted on a
role in the political events that would shape their lives. This began with
simple demands that the university rescind its ban on partisan activities on
campus. These demands escalated to a sit-in at Sproul Hall that was seized upon
by Ronald Reagan as a basis for the beginning of his political career.

Campus Is Calmer Now


The university speedily arranged accords with the student leaders by permitting
political activity, but pressures on the Selective Service System to supply
soldiers for the unpopular Vietnam War further increased tensions.

Meantime, Mr. Reagan was elected Governor of California, providing a further
target of student protest. By 1969 the Berkeley scene had reached the point
where the university was prevented by a full-blown riot from developing land
that it had purchased for student housing but that off-campus radicals had
seized and labeled Peoples Park.

The changing political climate of the 1970's coupled with significant changes in
the American business system's needs for people trained in computer technology,
engineering, mathematics and finance have effectively reversed those trends that
began 20 years ago.

It Began in 1971


But at intervals, the City Council in this city of 103,000 people across the bay
from San Francisco reaches new political plateaus as in the current controversy
over its refusal to open meetings with a flag salute and recitation of the
Pledge of Allegiance.

It all began on the night of May 4, 1971, when D'Army Bailey, a lawyer and
leader of the radical group that took control of the Berkeley City Council that
year, refused to rise for the flag salute because, he said then, the United
States was not ''one nation under God, indivisible with liberty and justice for
all.''

Mr. Bailey was recalled from office a few months later. He said in an interview
published here last week that he now practices law in Memphis, where he recites
the Pledge frequently in his Boy Scout volunteer work.

Defiance a Tradition


Yet the act of defiance lives on and has become a tradition here.  At a meeting
in early November of the Alameda County Board of Supervisors in the courthouse
in Oakland, Supervisor Charles Santana, waved a picture of the flag-burning. He
demanded that the Berkeley police enforce laws that prohibit defacing or
dishonoring the flag. After he received a letter of congratulations from
President Reagan, Mr. Santana said the Berkeley City Council refused to open its
sessions with a flag salute; he said, ''That's become very offensive to me.''

He proposed to cut Berkeley's Council out of any voice in the spending of
Federal appropriations for job training. Despite the protest by Supervisor John
George that ''Berkeley is an oasis of civilization in this county'' and that
''we should keep our snouts out of the Berkeley garden,'' the proposal was
approved 4 to 1.

Councilwoman Stands Mute


The Alameda County Employment and Training Board on Dec. 28 voted 11 to 2 to
exclude the Berkeley Council from its discussions on spending the Federal money.

Meanwhile, Berkeley Councilman Leo Bach lost his attempt to get the Council to
reinstate the Pledge. Mr. Bach, a retired printing company owner, also began
raising funds to buy flags for Berkeley schools, which do not fly them even
though state law requires it.


Then, at last Tuesday night's Council meeting, about 15 Berkeley residents led
by Peggy Casey of the Berkeley Women's Chamber of Commerce, marched in carrying
a flag.

Miss Casey spoke passionately of the flag as representing freedom of choice, and
then led a recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance. Six of the nine Council
members were present. They rose, as did the City Manager, City Attorney and
clerks, placed their right hands over their hearts and recited the Pledge.

Some present objected that President Reagan's policies were thereby supported.
The council is still on record as opposing the flag salute.

''By supporting the flag, they're supporting their nation, not any
administration,'' said Bob Gilmore, a Berkeley merchant. ''We're all liberal or
we wouldn't be living in Berkeley.''

Councilwoman Andrea Washburn said she voted against reinstating the flag salute
because it becomes ''an occasion for an ideological circus.'' She said ''there
is nothing about saying the Pledge that makes one a better or worse person.''

Lawsuit Is Threatened


Councilman John Denton, an opponent of the flag salute, said all Council members
''have taken an oath of office to support the Constitution.''

He said he thought the flag salute controversy was a political move by Mr. Bach
and Mr. Santana.

''It sounds almost like they want us to affirm Reagan's foreign policy,'' he
said.

Nor is the end in sight. Friday the Berkeley City Council wrote to California
Gov. George Deukmejian threatening to sue to block disbursement of the Federal
money unless its share is given directly to it to spend.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of demonstrators in Berkeley

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

KENNEDY SEES REAGAN ON 'GRIM' PATH

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 784 words

DATELINE: MANHATTAN, Kan., Jan. 30


Senator Edward M. Kennedy, joining the 1984 political debate with a sharp attack
on President Reagan, said today that the real issue of the campaign was what Mr.
Reagan might do in a second term, when he would not be accountable to the
voters.

Speaking at Kansas State University, the Massachusetts Democrat urged the
Democratic Presidential contenders not to allow the President to make the
campaign a debate about the past at a time when, Mr. Kennedy said, the policies
of the Reagan Administration have raised ''grim'' economic prospects for the
future and tensions in the world.

Mr. Kennedy, who took himself out of the race for the Democratic Presidential
nomination almost a year ago, said he was concerned that Mr. Reagan might
conduct an even more belligerent foreign policy in a second term.

''We have all read the reports that political pressures may finally force the
Administration to modify its course in the Middle East and Central America and
on nuclear arms control,'' the Senator said. ''But I am concerned about how this
President will choose to face our adversaries after he no longer has to face the
voters. Whatever he may say in an election year, Ronald Reagan has spent too
much time preparing for war, and not enough time preventing it.''

Site of Robert Kennedy Talk


Mr. Kennedy made his remarks at the Alf Landon Lecture Series, the same forum
that his brother Robert used, in his 1968 campaign for the Democratic
Presidential nomination, to denounce the Vietnam War as wrong and unwinnable.

In his remarks today, Mr. Kennedy said that in President Johnson's 1964 campaign
to retain the Presidency, Vietnam was ''hardly discussed at all.'' Since then,
he added, the trend in the re-election politics of Presidents, both Democratic
and Republican, has been ''to make decisions which will fly until the next
election.''

Mr. Kennedy said that both President Reagan and his Democratic predecessor,
President Carter, had promised to improve on the nuclear arms agreements of
previous administrations. ''The result so far is no agreement at all,'' Mr.
Kennedy said, ''as each new candidate strives every four years to prove that he
can be tougher or more effective with the Russians.''

Losing Faith in Promises


The Senator, who flew to this prairie town from his family estate at Palm Beach,
Fla., said Americans were losing confidence in the campaign promises of
Presidents. ''We move from election to election,'' he said, ''and the victor is
the candidate who can most nimbly manipulate the events of a few months in a
single year, to influence the voting of a few hours on a single day.''

Mr. Kennedy said Democrats must make a major campaign issue of Mr. Reagan's
policies in Central America.  ''Central America must be an issue in this
campaign so that afterwards we will not go to war by the back door, with our
people divided and deceived,'' he told his college audience.

''Some White House aides talk of the peace issue as if it were mostly a
political problem for Ronald Reagan,'' he continued. ''Others openly imply that
they only need to play for time before launching a wider war in Central America,
which would be a tragic replay of the fateful mistake of two decades ago in
Indochina.''

In an interview later, Mr. Kennedy said he did not mean his remarks today to be
a criticism of the way the Democratic candidates for President have conducted
their campaigns so far. He said it was one of several speeches he intended to
make this year outlining the direction he thinks the Democratic Party should be
taking in its opposition to Mr. Reagan's economic and foreign policies.

'Talking Sense' to the People


On the economic issue Mr. Kennedy said the Democrats ''can and should do more
than brood about the deficits, and with courage, we can and should advocate the
tax increases and the military cuts necessary to reduce them. We must talk sense
to the people, rather than competing with an Administration which tells them
only what they want to hear.''

The Senator said his speech today had been inspired by a careful examination of
what Mr. Reagan said in his recent State of the Union Message. Mr. Kennedy said
Democrats should insist that Mr. Reagan specify the domestic spending cuts he
prefers to bring down the Federal budget deficits.

''We can reduce the deficit now, and eliminate it by the end of this decade,''
he said ''if we will stand forthrightly for fair tax reform and a fair tax
increase, for fair restraints on spending, and for the end of wasteful military
projects like the MX missile, the B-1 bomber, Star Wars schemes and a new
generation of nerve gas weapons.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Senator Edward Kennedy

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STORY OF A V.A. PATIENT: A LONG ROAD TO SUICIDE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2870 words

DATELINE: MONTROSE, N.Y.


When Karl Lerchenmueller Jr., a psychiatric patient at the Veterans
Administration Hospital here, tried to take silverware from the hospital
cafeteria back to his ward, the staff called the state police to arrest him for
theft.

And though his psychiatrists at the hospital knew he tended to become suicidal
when he drank, he drank at a party on his ward on another occasion and later
that night tried to kill himself by slitting his wrists.

His psychiatrists knew, too, that he had had a terrible fear of being locked up
ever since his Vietnam combat days.

They knew, as one therapist put it, that he was a ''very messed-up man.''

Yet with all that was known about him, he was given an unsupervised day pass
Dec. 2 to appear in court on the silverware-theft charges. And he drank. And he
argued with the police officers who arrested him near the hospital for being
disorderly. And five hours after being jailed, he hanged himself.

His death has not passed unnoticed. To the contrary, it has raised widespread
concern in this northern Westchester community and in Government offices.

2 Teams of Investigators

The V.A. in Washington and the Governor's office in Albany have both sent teams
of investigators to the 1,400-bed Franklin D. Roosevelt Hospital here, the
largest V.A. psychiatric center in the country.

Hospital officials disagree about whom to blame, but there is a consensus that
the 20-patient Vietnam veterans' stress unit, where Mr. Lerchenmueller was
treated, has been in upheaval most of the year and a half of its existence. The
unit has had five directors. As doctors fought for control of the program,
patient care suffered and alcohol and drug abuse grew common on the ward,
hospital officials acknowledge.

In recent weeks, criticism of the Vietnam veterans' ward has led to criticism of
the hospital, known here as the Montrose V.A. And criticism of the hospital has
led to charges that for years the Veterans Administration in Washington has
underfinanced Montrose - which now has the third worst staff-to-patient ratio of
the 172 V.A. hospitals.

''I think the V.A. central office has been negligent in taking care of the needs
of that hospital,'' said Representative Hamilton Fish Jr., whose district
includes the hospital. ''We're going to work very hard to correct that.''

A psychiatric hospital so large in a lightly populated area has always been a
target of criticism. The 225- acre hospital's $52 million budget is five times
the size of that of Peekskill, the nearest city. But there has never been a
rallying point for critics like the suicide.

William F. Williams, Peekskill city manager, told V.A. investigators that he had
tried since last spring to meet with hospital officials about disturbed veterans
wandering through the city of 18,000, but that no one had responded.

Joseph A. Manes, a Cortlandt town justice, spoke out from the bench against the
hospital security force for calling the state police instead of V.A. doctors
when emotionally disturbed patients such as Mr. Lerchenmueller caused trouble.

The suicide has had an impact up and down the Veterans Administration's levels
of command.

Psychiatrists involved in the Vietnam unit have had their authority reduced. And
after weeks of saying that the whole affair had been blown out of proportion and
that he had no intention of resigning, Corydon F. Heard Jr., the hospital's
67-year-old director, said last week that the investigation had put so much
pressure on him that he would retire on March 1.

But in stepping down, he warned that unless the V.A. in Washington gave the
Montrose hospital the 250 extra staff members he had requested, problems would
persist.

Awareness of Problem

Mr. Heard's superiors in Washington say they are well aware of Montrose's
problems. ''Sure Montrose needs those 250 extra staffers,'' said Vernon Clayton,
the assistant director for the northeast V.A. region. ''But it won't get them
any time soon. We don't have the money.''

The investigations have brought the hospital's problems into the public realm
and prompted many staff members to speak openly. Their insights provide the sort
of rare glimpse into the operation of a psychiatric ward that is usually left to
the fictional likes of Ken Kesey's ''One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest.''

While all the Veterans Administration's Vietnam veteran psychiatric programs
have had initial problems, according to Dr.  John Lipkin, a V.A. investigator,
''the outcome has never been as unfortunate.''

Last July, Karl Lerchenmueller Jr., then 37, a troubled man with a history of
suicide attempts and alcohol abuse, came to Montrose's Vietnam veteran stress
unit.

He had been discharged honorably from the Marines in 1969, after a year as a
machine-gunner in Vietnam. At home, he had seemed fine at first, according to
his parents, Karl Sr., a state toll collector, and his wife, Hilda.


Growing ProblemsOf a Troubled Man

He married, fathered two children, bought a house near his parents in
Saugerties, N.Y., and worked dependably at various jobs. But in the last several
years, they said, he seemed to grow troubled, drank too much, had marital
problems and was often argumentative at work. He had run-ins with the police. He
had flashbacks and nightmares about Vietnam.

''During that time he was known to go on rampages, put his uniform on, take his
rifle and disappear into the woods,'' his father said. ''But he never hurt
anybody else.''

He attempted suicide at least four times.

Last June 9, Mr. Lerchenmueller was drinking at the Fountain Lounge in Kingston,
about 10 miles south of Saugerties, when he called a friend to say he had a gun
and was going to kill himself. The friend called the Kingston police.

Two detectives arrived at the bar, got into a tussle with Mr. Lerchenmueller,
and shot and seriously wounded him, according to the police report.

Jury Reduces Charge

Mr. Lerchenmueller, who the police said did not use his gun, was originally
arrested for attempted murder.

But a grand jury felt he had done more harm to himself than to the police and
reduced the charge to menacing, said Edward Feeney, the Kingston city judge who
heard the case.

The judge believed Mr. Lerchenmueller would be better off in a psychiatric
hospital than in jail. He agreed to reduce Mr. Lerchenmueller's bail, let him go
to the Montrose V.A. and then return when he was well to face the menacing
charge.

''My main concern was to get him help,'' Judge Feeney said. ''It would have been
silly to put someone like him behind bars. With his history, you knew he could
kill himself.''


Marshaling ForcesTo Treat the Problem

Nine other Vietnam veterans' psychiatric units like the one to which Mr.
Lerchenmueller was sent have opened at V.A. hospitals nationwide in the last few
years to treat the delayed affects of combat trauma.

The units themselves were delayed because it was not until 1980 that
psychiatrists who believe post-traumatic stress is a legitimate mental health
disorder won support from their professional peers and the V.A.

Many feel the Veterans Administration still is not supportive enough. ''The V.A.
hasn't given the units any central direction,'' said J. Nicholas Hayes, an aide
to Representative Fish.

The 20-patient Montrose unit has never had all the staff members it was
assigned, according to the psychiatrists who work there.

Use of Political Channels

To get money for such special programs, Representative Fish said, it is often
necessary for the local hospital director to use political channels to put
pressure on the V.A. in Washington.

But Mr. Heard did not, Representative Fish said. ''When the Vietnam veterans
asked for extra money for their unit, I had to take the initiative,''
Representative Fish said.

Mr. Heard agrees. ''I don't believe in going political,'' he said. ''My
superiors at the V.A. in Washington get mad when you go political.''

In April, the Washington V.A. gave Montrose an additional $240,000 for a Vietnam
veteran's unit.

''To pacify Fish, they give me $240,000,'' Mr. Heard said. ''We're talking
stress. We're talking Vietnam. That brought the bucks.''


Power StruggleSplits the Ward

In the early fall, shortly after Mr. Lerchenmueller arrived and just as the unit
was beginning to benefit from the additional money, a dispute arose over control
of the ward.

Two psychiatrists, Dr. Joel Brende and Dr. Seymour Gers, had been hired. They
had two very different philosophies of treatment, yet each says he was told he
would be in charge of the unit by Dr. Herbert Hendin, who recruited them.

Dr. Hendin, who runs a Vietnam veteran research project at the hospital,
acknowledges now that he made a mistake.

''I see now they couldn't work side by side,'' he said. ''The chemistry was
awful.''

Things grew so confusing, Mr. Heard said, that in November he asked who was in
control of the unit, and no one could give him a satisfactory answer.

Strict Rules for Team A

Dr. Gers's group of 10 patients - Team A - was given strict rules, including
weekly urine tests to make sure they were not using alcohol or drugs. Veterans
suffering post-traumatic stress often become dependent on alcohol and drugs.

Dr. Brende, head of the 10 patients in Team B, has a less authoritarian
approach. He requires no urine tests.

Soon, the two psychiatrists acknowledge, several patients, including Mr.
Lerchenmueller, were playing one doctor against the other. Team A wanted to know
why it had to take urine tests when Team B did not.

Said John Bear, a patient: ''There were guys refusing to take urine tests and
guys drinking six ounces of vinegar to throw off the tests.''

How to Treat the Patient

It reached the point, Dr. Gers said, where the unit may have been doing more
harm than good. ''Karl was very mixed up,'' Dr. Gers said. ''To get him unmixed
up, it was necessary to separate him from the problems that were plaguing the
ward.''

Key staff members who were involved have acknowledged in interviews that the
divisiveness harmed treatment in the unit.

''You had two psychiatrists at each other's throats,'' Dr. Ann Pollinger, an
administrator and researcher, said. ''Was the treatment retarded? Absolutely.''

On Dec. 1, according to Dr. Hendin, the day before Mr. Lerchenmueller's suicide,
a meeting was called to try to straighten out the administrative problems.

Making ProgressIn Tracing the Pattern

Despite the upheaval, Dr. Gers said, he was learning several things about Mr.
Lerchenmueller's illness and behavior pattern.

First, Mr. Lerchenmueller could become suicidal when he drank. It had happened
at the Kingston bar. And then, on Oct. 22, after several veterans including Mr.
Lerchenmueller took part in an unauthorized drinking party on the ward,
according to Dr. Gers, Mr. Lerchenmueller slit his wrists.

Second, Dr. Gers knew that being incarcerated sent Mr. Lerchenmueller into a
rage. ''He had fears of being captured and tortured in Vietnam,'' Dr. Gers said.

And third, Dr. Gers said, Mr. Lerchenmueller would become abusive with authority
figures to provoke conflict. He wanted to be punished for breaking rules, Dr.
Gers said.

He Carried 'a Lot of Guilt'

''He was carrying around a lot of guilt,'' he said.

The psychiatrists looked for the source of his guilt. When Mr. Lerchenmueller
first arrived, staff members said, he talked of machine-gunning Vietnamese
children to death by mistake. He also mentioned discovering the body of a friend
whose face was half eaten away by maggots, they said.

But not until November did he tell his therapists what bothered him most. When
he did, they took it as a good sign, a sign that they were beginning to reach
him.

''As far as I know,'' Dr. Brende said, ''he'd never told it to anyone in the 15
years since he'd been back from Vietnam.''

He told them that during an ambush in the jungle he had panicked and
machine-gunned his best friend to death.


Patients' Dispute Leads to Arrest

On Nov. 12, according to staff members, Mr. Lerchenmueller and a friend argued
with a hospital cafeteria worker over milk, sugar and silverware they were
taking back to their unit.

The cafeteria worker called hospital security. Security called the state police,
who arrested the two veterans at the hospital and charged them with petty theft.

Several staffers involved with the unit feel the state police should never have
been called. They believe Mr. Lerchenmueller was displaying symptoms of his
illness. They said a medical official should have been called and given control.


Memo of Complaint

''It was crazy to call the police,'' Dr. Hendin said.

Dr. Brende said he had written a memo complaining about Mr. Lerchenmueller's
arrest to Dr. Gaston Trigos, chief of medicine, but had received no response.
Dr. Trigos refused to comment to a reporter.

The case also angered the judge who arraigned Mr. Lerchenmueller that evening.
''This is a garbage case,'' Cortlandt Town Justice Manes said in court.

The judge said he got 8 to 10 such cases a year involving troubled Montrose V.A.
patients who were brought to his court on ''frivolous'' charges.

Mr. Heard, who is responsible for setting hospital security policy, believes Mr.
Lerchenmueller should have been arrested.

''He was vulgar,'' Mr. Heard said. ''He had a nasty temper. I think he should
have been arrested if he was at the point he was causing a disturbance around
here.''


A Drinking Bout, And Then Suicide

On Dec. 2, while Mr. Lerchenmueller was on an unsupervised day pass from the
hospital to appear in court on the petty theft charge, he drank heavily.

Back at the train station a few hundred yards from the hospital, according to
the police, a resident complained that Mr. Lerchenmueller and another patient
were being unruly. At 4:30 P.M., the state police arrested them and took them to
the jail in Peekskill.

Sometime between 8:30 P.M. and 9 P.M., according to the Peekskill police, Mr.
Lerchenmueller used his shirt to hang himself in the cell.

The autopsy report indicated his blood alcohol level was ''significiantly
above'' .10, the level at which a person is considered intoxicated.

Focus of Inquiry

The investigation by the Governor's office - the report of which is expected to
be released within a week - is focusing on the immediate events leading to Mr.
Lerchenmueller's suicide. Among the questions investigators say they are
studying are whether Mr. Lerchenmueller was well enough to be out on his own on
a day pass and whether the Peekskill or the state police knew he was a V.A.
patient with a history of suicide and took any precautions.

The five-member Veterans Administration team is also expected to be finished
with its investigation within a week, Dr. Lipkin said.

Mr. Heard has announced several corrective steps. He has recently appointed a
new director of the Vietnam veterans' unit and ordered other doctors not to
meddle.

The hospital director said he believed most of the unit's problems had been
caused by Dr. Hendin, the head of the Vietnam veteran research program who
recruited much of the stress unit staff.

Dr. Hendin says he took a strong role in pressing for more care at the stress
unit because higher-ups like Mr. Heard showed no interest. He is considered one
of the leading experts on post-traumatic stress in Vietnam veterans and has a
book coming out on the subject this fall. Last year he won an award from the
American Association of Suicidology.


Outgoing Director Looks Back in Bitterness

After 42 years of Federal service, 10 of them as director of the Montrose V.A.,
Mr. Heard said he could not believe that one man's suicide had brought such
political pressure and forced him to retire before he had planned.

''It's a comedy of errors,'' he said. ''Everything is incidental to this
suicide.''

He has thought much about why it has attracted so much attention. ''It has
nothing to do with problems at the hospital,'' he said. ''It's guilt on the part
of the people of the U.S. for the way we treated the Vietnam veterans when they
returned home.''

''All the politicians want to befriend them now,'' Mr. Heard said. ''Everyone
wants to be in with the Vietnam veterans.''

Last week, he said, he went to Albany to speak to the regional director of the
Veterans Administration, who told him that it appeared that the agency's
investigation report might recommend management changes.

''I decided then to retire,'' Mr. Heard said. ''Yes, I do feel I've been
scapegoated.''

So much time has been spent trying to straighten out the Vietnam unit that the
rest of the hospital has suffered, he said.

''I'm short 250 staff and all anyone responds to is the Vietnam veterans,'' he
said.''I have six nurses on that Vietnam stress unit for 20 patients. At the
rest of the hospital, I'm lucky if I have six for 60 patients. But I don't dare
move the stress unit nurses.''

After the suicide, when all the investigators descended on the unit, care
virtually halted for weeks, Dr. Brende said.

It will be a while, most staff members involved agree, before the Vietnam unit
heals.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Vietnam veterans

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 1, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AMONG DEMOCRATS: A COALESCING ON FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 940 words


NewsAnalysis

CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Jan. 31 - Seven Democratic Presidential hopefuls took a step
tonight toward offering a decipherable alternative to the Reagan
Administration's foreign policy.

The unifying idea at the Harvard University debate seemed to be this: The United
States can learn to live with change in the third world, rather than treat all
change as Communist or Soviet-inspired, and it must learn to negotiate with,
rather than confront, the Soviet Union.

A Different Course


If Mr. Reagan's motto will be peace through strength, judging from tonight the
Democrat's response will be peace through negotiation.

If Mr. Reagan defines strength in terms of military power, the candidates
tonight were saying that it is more than that. And to Mr. Reagan's assertion
that his policy had led to a safer world, the Democratic candidates retorted
tonight that the United States is now moving toward needless and dangerous
confrontations in Lebanon, Central America and with the Soviet Union.

The candidates all agreed on taking the United States Marines out of Lebanon.
They also stressed support for negotiations with leftist regimes in Central
America, placing new priority arms control and especially a freeze on nuclear
weapons development with the Soviet Union and cutting the Reagan
Administration's military budget. Based on tonight's performance, the Democrats
have decided to gamble that the country wants a clear peace alternative to Mr.
Reagan and that he is highly vulnerable on that score.

For the first time since this long campaign began, the candidates spent more
time attacking President Reagan than each other. All of the major candidates for
the nomination, except former Gov. Reubin Askew of Florida, participated.

A Little Humor


When they disagreed with each other, it was usually with humor, rather than with
the ax.

It was the Rev. Jesse Jackson calling Senator John Glenn of Ohio, ''Mr. Right
Stuff.''

It was former Senator George McGovern saying that he was back after his
disastrous defeat by President Nixon in 1972 because, ''I was 10 years ahead of
my time.''

They all laughed at each other's jokes.

There was no clash between the candidates considered front runners - former Vice
President Walter F. Mondale and Mr. Glenn. Mr. Mondale went out of his way to
mute differences with his colleagues.

He was trying to act as if he felt he had the nomination wrapped up and looking
for ways to heal bruises.

The format for tonight's debate also helped to dull the candidates' blows at one
another. Questions from Harvard professors and members of the news media were
posed to one candidate at a time. There was little opportunity for exchanges.
Almost all the answers had to be 60 seconds or less.

Accordingly, the candidates were short on details, where differences normally
are thrown into sharper relief.

Mondale Voiced Theme


Mr. Mondale set the main theme early on when he spoke of using military force
''as a last resort, not as a first resort.'' He said that force was appropriate
in response to a situation such as World War II, but that American military
involvement in Vietnam and Central America was ''totally without
justification.''

Mr. McGovern followed and went further by charging that the basic weakness of
American foreign policy has been that Washington has ''embraced every tin-horn
dictator as long as he raised the anti-Communist banner.''

The common message seemed to be that the United States should and could tolerate
and even promote social change in the third world, instead of transforming
revolutions and civil wars into East-West confrontations.

On Lebanon, several of the candidates took pains to say that President Amin
Gemayel did not represent ''a real government,'' and that the Administration had
to press him even harder to expand participation of opposition elements in his
Cabinet.

The Presidential hopefuls came perilously close to saying that the United States
could accept the fall of the Gemayel Government.

Central America Issue

On Central America, Mr. Glenn, Senator Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina, and
others argued for direct negotiations with the Sandinista Government in
Nicaragua and the leftist revolutionaries in El Salvador.

Mr. Glenn, in particular, stressed negotiations as an alternative to drawing a
''hard line.''

Short of Nicaragua and El Salvador becoming bases for Soviet or Cuban military
power, the candidates seemed prepared to recognize and negotiate with them.
Several expressed the view that this went for Cuba as well.

On relations with the Soviet Union, all came close to agreeing with Senator Alan
Cranston of California's assessment that this is ''one of the most dangerous
times in world history.'' Their remarks also suggested that Mr. Reagan was as
much to blame for this state of affairs as Soviet leaders.

As for military spending, the proposals ranged from Mr. McGovern's call for a 25
percent cut to Mr. Mondale's idea of slowing the rate of increase from 10
percent to 4 percent.

By moving in these directions, the Democratic challengers to Mr. Reagan seemed
to recognize that they were pursuing a tricky and even risky electoral strategy.

They seemed to be judging that they must play up differences with Mr. Reagan on
foreign policy because he may have won the high ground on the economy.

They also seemed to be betting that the country is moving leftward in its
attitudes toward foreign affairs, that public fears of war are growing, and that
these are Mr. Reagan's maximum vulnerabilities.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 1, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS, IN FOREIGN POLICY DEBATE, URGE BEIRUT WITHDRAWAL

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Jan. 31


Seven Democratic candidates for President coalesced around their opposition to
the continued presence of United States marines in Lebanon tonight in a debate
at Harvard University.

Former Senator George McGovern, noting that 259 marines have been killed in
Lebanon, said he wondered ''how long some people are going to have to wait''
before withdrawing them.

''We should stop worrying about saving face and start worrying about saving
lives,'' Mr. McGovern said during the debate on foreign policy at Harvard's John
F. Kennedy School of Government. It was sponsored by the school's Institute of
Politics and the Boston Globe.

Mr. McGovern appeared to be the most humorous, relaxed and eloquent of the seven
candidates. Others taking part were former Vice President Walter F. Mondale,
Senators John Glenn, Alan Cranston, Gary Hart and Ernest F. Hollings, and the
Rev. Jesse Jackson. The other Democratic challenger, former Gov. Reubin Askew of
Florida, said he had a conflict in his schedule.

But in contrast to previous debates among the Democratic hopefuls, they spent
more time criticizing President Reagan than attacking each other, and they
seemed to be moving toward offering a broad Democratic alternative to the Reagan
Administration's policies on Central America, human rights and arms control, as
well as Lebanon.

Moments of Humor


But there were also moments of humor and personal barbs. Mr. Jackson, given the
chance to question Mr. Glenn, began by calling him ''Mr. Right Stuff,'' alluding
to the movie about the Senator's exploits as an astronaut.

Mr. Jackson staked out the most personal policy, suggesting that the Democrats
would not be able to develop their own foreign policy until they enforced the
Voting Rights Act in the South

Mr. Jackson also complained that the other candidates ignored the third world
during the debate, concentrating on United States-Soviet relations.

And in reply to a question from Ezra Vogel, a specialist on Japan at Harvard, he
asserted that the real challenge to American industry was not Japanese high
technology but rebuilding America's slums.

Machines may be better than workers ''because they don't come to work late and
they don't get drunk,'' Mr. Jackson said. ''But they also don't buy clothes.''

In a campaign in which arms control is a major issue, the candidates spent much
of the 90-minute debate calling for negotiations to end the arms race and
criticizing President Reagan for his ''bellicose'' policy toward Moscow.

Mr. Cranston charged that ''we are in one of the most dangerous times in world
history, with the arms race totally on the loose.'' For the first time in 20
years, he noted, there are no arms talks with the Soviet Union under way, and
''we have a bellicose President.'' He also charged that Mr. Mondale bore
responsibility for ''serious mistakes'' made by the Carter Administration in its
negotiations for the strategic arms treaty with the Soviet Union.

On Central America, the candidates came close to agreeing that the United States
should decrease what Mr. McGovern termed its ''interference.'' America also
ought to enter negotiations with left-wing guerrillas in El Salvador, several of
the Democrats including Mr. Glenn concurred.

''The basic mistake in U.S. foreign policy,'' said Mr. McGovern, is that it has
been based ''too much on what we're against and not what we're for.'' The result
has been inflexible anti- Communism which has led Washington to embrace ''every
tinhorn dictator.''

Lebanon and Vietnam


Mr. McGovern, who ran as the Democratic candidate in 1972 on the stregth of his
opposition to the Vietnam war, said he found disturbing parallels in Lebanon to
American involvement in Vietnam. Mr. Mondale agreed, saying that the United
States had become entrapped in Beirut supporting only a minority faction.
Lebanon is not a vital American interest, like Israel, Mr. Mondale said. Mr.
Glenn said, ''I would not have sent Marines in there on a mission impossible''
and he urged that the United States ''should start phasing our people out.'' The
other candidates expressed similar concern.

Rather than interacting with one another, the candidates were asked a series of
questions, and had no chance to comment on anyone else's answers.  As a result,
the confrontation began in less argumentative fashion than other joint sessions
of the Democratic Presidential contenders.

Early in the session Mr. Jackson, responding to a question, said that the United
States should support ''Palestinian justice''and ''normalize ties with the Arab
world.''

Mr. Hart said President Carter's human rights policy had been flawed because it
did not deal ''equally with our so-called friends as well as enemies.'' He cited
United States cooperation with the late Shah of Iran and the Governments of the
Philippines and South Korea. Later, Mr. Mondale defended Mr. Carter. ''President
Carter deserves a lot of credit on the issue of human rights,'' he said.

Mr. Hollings, asked how he would approach an offer from Cuba of renewing
diplomatic ties, said that he would not make a withdrawal of Cuban military
forces a condition for re-establishing diplomatic relations but would allow for
a gradual phasing down to provide the government of Fidel Castro with a way to
''save face.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Democratic Presidential candidates before debate

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 1, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY ROLE OF ARCHBISHOP IS ENDED

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 659 words


With the appointment of Bishop John J. O'Connor as head of the Archdiocese of
New York, Pope John Paul II broke a 65-year-old tradition of giving the
archbishop the additional role of spiritual leader to Roman Catholics in the
United States armed forces.

Vatican officials said the Pope would soon name a separate military vicar. Until
that time, the new Archbishop-designate, who served for 27 years as a Navy
chaplain, will head the military office on an acting basis.

The Vatican did not give a reason for the change, but church officials in New
York said that it would allow a strengthening of the military office while
relieving the pressure on Bishop O'Connor.

''It is just too much for one man to be responsible for two such large
organizations,'' said Msgr. James J. Markham, an official in the vicariate.

There are two million Catholics under the jurisdiction of the Military
Vicariate. These include members of the armed forces and their families,
patients in Veterans Administration hospitals and embassy personnel abroad.
Marriage, baptismal and confirmation records of these personnel are kept in the
vicariate's office in New York.

Focus on Archdiocese

The number of Catholics in the vicariate is even greater than the 1.8 million in
the New York Archdiocese. However, the past three archbishops who held the two
posts - Patrick Cardinal Hayes, Francis Cardinal Spellman and Terence Cardinal
Cooke - tended to focus more on the needs of the archdiocese, leaving most
military matters to subordinates.

The archbishops were most visible in their military role when they visited
military outposts around the world on Christian holidays.

Archbishop Joseph T. Ryan, who has been running the military office since the
death of Cardinal Cooke, said yesterday that the decision by the Pope to divide
the military and New York positions would strengthen the military office.

''The Holy Father is giving a new status to the Military Vicariate by making it
totally independent of any territorial diocese in the United States,'' the
Archbishop said.

A Different View

From another perspective, however, some said the move would diminish the power
of the Archbishop. One of these was the Rev. Gerald P. Fogarty, a Catholic
church historian at the University of Virginia, who said yesterday, ''As
military vicar, Spellman had access to the White House, and as Archbishop he had
influence locally.''

Monsignor Markham said that despite the change, the new Archbishop- designate
would have the influence enjoyed by his predecessors. He mentioned several
reasons, among them Bishop O'Connor's personality and his long military career.

''He's a very strong personality,'' said Monsignor Markham, ''and that will
immediately be evident to everybody in New York. He's a born leader.''

Bishop O'Connor became a Navy chaplain in 1952 and served in both the Atlantic
and Pacific fleets, with tours of duty in Okinawa and Vietnam. He became senior
chaplain at the Naval Academy and then chief of navy chaplains, a post that
included overseeing Protestant and Jewish clergy as well as Catholic.

A New Post in 1979

He left this post in 1979 when he was named an Auxiliary Bishop to Cardinal
Cooke, serving in the office of the Military Vicariate.

The United States Military Vicariate is the largest of 30 around the world that
were established by the Vatican to oversee the religious faith of Roman
Catholics.

The vicariate, when compared with the 171 civilian dioceses in the United
States, serves the largest number of Catholics, and ranks second in the number
of annual conversions and ninth in the number of annual infant baptisms.

The tradition of having the same church official hold both the military and
archdiocesan posts dates back to Cardinal Hayes. He was chosen to head the
Military Vicariate in 1917 and kept the position when he was elevated to
Archbishop of New York in 1919.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 1, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
A SURPRISE CHOICE FOR ARCHBISHOP

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words


At 7 A.M. yesterday, the word came officially from Rome: ''John Paul II has
nominated to the metropolitan church of New York, Msgr. John J. O'Connor, up
until now the Bishop of Scranton.''

Until he was sent to his first diocese - Scranton, Pa. - only seven months ago,
Bishop O'Connor served Terence Cardinal Cooke as Auxiliary Bishop in charge of
military chaplains.  He had been in New York, within the archdiocesan center,
but his work often took him to distant places.  As priests, nuns and members of
the laity filed in and out of the archdiocese's chancery, at First Avenue and
55th Street, they caught a fresh glimpse of the Bishop, his photograph in a
red-fringed frame, with the words ''Our New Archbishop'' above it and ''Ad
Multos Annos'' (''For Many Years'') beneath it.

There was surprise and curiosity among Roman Catholics concerning the Pope's
choice. Most church officials had not considered Bishop O'Connor a leading
candidate because of the briefness of his first stint as head of a diocese.

From records and the reactions of knowledgeable Catholics, a portrait of the
next Archbishop began to emerge yesterday. Bishop O'Connor appears as a complex,
highly skilled prelate who exerts firm authority and brooks little dissent.
Observers say he has displayed the tough-minded efficiency many believe
essential to running the huge archdiocese of 1.8 million Catholics. At the same
time, the observers say, he has exhibited deep concern for his flock, a talent
for framing and examining difficult issues and a tireless commitment to the
church.

He Is 'Almost a Workaholic'

Bishop O'Connor is a tall, formidable man with swept-back black hair and dark
features. Though he fights hard and seriously for what he believes, observers
say, he also shows a puckish, darting wit. Bishop Joseph T. O'Keefe, who has
administered the archdiocese since the death of Cardinal Cooke, described Bishop
O'Connor as ''almost a workaholic,'' but said that the next Archbishop has found
time for swimming, ice skating, golf, music and reading.

Among his credentials are a doctorate in political science from Georgetown
University; 27 years as a Navy chaplain, during which he rose to the rank of
rear admiral; a reputation for superb administration, and a much publicized role
as the leading conservative critic on the five-man committee that prepared the
bishops' recent pastoral letter on war and peace that condemned nuclear
proliferation.

During the debate over the final version of the pastoral letter last May, Bishop
O'Connor learned that he had been chosen for the Scranton Diocese. He was on his
way to a microphone to make a point when the Pope's Apostolic Delegate to the
United States, Archbishop Pio Larghi, gave him the news.

Though Bishop O'Connor is known as an unstinting supporter of the church's
teachings, observers say he has cut a large figure as a determined, independent
leader when it comes to applying those teachings.

In this regard, some officials say he bears a resemblance to the style and
perspectives of the Pope. ''Bishop O'Connor has a tough, quick, well-honed,
disciplined mind,'' said one associate. ''He is a conservative man who knows how
to situate himself in the complex flow of events.''

During the drafting process within the war and peace committee, Bishop O'Connor
won a fight to change ''halt'' to ''curb'' in a reference to nuclear
proliferation, but lost most efforts to soften the letter.

Samples of Bishop O'Connor's thinking on key matters are found in his letter
last summer to his priests in the Scranton Diocese. Over all, the perspective in
the letter upholds a hierarchical concept of the church and an insistence on
obedience.

''It is essential that we recall every day of our lives,'' he wrote to the
priests in the 23-page single- spaced letter, ''that the people do not exist to
serve us but we exist to serve people.''

Too Many Uncertain Trumpets'

On parish deployment, he wrote: ''There can be no such thing as 'I will not
accept that assignment,' nor may any pastor arbitrarily say, 'I will not accept
that assistant.' The priest who will not accept an assignment could find himself
without any assignment.''

On preaching, the Bishop told his priests that the pulpit was ''not a place for
theological speculation'' because ''people are crying out for fundamentals.''

''They hear too many uncertain trumpets, are misled by too many pied pipers,''
he wrote.

In another section, apparently aimed at dissenters in the church, the Bishop
said priests, in presenting church doctrine, ought to listen to the ideas and
opinions of others but only to ''dispel misunderstandings.'' It would be
misleading, he said, to ''pretend that such teachings can be changed by
discussion.''

''With charity toward all, and malice toward none, it is imperative that we
communicate that magisterial teaching of the church in all things and support
our Holy Father as Vicar of Christ on earth,'' he wrote.

John Joseph O'Connor was born Jan. 15, 1920, in Philadelphia. He had two
brothers, one of whom is dead, and two sisters.

In addition to his doctorate in political science, he earned a master's degree
in clinical psychology from Catholic University in Washington, which led to work
with retarded children. He has written a number of books, including ''A Chaplain
Looks at Vietnam'' and ''The Naval Officer and the Human Person.''

Entered Chaplaincy During Korean War

After his ordination on Dec. 15, 1945, he taught both at the secondary and
college levels before entering the Navy chaplaincy during the Korean War.

Though his stay in Scranton has been brief, many Catholics there say he has set
the diocese on a healthy course. The Rev. J. J. Panuska, president of the
University of Scranton, a Jesuit institution, predicts Bishop O'Connor will
write a bright chapter as the eighth Archbishop of New York. Among the traits
that will help, Father Panuska said, are the Bishop's darting wit, memory for
names and prodigious energy.

''Going to a center like New York seems very appropriate for him,'' Father
Panuska said. ''He is a public figure of considerable stature. He has a
fantastic ability to present himself in speech and appearance. He is a natural
leader for a complicated society.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Msgr. John J. O'Connor

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 2, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

COURT ORDER RESCUES HISTORIC GUARD UNIT

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 531 words


For a while, it looked as if the last battle had been fought by the battalion,
which was founded on Delancey Street in 1850 and has a long and illustrious
history dating to the Civil War.

The Division of Military and Naval Affairs in Albany had apparently decided to
form a new unit in upstate New York and disband the First Battalion, 71st
Infantry, of the Army National Guard in New York, which has 700 men and is based
in two armories, one in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn and the other
on 14th Street in Manhattan.

''We were stunned,'' said Capt. Richard Liebert. ''It was as if they put the gun
up to our heads and pulled the trigger.''

Part of 42d Division

The battalion, a unit of the 42d Infantry Division, was apparently saved late
Tuesday night when Judge Mary Johnson Lowe of Federal District Court in
Manhattan blocked the state from acting. She ruled that under Federal law
Presidential approval was needed to disband a National Guard unit.

''My guess is that the war is over,'' said Russel H. Beatie Jr., counsel for the
unit's Veteran Association, which fought the proposed disbanding. ''The regiment
is intact.''

Col. Marvin Shiro, a spokesman for the Division of Military and Naval Affairs,
said, ''The 71st is alive and well.''

Goal Explained

Colonel Shiro added that the military had wanted to form the new battalion to
''realign our forces for better control and to better serve the Governor.''

The Veteran Association charged that such a realignment would violate state
affirmative action guidelines since the 71st Infantry is predominantly black and
Hispanic.

The Brooklyn armory is at Bedford and Atlantic Avenues in the Bedford-Stuyvesant
section and the Manhattan armory is at 125 West 14th Street.

Acknowledging victory, Captain Liebert talked of the 71st, with its
participation in the Spanish- American War and in both World Wars, as a proud
family.

''Our family has had a long history,'' he said. ''We've trained hard together.
Our loyalty to soldiers in the regiment is sometimes stronger than loyalty to
one's country. For example, a soldier fighting in Vietnam is not concerned about
politics in Washington. He's concerned about his buddy who's fighting in the
foxhole next to him.''

Unit Called a Haven

He said the unit had a large number of Vietnam veterans. One of them, Sgt.
Rafael Castillo, a refrigeration mechanic, said: ''It's a place that helped me
get over a lot of problems I had when I got back from Vietnam. It's a place
where we can all talk.''

Among the members of the 71st Veteran Association is a past president of the
Medal of Honor Society - Charles MacGillivary, who fought in the 71st Infantry
in Europe in World War II and was awarded the Medal of Honor by President
Truman. The unit received a Presidential citation for gallant action in Europe
during the war.

Captain Liebert said the disbanding would have been particularly harmful to
members of the 71st Infantry, who he said had a 30 percent unemployment rate. He
said a private could earn about $100-a-month for service in the National Guard
and might earn another $400 to $500 for summer training.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Armory of 71st Infantry

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 2, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS VOW TO REDUCE PENTAGON OUTLAY FOR 1985

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb 1


Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger told Congress today that growth rates
in military spending could be slowed after next year if Congress approved the
big increase that President Reagan proposed for the fiscal year 1985.

But Mr. Weinberger, in testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee, ran
into an immediate barrage of criticism from Democrats. The Democrats, led by
Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, said the question was not whether the military
budget would be cut this year but by how much.

The Defense Secretary said in his annual report to Congress, ''If we are allowed
to continue on the path we have set, we can look forward to a time, only two
fiscal years from now, when defense increases can begin to slow dramatically.''

Senator Nunn, a leading Democratic spokesman on military issues, said he had
seen no change in the Congressional sentiment that led to cuts in the budget
last year, and predicted that it would be cut again this year.

The Reagan Administration proposes to spend $264.4 billion for the Defense
Department in the fiscal year that begins next Oct. 1, a 14.5 percent increase
over military spending in the current fiscal year, not adjusting for inflation.
When inflation is taken into account, the real rise is 9.2 percent.

For the fiscal year 1986, the Administration has projected an 8.4 percent
increase in military spending in real dollars, but then it would taper off to
3.3 percent by the fiscal year 1989.

Even with that slowdown, the Administration has projected military spending to
reach $398.8 billion in 1989, which would include estimated inflation. When
compared in dollars of the same value and thus not counting inflation, that
would be 24.8 percent higher than the 1985 military spending proposal.

Over the five years from 1985 through 1989, the Administration proposes to spend
a total of $1,891.4 billion, including inflation. In the process, that would
raise military spending from 25 percent of the Federal budget to 32 percent, and
from 5.3 percent of the gross national product in 1981, when Mr. Reagan took
office, to 7.5 percent. The gross national product is the sum total of the goods
and services produced in the nation.

Comments by Other Democrats


Besides Senator Nunn, other Democratic Senators who criticized the military
budget included J. James Exon of Nebraska, who said there was ''no question that
this budget will be cut''; Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, who called the
budget ''basically irresponsible,'' and Carl Levin of Michigan, who contended
that the budget was being ''sold to Congress with one- sided charts, misleading,
exaggerated and contradictory statements.''

Secretary Weinberger disagreed, arguing that ''everybody wants a strong defense;
nobody wants a strong defense budget.''

As proposed, the military budget would be the largest since World War II when
measured in dollars of the same value, including the peak years of the wars in
Korea and Vietnam.

In budget authority, which permits the Pentagon to commit the Government to pay
for military programs, the Administration proposes programs that would cost
$305.7 billion, a 13 percent increase over that for the current fiscal year in
real dollars.

Mr. Weinberger, in a press briefing Tuesday, said most of the Administration's
military initiatives had been started and thus there were but few new programs
in the five-year program from 1985 through 1989. Among the main items were
these:


- For strategic defense, $1.8 billion in 1985, of which the Secretary said $250
million was new money and the rest from existing programs with lower priorities.
That would be a ''down payment'' on the President's ''Star Wars'' plan to build
a laser system designed to intercept and destroy nuclear missiles aimed at the
United States.


- For the Army, a new type of light infantry division and a third Ranger
battalion. The new division, the Army's 17th, would have 10,000 troops, compared
with 16,000 to 18,000 in armored and mechanized divisions, and could be swiftly
airlifted into battle. The Ranger battalion, similar to the units involved in
the invasion of Grenada last October, would have 600 soldiers.


- For the Navy, the first of a class of 40 to 50 new guided missile destroyers
to help defend aircraft carriers from air and sea attack.


- For the Air Force, $4.9 billion to continue developing and to procure 40 MX
intercontinental nuclear missiles, and $8.2 billion to develop and produce 34
B-1 bombers.

Beyond the budget, the Defense Secretary's report to Congress seemed to have
been drawn up as a comprehensive justification of Mr. Reagan's military policy,
which is expected to be a leading issue in this year's election.  In the report,
Mr. Weinberger pointed to purported weaknesses in the nation's military posture
that he said existed when Mr. Reagan took office, and to what the Secretary
termed the Administration's military accomplishments since then.

In urging Congress to approve the 1985 military budget, Mr. Weinberger said:
''As the bills that we as a nation put off too long continue to come due, it
will be tempting to search for excuses to avoid the reckoning once more. We must
not yield to that temptation.''

''If we stop in mid-course,'' he added, ''we will only endanger the progress we
have made in recent years and invite speculation by friends and adversaries
alike that the United States can sustain neither its will nor its leadership.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: chart of military spending

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 2, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

OUTLOOK FOR '85: DRASTIC ACTION DELAYED

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 921 words


News

Analysis


WASHINGTON, Feb. 1 - For those awaiting bold proposals to reduce the Federal
deficit, President Reagan offered this budget message today: Wait till next
year. It was an uncharacteristic stance for a President who has dominated the
fiscal debate with pledges to cut spending sharply and keep taxes down.
Election-year politics have led Mr. Reagan to submit a budget to Congress for
the fiscal year 1985 that looks backward more than it looks forward. The
President's Budget Message offers effusive praise for the ''remarkable'' savings
in the last three years and extremely modest ambitions for the future.

With considerable candor, top economic officials in the Reagan Administration
said today that they recognized their optimistic projections on interest rates,
inflation and unemployment hinged on drastic budget actions in the years ahead.

At the same time, and with equal candor, the same officials acknowledged what
they said was the political futility of achieving those actions just as Congress
and Mr. Reagan are stirring to the quadrennial sounds of an approaching
Presidential election.

Spending Cuts Ruled Out


In the current political climate, Mr. Reagan is not reintroducing spending cuts
that Congress rejected in the last three years in such programs as school aid,
food stamps and Medicare. Such cuts would quickly be used by Democrats in the
coming campagn.

''We're simply not going to line up a whole array of targets that people can
shoot at,'' said David A. Stockman, the budget director.

Nor is the President addressing the use of future tax increases, except to hint
more broadly than in the past that such increases are likely.

As recently as Tuesday, Mr. Reagan told a gathering of executives in Chicago
that raising taxes was ''no answer'' to closing the deficit. In November, he
told campaign workers that he was ''prepared to veto tax increases if they send
them to my desk, no matter how they arrive.''

By contrast, in his Budget Message today, the President declared, ''To those who
say we must raise taxes, I say wait.'' This was hardly a clarion call to resist
revenue-raising measures at all costs.

In the last few years, there have been many euphemisms for tax increases. In
1982, Congress and Mr. Reagan spoke of ''revenue enhancements'' and ''tax
equity'' when taxes were raised by $98 billion in three years.

'Broadening the Tax Base'


This year, the same people are talking about ''tax reform'' and ''broadening the
tax base.'' In his Budget Message, the President calls for efforts to ''simplify
the entire tax code so everyone is on an equal footing.'' To this end, he has
directed Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan to prepare proposals for tax
increases at the end of the year - after the election. Secretary Regan suggested
today that his study could result in proposals to broaden the tax base and
increase revenue over all.

The budget submitted today explicitly aims to skirt long-range tax and spending
issues. Instead, the Budget Message calls for discipline in preserving gains
already achieved, and urged a bit more ''retrenchment'' on spending. If this is
done, it said, a new ''equilibrium'' can be achieved between spending and
receipts.

The problem is that, by the Administration's own calculation, the new
equilibrium still leaves deficits that threaten continued economic growth.

A Posture of Ambiguity


Mr. Stockman, at a briefing, spoke of this year's budget as a prelude to
addressing this problem next year. He said that ''there are going to be some
tough bullets to bite'' in 1985 and that the proper thing for the Administration
to do now would be to keep quiet about what it had in mind.

When he ran for President four years ago, Mr. Reagan adopted a similar posture
of deliberate ambiguity. Asserting that it would be possible to cut taxes
deeply, raise military spending and balance the budget, he said the only budget
cuts needed would be in the area of ''waste, fraud and abuse.''

Democratic charges that he would cut into programs and benefits were dismissed
out of hand. Once in office, the President sought sharp reductions in welfare,
Medicaid, food stamps, job training, housing subsidies and other programs that
benefit the poor.

The question now is whether the Democrats can force Mr. Reagan to be specific on
spending and taxes after this year's election.

The most explicit part of the long- term budget plans are in military spending.
But in this area, too, Mr. Reagan's intentions are ambiguous. The comments made
today suggest that the Administration's proposal to increase military spending
in 1985 by 14.5 percent, not adjusting for inflation, was highly negotiable.

In the face of Republican and Democratic protests that military spending was
growing too fast, Mr. Stockman said that ''we're willing to talk about defense''
as long as the end result does not ''impair national security.''

The President is certain to create controversy by acknowledging that he wants to
return military spending to a level greater than that achieved in 1968, when
there were 500,000 American troops in Vietnam. His proposed outlays would be the
highest military spending since the end of World War II.

Today the Democrats seized principally on Mr. Reagan's military spending plans
as the target of their criticism. They also made it clear that what the
Administration termed a modest new ''retrenchment'' in domestic programs was
unacceptable.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AIDES SAY REAGAN FOREIGN POLICY WILL SURVIVE DEMOCRATS' ATTACKS

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1604 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 2


Even though Democratic attacks on President Reagan's foreign policy record are
growing, Administration officials say they are in a good position to face an
election-year onslaught if there are no catastrophes or surprises.

The officials acknowledge the volatility of foreign policy issues in the
campaign and President Reagan's vulnerability in that field, particularly
regarding the Marines' presence in Lebanon.

Nevertheless, they say they believe it is unlikely that he will look for face-
saving pretexts to get the Marines out, despite the risks of further casualties,
and that they are convinced he will continue to back the Salvadoran Government,
with all the questions about its survivability and abuses of human rights.



Arms Concessions Doubted


They also do not foresee Mr. Reagan making major concessions to break the
deadlock in arms control talks with the Soviet Union.  This was the consensus of
a range of White House, Defense and State Department officials interviewed in
recent weeks. They are seeking to foster achievements that will reflect well on
Mr. Reagan, but they argue that, as matters stand, he can hold his own.

To the officials and to Mr. Reagan's political advisers, he is making simple,
straightforward points about standing up to Communism and terrorism while
seeking peace, and they say that will ultimately go down better with the public
than the complicated arguments Democrats will have to make to show where he went
wrong.

The officials and advisers also say that some Democrats, by backing the
positions of the President's bipartisan commissions on strategic forces and
Central America, have given Mr. Reagan powerful ammunition.



'Walking Through a Minefield'


However, some political advisers in and out of the Government fear the
galvanizing political effects of Americans being threatened and killed, and they
want the Marines out of Lebanon by April or June. They say that so far Mr.
Reagan has shut every door they and their allies in the Pentagon, often opposed
by the State Department, have tried to open for him.

''There is no area of Presidential performance where public opinion changes as
rapidly and dramatically as foreign policy,'' said Richard Wirthlin, the
President's pollster. ''My biggest worry is what the seeds of the present may
hold for the future. We are walking through a minefield.''

''There has to be some kind of disengagement in Lebanon,'' one of Mr. Reagan's
closest political advisers insisted. ''Of all things, that could potentially
tumble or at least badly bruise the President.''

Seven of the eight major candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination
clearly agree with this, judging by their unanimity in Tuesday's debate at
Harvard University. They all called for withdrawing the Marines. These
candidates also seem to be betting that the public would be drawn more to their
theme of peace and negotiations than to Mr. Reagan's appeal to patriotism and
military power.

Waiting Game on Arms Deadlock


Senior State Department officials who owe their jobs to Mr. Reagan are concerned
about this, too, and they acknowledge they are waiting for the political
campaign to provide them with the opportunity to break the negotiating deadlock
with the Russians in the strategic arms talks. If Mr. Reagan starts slipping in
the polls, they say they will jump in with a new proposal and expect to be
backed by political advisers such as Mr. Wirthlin and Michael K. Deaver, deputy
chief of the White House staff.

Their idea is to offer some modifications of the arms treaty signed by President
Carter but not approved by the Senate. But they know this approach would mean an
open struggle with top Pentagon civilians and a direct challenge to Mr. Reagan's
opposition to the treaty.

Still, this seems to be an Administration less divided over foreign affairs than
the Johnson and Nixon Administrations were over Vietnam, the Ford Administration
over detente with the Soviet Union, and the Carter Administration over many
issues.

Less Disarray in Reagan Ranks


Most of the policy battles have been fought and settled, whatever might happen
on Lebanon and arms control. The high-level bloodletting that dominated
headlines for three years has dissipated as the most prominent duelists, such as
former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. and William P. Clark, the
national security adviser, have left the scene. The Democrats are finding it
harder now to charge the Administration with disarray.

The Administration, however, does not present a picture of serenity. Officials
are aware that the public opinion polls are showing rising concern with foreign
policy. The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll showed significant sentiment
against keeping the Marines in Lebanon and for trying harder in arms talks with
Moscow.

But the same poll showed that, even though Democrats have been criticizing
military spending and budget deficits, almost a quarter of the public favored
increases in the Pentagon budget and more than 50 percent felt the budget should
be kept the same.

''The President is concerned,'' a high White House official said. ''If he has a
weakness, it's that some people think he'll cause a war, but he's determined
this won't happen.''

Administration officials say that, barring a catastrophe, the President can
control the political debate with conciliatory speeches, by dispatching envoys
to trouble spots and, if necessary, by co-opting opponents' proposals.

''He can make things happen - he has the initiative,'' said a White House
official. On Lebanon, the official pointed out, Mr. Reagan could withdraw some
of the Marines and redeploy others to safer positions aboard ships off Lebanese
and ''do this without removing the Marines from the area entirely.''

Bipartisan Commissions Helped


Mr. Reagan believes he is well-positioned on East-West issues, according to
these officials. If Moscow returns to the nuclear arms negotiations, it will
show the Soviet leaders realize they must deal with Mr. Reagan; if Moscow
continues to boycott the talks despite Mr. Reagan's entreaties to resume, ''a
lot of Americans will agree with him that the Soviets are the ones who are
intransigent,'' another White House official said.

These officials also say the President's bipartisan commissions have put the
Democratic Presidential contenders in an awkward position.

The President's Commission on Strategic Forces, headed by Brent Scowcroft, who
was President Ford's national security adviser, worked out an approach to the
arms talks that was endorsed by such prominent Democrats as Lloyd Cutler, a
former adviser to President Carter, and Representatives Les Aspin of Wisconsin
and Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee.

Mr. Reagan's commission on Central America, led by former Secretary of State
Henry A. Kissinger, strongly backed Mr. Reagan's view of the vital strategic
nature of the area. Commission members included Robert S. Strauss, a former
Democratic Party chairman, and Lane Kirkland, president of the American
Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations.

'Democrats Boxed In'


''We've really got the Democrats boxed in here,'' said a senior Pentagon
official. ''They can't very well buy the importance of Salvador to American
security on the one hand and insist that we cut off aid because of human rights
violations on the other hand.''

Mr. Reagan has also embraced the commission's recommendation for $10 billion in
aid for the area based on the proposition that the causes of conflict are
economic. One State Department official said, ''If the Democrats vote against
that aid program, they vote against their own belief about the cause of war in
Salvador.''

Officials said Mr. Reagan was so confident on this matter that he had decided to
keep American troops in Honduras indefinitely, even though the military
exercises that took them there have been ended. Gen. John W. Vessey, Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger wanted the
troops to leave on schedule. The State Department urged keeping them in place.

Even on the Middle East, Administration officials generally believe they have
the better of the political argument. True, they say, the longer the Marines are
in Lebanon, the greater the risks. But it is also true, they point out, that
Israel is against a pullout and that American Jews seem to go along with this
and with the argument that it would be dangerous to give in to Arab extremists.

The Soviet and Syrian Threat


Mr. Reagan, the officials said, wants the Marines out, but his first priority is
to stand up to what he believes is a serious Soviet and Syrian threat to
American interests in the area.

There is also the fact that House Democrats, including Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill
Jr., endorsed the resolution calling for the Marines to stay for 18 months,
though Mr. O'Neill recently changed his mind.

The one tricky matter, as officials see it, would be if King Hussein of Jordan,
President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and Yasir Arafat, head of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, became united on a peace plan close to the Reagan plan
calling for association of the West Bank with Jordan.

That would require Mr. Reagan to twist arms in Israel. ''He's prepared to do
that,'' said one White House official, ''but not too hard.'' But here, too,
Administration officials say, the net effect of a new Arab initiative would be
to indicate that they were coming around to Mr. Reagan's way of thinking.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA, WELCOMING THE RAT, EXPLODES IN REVELRY

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 2


The black winter sky exploded into streaks of color at midnight Wednesday as
millions of fireworks rattled in chorus from the alleys and courtyards and the
bitter cold wind swept an acrid gunpowder smell through the Chinese capital.

It was the Spring Festival, as China calls its Lunar New Year, in which the Year
of the Pig gave way to the Year of the Rat, the first of the dozen creatures
represented in the Oriental zodiac.

For the Chinese, the Spring Festival combines the excitement and sentimentality
of the Christmas and New Year holiday season in the West. The country grinds
perceptibly to a halt as bureaucratic curtness gives way to good humor and the
Communist ideology is eclipsed, if only for a few days, by more enduring
tradition.

Millions on the Move

Hundreds of millions of Chinese, laden with presents, embark on the family
reunions that form the core of the holiday.

A directive issued last month by China's cabinet-level State Council estimated
that planes, trains, buses and ferryboats would carry 600 million passengers
during the peak period from Jan. 13 to Feb. 21. This would be 80 million more
than in the same holiday season last year.

The State Council urged that better preparations be provided for travelers. Li
Senmao, a Deputy Minister of Railways, reported that 406 more daily trains were
added to cope with 131 million riders during the holiday period.

Across the border in Hong Kong, as many as 1.1 million of the British colony's
5.5 million residents were expected to spill into the mainland to visit
relatives. Railway officials there tried to enforce a new regulation limiting
baggage that passengers could haul with them, forcing some travelers to abandon
their bamboo poles used to balance heavy loads.

Trains Are Jammed

No such restriction was imposed on mainland travelers, who jammed into the
railway carriages clutching bags, cardboard cartons, bedrolls and even baskets
of live animals. Like a student from Harbin who was traveling two days to
introduce his fiancee to his parents in Shanghai, most were reconciled to
passing days and nights squeezed upright on the hard wooden seats.

Yet a folksiness prevails, and Wednesday morning, at Peking's main railway
station, a chorus of railway workers with accordions serenaded travelers who
staggered out into the weak winter sunshine burdened with food and gifts.

Some did not bother to fight the congestion. A young government official whose
parents live in the Manchurian city of Dalian said that he and his wife would
remain in the capital for the holiday, visiting colleagues and maybe catching a
movie.

China's pre-eminent leader, Deng Xiaoping, was in Canton, following a visit to
the Shenzhen and Zhuhai special economic zones in the southeastern province of
Guangdong, the official press reported. Peng Zhen, the chairman of China's
nominal parliament, the National People's Congress, was celebrating the festival
in the resort city of Hangzhou.

Party Chief Visits Troops

The Communist Party chief, Hu Yaobang, was inspecting frontier guard units along
China's troubled border with Vietnam. The New China News Agency quoted Mr. Hu as
telling the troops to maintain their vigilance during the Spring Festival. The
holiday, which Vietnam celebrates as Tet, is usually followed by mutual
accusations of border violations.

The Spring Festival traditionally encompasses seven days of preparations and
three days of celebrations, though the weekend this year stretches the holiday
to four days. The lavish shopping has reflected the prosperity introduced by the
economic changes of Mr. Deng.

Peking's markets stocked up for the holiday with 10,000 tons of pork, nearly a
third more than last year, 8,500 tons of fish and 170,000 tons of vegetables,
much of which was shipped from the south, further straining an overworked
railway system. Some markets stayed open all night to handle the crush of
customers.

Shoppers also cleaned out shelves of the clothing and toy stores along downtown
Wangfujing Street. The municipality's nine million residents were augmented by
peasants with money to spend from the 1983 bumper harvest who traveled into
Peking in search of greater quality and variety in consumer goods.

The New China News Agency reported that peasants from the countryside around the
capital snapped up 80 percent of the 1,200 television sets put out for sale at
four major Peking department stores on the eve of the Spring Festival.

'Frivolous' Practice Returns

The Government has used the sentimental holiday to press its campaign for
reunification with Taiwan. A five- hour nationwide television variety show
featured Huang Yiteng, a Taiwan singer who came here last year, performing his
song ''Descendants of the Dragon'' with Huang Zicheng and Li Dawei, two Taiwan
air force pilots who defected to the mainland.

The Spring Festival has revived the old customs of pasting couplets to the
doorframes for good luck and mounting bright paper cutouts in the window panes.
Such touches were discouraged as frivolous during the Cultural Revolution.
Peking also scheduled dragon dances, lantern displays and other street
entertainment.

For young people wishing to be more contemporary, Peking's Communist Youth
League has been holding some group dancing, which a league official said
participants enjoyed ''for the social content and as an outlet for their spare
energy.'' Social dances, which involves only couples, have been handled more
cautiously after ''some private dances degenerated into 'cheek to cheek'
dances,'' as the New China News Agency delicately phrased it.

The Peking municipality has tried to look after those without families. It
arranged special food for 5,000 childless elderly people. Officials at Peking's
municipal prison said that its staff would celebrate the Spring Festival with
the 2,000 inmates, who get a break from making shoes and socks in the prison
workshops.

Fireworks to the Fore

The most conspicuous element of every Spring Festival is the fireworks, pyramids
of which have been sold in shops and at sidewalk stalls to the wide-eyed
fascination of small children. Peking stocked 600 million fireworks in 150
varieties from around the country, with most of them exploded at midnight to
usher in the Year of the Rat.

The authorities have warned against setting off firecrackers in crowded or
enclosed places, but otherwise no restrictions have been placed on their use.

The rat is one of 12 propitious creatures, borrowed from Buddhist mythology,
that delineate the old Chinese calendar. The others are the ox, tiger, rabbit,
dragon, snake, horse, goat, monkey, rooster, dog and pig. People born in the
Year of the Rat are supposed to be good-natured, sensitive and honest, if
inclined sometimes to fuss and gossip.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of railroad worker celebrating

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BAPTIST NEIGHBORS OPPOSE TEXAS BUDDHIST TEMPLE

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 820 words

DATELINE: GRAND PRAIRIE, Tex., Feb. 2


Just three blocks west of the Fairview Baptist Church, one of 16 Baptist
churches here, on a block lined with tidy, one-story frame houses, is an odd-
shaped yellow house that has both a rusty basketball hoop and a Buddhist shrine
in its yard.

The yellow house is the home of Thich Tri Hien, a 46-year-old Buddhist monk, and
the Khoun-Viet Buddhist Monastery of America, the temple of 300 Buddhists living
in the surrounding Dallas-Fort Worth area.

But to many of Mr. Thich's neighbors in this North Texas city of 83,000 people
the yellow house has become a ''nuisance,'' one more intrusion on the small-town
way of life that the area's rapid growth has threatened.

Mr. Thich says he has had no problems so far with the neighbors. But last month,
when the Buddhists announced plans to build a temple and a monastery for
Buddhist students on their property, 67 nearby residents signed a petition
opposing the plan.

No Room for 'Communists'


Will Zachry, a Grand Prarie resident, said at a public hearing before the City
Council a week ago, ''We don't want the church or the Communist- type of
government they come from in our city.'' One Councilman angrily told Mr. Zachry
to keep his remarks relevant to the zoning issue, but Mr. Zachry's comments
brought applause from about 15 people in the audience.

Most of the opposition, however, has been less vehement.

''This neighborhood won't accomodate that kind of facility,'' said Opal Wasson,
who has lived down the road from the Fairview Baptist Church since 1954.

When Mrs. Wasson bought her house, Grand Prairie's population was just over
15,000, and Main Street, which now cuts across the northern third of the city,
was the center of the community. Grand Prarie is struggling to remain the sort
of place where people know where their neighbors go to church.

'People Here Are Very Nice'


It was this small-town spirit that first attracted the Buddhists to the area and
led Mr. Thich to buy his property in 1981. ''The people here are very nice, very
religious,'' Mr. Thich said. ''There is no drinking and there are no movies bad
for children.''

Most of the temple's members are refugees, he said, and it has taken them three
years to scrape together enough money to build the temple.

There is as yet no money for the planned monastery, which would house about
eight of Mr. Thich's students.

''We really want to do it for the next generation, so when they grow up in a
foreign country they still will know something of Vietnam,'' said Hai-van
Eckert, a computer programmer who married a civilian employed by the Army in the
Vietnam War.

Mrs. Eckert, Mr. Thich and other Buddhists here are puzzled by their neighbors'
petition. ''I don't know why my neighbors oppose the building,'' Mr. Thich said.
''What is their cause?''

'Different Attitudes About Life'


''They have different languages, different religions and different attitudes
about life,'' said Rachel Crews, a retired teacher who signed the petition.

''I bought my house so I'd have a place to live out my years quietly,'' she
continued. ''I don't want a bunch of monks under my nose. It wouldn't matter if
it were a Catholic boys' school or any other kind of school. I just don't think
we need it.''

Mr. Thich was the chairman of the Buddhist Social Service Committee in
Washington before moving to Grand Prairie. He said he encouraged the refugees to
learn to live in their new country. ''We must strive to do our best for our
neighbors, for Grand Prairie, for America,'' he tells his congregation.

Son Tran, now a teacher in Dallas, said he and other refugees were trying very
hard to live as Americans. Mr. Son, who earned a bachelor's degree from
Georgetown University in 1981, said he escaped on one of the last American
helicopters that left Saigon on April 30, 1975, the day the city fell.

''We do not attempt to interfere in their lives,'' he said of his neighbors.
''Eventually, when the neighbors understand what we want to do, there will be no
problems.''

Temple Wins Council Approval


His optimism mirrors that of other temple members, who said they were pleased
when the City Council voted unanimously Jan. 24 to approve the building of the
temple.

The planned monastery was disapproved, however. Council members said it could
cause density problems in the neighborhood, which is zoned for single- and
two-family homes.

Neighbors say they will appeal the Council's decision to approve the the temple,
although they have as yet taken no action.

And, early last Sunday morning, the neighbors called the police when nine
anti-Buddhist protesters showed up.

The protesters, some dressed in Army fatigues and others dressed in hooded
robes, identified themselves as members of the Ku Klux Klan. They have said they
will stand across the street from the temple every Sunday until the Buddhists
leave.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Thich Tri Hien, a Buddhist monk

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

METROPOLITAN BAEDEKER;
A CITY WITHIN A CITY WHERE OLD MEETS NEW

BYLINE: By FRED FERRETTI

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2401 words


THE inflections will differ in Chinatown this weekend, depending upon where you
happen to be - either the traditional singsong Cantonese greeting, ''Gung Hay
Fat Choy,'' or the newer clipped accents of Mandarin,'' ''Gong Xi Fa Cai'' - but
the words will convey the same wish for happiness in 4682, the Year of the Rat
in the Chinese zodiac, which began yesterday.

The annual observance of the lunar New Year is the happiest part of the year for
the Chinese community, particularly in Chinatown. It is also in some ways the
best time to visit New York's Asian city-within-a-city, for it is in this 10-day
New Year observance that differences between the entrenched Cantonese

Metropolitan Baedeker and Kuomintang Taiwanese on the one hand and on the other
the relative newcomers who reflect the views of today's China are temporarily
set aside. This is a time when the constantly changing Chinatown community comes
together, when debts are forgiven, when houses are cleaned and renewed, when
foods acquire a significance beyond taste, when everybody wishes everybody else
longevity and good fortune.  This weekend the ''lions,'' young men under huge
lion masks and long, writhing bodies, will dance down Mott Street, the spine of
Chinatown, among crackling, sputtering firecrackers. There will be Chinese
opera, movies, parades and that crashing of cymbals that marks the best of
Cantonese dramatic musical performances. The climax of the New Year observance
will be this weekend, which makes it a fine time to take the subway to China.

The white-on-blue signs in the BMT station read ''Canal Street,'' but the
Chinese know the subway stop by the accompanying calligraphy which reads ''Hua
Bu,'' or ''Chinese Port.''

These days, Chinatown is no longer so easily defined as it once was. It is a
shifting, spreading community that is home not only to the older immigrants from
Canton, but to newer people from Shanghai, other parts of China and Hong Kong as
well as to its newest settlers, Chinese immigrants from Vietnam.

Nor are its boundaries precise. The City Planning Commission officially
designates the 10-block square bounded by the Bowery and Chatham Square, and
Canal, Baxter and Worth Streets, as Chinatown, and suggests that the population
could be as much as 125,000. The true boundaries of Chinatown are indefinable,
and its constantly expanding population is now said to be 175,000 to 200,000.

Today's Chinatown, filled with small restaurants and tea shops, with scores of
new stores and trading companies, with banks, Buddhist temples and theaters,
reaches far north of An influx of immigrants from Hong Kong is changing the
eating scene in Chinatown. A report will appear Wednesday in The Living Section.

Canal Street along Mott, Elizabeth and Centre Streets into Little Italy. It
stretches far into the traditionally Jewish Lower East Side, down East Broadway
and along Allen Street and along the slips that end at the East River, and its
residents fill not only the old Lower Manhattan tenements but also the huge
Confucius Plaza apartment complex, which dominates the Manhattan Bridge
approach. Once Chinatown was quite small.

A Brief History

It is not known precisely when the first Chinese immigrant settled on the piece
of Manhattan farmland that is roughly where the intersection of Pell and Doyers
Streets is today. Karl Friedrich Neumann, a 19th-century Asia scholar, wrote
that a Buddhist monk, Hoei Shin, sailed to New York late in the 18th century. In
1808, John Jacob Astor sailed one of his fur- laden ships into New York Harbor,
and while visitors gaped at a passenger he called a Chinese, called Pun Hua Wing
Chong, Astor reportedly unloaded a shipful of illegal furs.

In 1847, the junk Kee Ying sailed into New York from Canton loaded with silk and
a crew of 35 Chinese. It was reported in the press that 50,000 people visited
the Kee Ying that summer, and many New Yorkers gave parties for the crew. When
the ship set sail for China, not all the crew was aboard. Those who stayed were
probably Chinatown's first settlers.

Other Chinese, virtually all males, arrived from California after laboring in
the gold fields and working on the transcontinental railroad, and by 1869 a
sizable colony had settled in Lower Manhattan. They started laundries, made
cigars and paved the way for the settlers of the 1870's and 80's, who helped
form the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association, a practical sort of local
government that represented the community in New York's political and social
worlds. The association is still a Chinatown power, its influence diluted.

From 1882 to 1965, the number of Chinese was held down by Federal exclusion
acts, but when national-origins quotas were abolished in 1965, immigration began
in earnest. Today, Chinatown has 10 daily Chinese newspapers of every
conceivable political bent, as well as the English version of People's Daily
from Peking, The China Daily, which is flown in each day. New banks from Taiwan
and Hong Kong seem to open at the rate of one a week. Real-estate investment and
speculation has soared, with as much as $1.5 million being paid for
undistinguished old buildings along East Broadway. Chinese supermarkets, such as
Kam- Man on Canal Street, abound, and so do churches, community centers,
language schools and retail stores.

Walking and Shopping

The essence of the community can be felt by walking the streets of ''Old
Chinatown.'' Come up the subway stairs and begin at Canal and Centre Streets by
viewing the new headquarters of the Golden Pacific National Bank, a six-story
office building created to look like ''the New York version of Peking's
Forbidden City,'' as one Chinatown resident called it. It has pagodalike roofs
and galleries, and its exterior is ornately decorated in traditional red, gold,
blue and green. It is unquestionably Chinatown's current star attraction.

Go farther up Canal to Baxter Street, which has become a street bazaar, and walk
east. On gerry-built stands are fresh fish piled on shaved ice, live lobsters
and baskets of live blue crabs. Next to them are piles of sweaters, scarfs,
jeans and down jackets imported from Hong Kong, Taiwan and China. There is even
a streetside Fortune Cookie Center, selling cellophane packets of the
message-filled sweets. Up one block, between Mulberry and Mott Streets, you'll
find vendors selling tiny orange and kumquat trees for the New Year, because
these citrus fruits are symbolic of the holiday's wishes for good luck and long
life.

At Bok Lei Tat, 213 Canal, you can buy clothing and equipment for kung fu and
other martial arts, or you can cross the broad avenue into the Kam- Man Market,
200 Canal, where there are piles of special New Year sweets - candied mangoes,
coconut, oranges, tangerines and dates - racks of roasted and barbecued
chickens, ducks and geese, and all manner of canned and dried goods. Kam-Man
also sells cooking equipment and inexpensive porcelains. Farther east, among the
older traditional Canal Street jewelers, you might want to drop in either at Li
Xing, 167 Canal Street, or Mae Chong, No. 175, to see the pink 18- and 22- karat
soft-gold charms, bracelets, ornaments and necklaces favored by the Chinese.

Turn right on Mott Street, Chinatown's Main Street, to visit the Hong Kong Book
Store, No. 72, where you can buy some lovely red good luck New Year envelopes
and decorations, and almost any weekly or monthly magazine published in Hong
Kong. A couple of doors farther down is the Southeast Asia Food Trading Company,
No. 68A, where you can get the spices, chili, fishpastes and fish sauces of
Indonesia.

At 62 Mott, you will come to the Eastern States Buddhist Temple of America,
where for a small donation Mrs. Ying Chin Xia Fan will let you view the gilded
statues of Kwan Yin, the iron goddess of mercy, and Buddha, and to smell the
incense, leave an orange or 50 cents for good will and take a rolled-up fortune
from the box. In the rear of the temple, for another 50 cents, you can view a
small museum of Buddhist statuary and holy books. Next door, at 60A Mott, is the
Tai Heng Lee Company, one of Chinatown's oldest dealers in furniture and
porcelains. It carries a few antiques, but most of the furniture and porcelains
are new.

Follow Mott Street past the Church of the Transfiguration, an 1801 example of
Georgian Gothic, to its end on Chatham Square, cross the square to St. James
Place and view, as a bronze plaque will tell you, ''The First Cemetery of the
Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue, Shearith Israel, in the City of New York,
1656-1833.'' Another tablet over the arched entry to the tiny stone-strewn
graveyard notes that this is the oldest Jewish cemetery in the United States. A
bit to the right you encounter St. James Roman Catholic Church, an 1837 example
of Greek Revival, now closed. Walk down East Broadway to see the Sun Sing
Theater. The tiles on its entrance floor indicate it was once the Florence
Theater, which showed Italian movies. These days it shows the best of Hong Kong.

From Chatham Square, walk north along the Bowery, passing the green-
and-black-marble statue of Confucius that introduces Chinatown's huge apartment
house, Confucius Plaza, and turn left into Doyers Street, a narrow, tiny,
twisting street, which holds Chinatown's post office, as well as the historic
Nam Wah Tea Parlor, 11 Doyers, the first establishment of its kind in Chinatown
and a fine place for a cup of jasmine tea and some afternoon dim sum. Doyers
crosses Pell Street, home for two of the neighborhood's more interesting stores.

At No. 14 is the Chinese American Emporium Ltd., a big, well-lighted market
specializing in Chinese herbal medicines and ingredients thought to contribute
to one's internal balance. On sale are ginseng root, deer antlers (whole or
powdered), deer sinew, often used in banquet menus, dried abalone, shrimp,
scallops, sea horses, mussels, oysters, goat horns and all manner of roots.
There are also framed embroidered silks and tapestries, as well as porcelains. A
few doors away, at 20 Pell, up one flight, is the popular Oriental Culture
Enterprises Company, a vast bookstore selling newspapers, magazines,
English-Chinese dictionaries and English and Chinese cookbooks, as well as a
large collection of books from China. It is here that The China Daily is sold.
There are also scrolls, inks and carved stone seals, not to mention table-tennis
paddles and soccer balls. Like virtually every other shop in Chinatown, it is
open seven days a week.

Move east on Pell and return to the Bowery, stopping on the corner at 18 Bowery,
a Federal house that is the oldest preserved house in Chinatown. Now painted a
dull red, it is nonetheless in good repair. Recently it housed the Chinatown
branch of Off-Track Betting, but now it houses Landmark Gallery, which sells
traditional Chinese ink paintings on silk. Another nearby attraction is
Olliffe's Pharmacy at 6 Bowery, once the country's oldest pharmacy. It is now
closed, but its shell and sign remain.

Walk north on the Bowery to Bayard Street, turn right to Elizabeth Street, which
houses Chinatown's Fifth Precinct police station. Just a few doors before the
handsome old station house is Chan Jim Kee, 3 Elizabeth, one of Chinatown finer
jewelers, particularly for jade, and one of the more respected purveyors of
Chinese herbs. Follow Elizabeth out to Canal and turn right one block until you
again come to the Bowery. In front of you will be the Sun Doh Theater, with the
best of China's kung-fu movies.

A block north along the Bowery, on the side wall of the Seun Gung Theater on
Hester Street, is Chinatown's own wall mural. An entire side of the building is
painted with a dragon, a group of working peasants, a ship coming to America
welcomed by the hand of Uncle Sam, a woman at a sewing machine, a grocery, a
family and a restaurant. A man holds a tablet on which Chinese characters
appear, which translate as ''Together we have strength.'' The mural is titled
the ''Wall of Respect for the Working People of Chinatown.''


Weekend Activities

The lion dances, which began at midnight and ended early this morning, will be
repeated Sunday. The ''lions'' each representing a civic, community or athletic
club, dance down Mott Street from Canal to Chatham Square, leaping and growling
to the thump of giant drums and the bang of firecrackers. The ''lions'' stop at
stores where they are given ''lucky money'' in red and gold envelopes, enabling
them to carry on their programs through the year. The lions are scheduled to
begin their dances at 11 A.M., and if you care to follow them wear ear plugs.

This evening in the auditorium of the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent
Association, 62 Mott, there will be Chinese folk dances by students of the New
York Chinese School, which is in that building. A similar program will be
offered tomorrow at 3 P.M. by the Chinese Cultural and Recreation Association,
and at 7 P.M. there will be a program of traditional Chinese music by the Kou
Shing Musical Association. Sunday the New York Chinese School's drum and bugle
corps will follow the lion dancers down Mott Street beginning at 1 P.M.; there
will be a Chinese movie show in the Consoliodated Benevolent Association's
auditorium at 2 P.M. and at 7 a recital of Cantonese music presented by the
Chinese Musical and Theatrical Association. All of these are free.

At 26 Bowery, two stories up, in studios shared by the Asian American Dance
Theater and the Asian Arts Institute, is a free exhibition of antique woodcuts
on paper, ''Door Gods and Other Household Dieties,'' a collection of so-called
Chinese paper gods, whose images are burned and sent heavenward throughout the
year as part of festival observances. The gallery will be open today and
tomorrow from 5 until 8:30 P.M. and Sunday from 11:30 A.M. until 2 P.M. The
number for more information on the show of woodcuts, many on loan from the
University of Pennsylvania collection, is 233-2154.

Of particular interest at this time of the year is Tsao Wang, the god of the
hearth or of the kitchen. He is the traditional god of the New Year. His image
usually hangs in the family kitchen all year, then on New Year, honey is smeared
on his lips, and the image is burned. He is then expected to report only sweet
things about the family to the other gods when he reaches heaven.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of fish market at Baxter and Canal Streets; photo of porcelains
at Tai Heng Lee Company on Mott Street; photos of antique woodcut of household
god, Buddhist deity; photo of vendor on Canal Street, children celebrating
(pg.A1); map of Chinatown, in detail

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SKETCHES OF CHALLENGER'S CREW OF 5

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 881 words


Vance Devoe Brand

The mission commander and an old hand at orbiting in space . . . United States
command module pilot on Apollo spacecraft when it hooked up with the Soviet
Union's Soyuz in 1975 . . . He and two crewmates narrowly escaped serious injury
when toxic jet thruster gases leaked into the cabin on Apollo's return to earth
. . . In 1982 he commanded the Columbia on the fifth space shuttle flight, the
first fully operational shuttle mission . . . Supervised deployment of two
communications satellites placed in geosynchronous orbit on that flight . . .
Born 52 years ago in Longmont, Colo., in shadow of the Rocky Mountains, the son
of a veterinarin . . . Majored in business administration in college, but
decided to go into aviation and earned master's degree in aeronautical
engineering . . . Test pilot for Lockheed before being picked as an astronaut in
1966 . . . Blonde, gray- eyed, 5 feet 11 inches tall . . . Married to the former
Beverly Ann Whitnel . . . Has five children.


Robert Lee Gibson

The pilot of the mission was born into a family of fliers and is married to an
astronaut . . . Commander in the Navy . . . Born Oct. 30, 1946, in Cooperstown,
N.Y. . . . His father, Paul A. Gibson, served as a military aviator and his
mother held a pilot's license . . . Regarded as outspoken and witty by his
peers, who nicknamed him Hoot, after the actor Hoot Gibson . . . Guided by his
parents, he was at the controls of the family plane at the age of 10 . . .
Earned a private pilot's license at 17 . . . Graduated from high school in
Huntington, L.I., and earned a degree in aeronautical engineering at California
Polytechnical State University . . . Considers Lakewood, Calif., his hometown .
. . Entered Navy flight training upon graduation from college in 1969 . . . Flew
56 combat missions in Vietnam . . . Has chalked up 3,000 hours flying 35
different types of aircraft . . . Joined NASA in 1978 . . . For relaxation, he
flies an acrobatic racer and radio-controlled model planes . . . married in 1981
to the former Margaret Rhea Seddon, a physician and astronaut . . . they have
two children.

Bruce McCandless 2d

A rookie embarking on his first mission in space . . . Waiting to go into space
since 1966, when he was selected as an astronaut . . . No. 2 man in the class of
1958 at the Naval Academy, and the son of a Navy admiral . . . Earned a master's
degree in electrical engineering at Stanford University in 1965 . . . Became a
Naval aviator and has logged more than 4,000 hours of flying time . . . Now a
Navy captain . . . Has often manned the ground-to-space radio link at Mission
Control in Houston, including the time in 1971 when the lunar module
successfully docked with the command ship after earlier failures . . . As a
flight specialist on the shuttle flight, he will play a major role in the
experiments with the free-flying manned maneuvering units . . . Forty-six years
old . . . Regarded by peers as an electronic wizard . . .  Played a major role
in designing and developing the jet backpacks that will send him and Robert
Stewart through space without a tethering safety line . . . Says he feels
''safer doing that than I am trying to cross the Gulf Freeway in the
afternoon,'' in Houston . . . Hobbies include photography, scuba diving and
volley ball . . . married to the former Bernice Doyle of Rahway, N.J. . . . They
have two children.


Ronald E. McNair

Specialist in laser technology . . . 33 years old . . . Second black to leave
the earth on a shuttle mission . . . Regarded as outgoing and gregarious . . .
Born in Lake City, S.C., where his mother, Pearl, lives . . . Graduated magna
cum laude from North Carolina A&T State University and obtained his doctorate in
physics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . . . Author of published
papers on laser physics and molecular spectroscopy . . . Attended the advanced
theoretical physics summer school at Les Houches in the French Alps . . . Was
working in the optical physics department of Hughes Research Laboratories in
Malibu, Calif., in 1978, when he became one of three blacks chosen as astronauts
. . . Teaches karate at a church in Houston . . . Plays saxophone in jazz groups
. . . Married to the former Cheryl Moore of Jamaica, Queens.


Robert L. Stewart

First member of the United States Army to go into space . . . Lieutenant Colonel
Stewart has flown 38 types of aircraft . . . Won more than 40 medals in more
than 1,000 hours in combat in the Vietnam War . . . Born Aug. 13, 1942 in
Washington, D.C. . . . Grew up in Hattiesburg, Miss. . . . Smitten by the
romance of flying as a boy . . . As a teen-ager he withdrew all the books on
flying from the local library and spread them around his home to help overcome
parental objections to his taking flying lessons . . . Graduated from the
University of Southern Mississippi in 1964 and entered the Army, first serving
as an artillery officer . . . Later earned a master's degree in aerospace
engineering at the University of Texas . . . Also served as a flight instructor
and experimental test pilot before being selected for astronaut training in 1978
. . . Married to the former Mary Jane Murphy of La Grange, Ga. . . . They have
two children . . . Family lives in El Lago, Tex.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of shuttle crew Brand, Gibson, McCandless, McNair, Stewart

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON'S PANEL ON PRESS COVERAGE TO MEET

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 674 words


A newly formed Pentagon panel of 14 military public information officers, former
journalists and journalism professors is scheduled to meet in Washington
tomorrow to take testimony and begin drafting guidelines on press access to
military actions.

The chairman of the group, Winant Sidle, a retired major general and former
Pentagon spokesman who is now director of public affairs for the Martin Marietta
Corporation, said the panel hoped to complete its work by the end of the month.
The panel is to propose written guidelines on issues such as when reporters
should be notified of pending military actions and how pools of correspondents
can be organized when the military feels it cannot accommodate all the reporters
who want to cover an action.

The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., authorized
the study in response to complaints from the Congress and the press about the
exclusion of reporters from the United States invasion of Grenada.

General Vessey and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger said reporters had
been barred to protect the security of the mission and because the military
could not guarantee correspondents' safety. News organizations said the step was
an unparalleled act of censorship that forced the public to rely on the
Government's self-serving accounts of the action.

No Formal Procedures

In the past, reporters and photographers have generally accompanied troops on
combat missions, observing restrictions on the release of their accounts and
submitting to military censorship to avoid disclosing information that might
assist enemy forces. The Pentagon has not had any formal, written procedures
defining the conditions under which journalists can cover such missions, and
access has often been determined by ad hoc decisions.

It is not clear if the panel will address only coverage of relatively limited
actions, such as the United States invasion of Grenada, or if it will try to
compose rules for longer troop commitments, such as those in Lebanon and Central
America. Press access to the Marine compound in Beirut was reduced three months
ago after the bombing Oct. 23 that killed 241 American servicemen.

There are no active journalists on the panel announced yesterday. The major news
organizations were invited to name representatives but all declined, saying
journalists should not serve on a governmental rule-making body.

Many organizations have agreed, however, to testify before the panel in hearings
to be held at the Naval War College in Washington. Some have already answered a
questionnaire asking what kinds of operations they feel they are entitled to
cover and how the coverage might be structured.

Lieut. Col. Jamie Walton, a spokesman for the panel, said these were its
military members: Col. George Kirschenbauer of the Army, in the

operations branch, J-3, of the office of the

Joint Chiefs of Staff Capt. James Major of the Navy, also from J-3 Col. Robert
J. O'Brien Jr., Deputy Assistant

Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Billy Hunt, office of the Army Chief of
Public Affairs Comdr. Jack A. Garrow, office of the Navy

Chief of Public Affairs Lieut. Col. Stewart S. Duncan, office of the Air

Force Director of Public Affairs Maj. Fred Lash, office of the Marine Corps

Director of Public AffairsThese are the members of the panel representing
journalism interests: Keyes Beech, a retired correspondent who

covered the wars in Korea and Vietnam

for The Chicago Daily News Scott M. Cutlip, former dean of the School of

Journalism at the University of Georgia A. J. Langguth, professor of journalism
at

the University of Southern California Wendell Merick, former Vietnam bureau

chief for U.S. News & World Report Richard S. Salant, president of the National

News Council and former president of

CBS News Barry Zorthian, a former spokesman for the

United States Embassy in Saigon and executive of Time Inc. who is now senior

vice president of Gray & Co., an advertising and public relations firm

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LABORITE, SET TO VISIT, FAULTS U.S. AIDE

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 835 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Feb. 4


The leader of Britain's opposition Labor Party, who is to begin a weeklong visit
to the United States Wednesday, says he finds it impossible to understand ''the
petulant attitude'' behind a senior American official's criticism of European
views on international security questions.

The Labor leader, Neil Kinnock, said in an interview Friday that he rejected the
suggestion this week by Under Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger that
Europeans ''have become so consumed with their own problems that it has tended
to make it ever more difficult to get Western Europe to look outside its
borders.''

Mr. Kinnock said: ''I wouldn't be surprised if an American taxi driver in a
small town 1,000 miles from any seacoast had such an idea, but I find it
absolutely amazing to hear misconceptions of that kind from a respected,
experienced diplomat.''

''What people like him must understand is that European complaints and dissents
are nudges in the ribs from friends and not stabs in the back from enemies,'' he
said.

Became Labor Leader in October

The 41-year-old Welshman reiterated the view, which he first expressed in
October upon succeeding Michael Foot, that British foreign policy has in recent
years been too closely tied to Washington's, and he welcomed signs of
independence from Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on such issues as the United
States-led invasion of Grenada. When a junior partner in an alliance cannot or
does not maintain its own viewpoint, he argued, it is ''not really an alliance
but an empire.''

In an aside on Grenada, he compared President Reagan's comments on the invasion
to those of an elephant saying: ''I flattened this gnat. It was a struggle, but
somehow I managed to do it.''

Mr. Kinnock's trip will be the first to the United States by a Labor leader
since Mrs. Thatcher's election in 1979. Although Mr. Kinnock has often
criticized President Reagan's policies, the Administration has agreed to a round
of high-level talks, including appointments with the President, Secretary of
State George P. Shultz and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger.

The Labor leader will also meet leading Republicans and Democrats in Congress,
trade-union officials and the Secretary General of the United Nations, Javier
Perez de Cuellar. He is to make speeches to the Council on Foreign Relations in
New York and to the Carnegie Endowment and the National Press Club in
Washington.

Welcomes U.S. Change of Tone

He said he would have ''nothing but words of encouragement'' for the President's
recent change of tone toward the Soviet Union, which he called ''a suspicion of
a smudge of a pale dawn'' of a new day in East-West relations. Mr. Reagan's
latest speech, he said, had ''stalled but not put into reverse the rush toward
confrontation that has frightened even the most complacent of the cold
warriors.''

But if the interview was any guide, much of what Mr. Kinnock will have to say in
the United States will displease the Administration.

He said he favored the immediate withdrawal of the multinational force from
Lebanon, in which Britain has a contingent of 110 men. Until that was done, he
said, President Amin Gemayel would have no real reason to broaden his
Government, Israel would have no reason to withdraw its troops from the southern
part of the country and Syria would have an excuse for continuing to block
progress.

''Withdrawal would not invite a Soviet takeover,'' Mr. Kinnock said in his
office at the House of Commons. ''I'm not complacent about Soviet intentions. I
think they want all the influence they can get in the area, but I think they
want it without further commitments.''

Central America and Vietnam

He also criticized United States policy in Central America, commenting that
''only the flowers are different'' from those in Southeast Asia. He said he
found it ''incredible, given the recent nature of the horror in Vietnam, that
America can even contemplate the possibility of stumbling into a similar
situation once again, especially when for a far lower price she could gain
unprecedented influence through promoting economic and social change there.''

Mr. Kinnock said he would argue vigorously in Washington on behalf of his
party's antinuclear platform, which includes the closing of all American nuclear
bases here, including those with cruise missiles, and the scrapping of Britain's
independent deterrent. He invited ''any American who does not understand our
attitude to slip on a pair of British shoes and wish for our country what he
wishes for America.''

''We believe that the possession of nuclear weapons does not add to our
security, only to our vulnerability,'' he said.

He said Britain need not depend on an American nuclear strike force for defense
or deterrence, because ''in the horrible event of war'' there would be no
defense and because he did not believe that the Soviet Union had any reason to
want to advance beyond the Warsaw Pact's boundaries.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Pacific Basin

SECTION: Section 3; Page 12, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 515 words


To the Editor:

Prof. Yoshi Tsurumi's provocative article on the growing economic and political
power of the Pacific Basin (Business Forum, Jan. 1) correctly describes the
importance of the phenomenon to the United States - the sun may indeed by
setting over the once-dominant Atlantic community - but he offers rather
debatable prescriptions for maintaining America's regional influence.

As he writes, the United States market position in some Pacific Basin nations is
declining. But this reversal of pre-1981 trading patterns has very little to do
with the prejudices of American politicians and academics against the
''mysterious and unfriendly Far East,'' or with the ignorance and inexperience
of American multinational business executives.

Rather, United States exports to the nations of the Far East are declining
because the overvalued dollar has put them at a formidable competitive
disadvantage. The same adverse trend is evident throughout the dollar- short
developing world, which until recently provided the fastest-growing markets for
United States exports. A reasonably valued dollar (perhaps 20 percent cheaper
vs. the Japanese yen), with the exchange rate decline translated into lower
export prices, would do wonders for United States competitiveness in Pacific
Basin markets.

Professor Tsurumi also criticizes Japan and the United States for supporting
repressive regimes in the Philippines and South Korea, and accuses President
Reagan and Prime Minister Nakasone of telling the world that ''the human rights
and political freedom of the civilized democracies are not necessary for
sustained economic growth.''

Of course, as Professor Tsurumi well knows, the United States and Japan, as
colonizers, once did attempt to shape the Philippines and Korea, respectively,
in their own images but they failed and retreated. Thankfully, the two economic
superpowers do not feel any mandate today to be the political tutors of their
neighbors in the Pacific Basin. This is especially true of the United States,
which saw the grandiose dream of ''nation-building'' on alien soil collapse in
Vietnam.

In the years since the United States flag was hauled down in Saigon, the nations
of the Pacific Basin have nervously watched American military withdrawal more
than matched by Soviet advances. They have experienced upheavals in energy
patterns. But they have lost none of their economic vitality. Instead, they have
gained a new measure of political self-reliance, maturity and cohesion expressed
through the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which Professor Tsurumi
rightly praises.

The prospect is that the populous, youthful and dynamic nations of the Pacific
Basin will continue to forge their own identities, destinies and civilizations,
all the while confidently creating rich opportunities for themselves and
American and Japanese businessmen. Professor Tsurumi ought to be as satisfied
with this human progress as the people enjoying it.

RICHARD J. WHALEN Chairman, Worldwide Information Resources Ltd.  Washington,
Jan. 5

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MAKING OF NEW YORK'S ARCHBISHOP

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 936 words


When Pope John Paul II ended months of speculation by naming Bishop John J.
O'Connor of Scranton as the next Archbishop of New York last week, the 1.8
million Roman Catholics in the archdiocese were left with many questions and a
few mysteries.

The winnowing process leading to the Pope's final decision was shrouded in
secrecy, though the mechanism is set by church regulations. The Apostolic
Delegate in Washington, Archbishop Pio Laghi, elicited opinions and
recommendations from a wide variety of Catholics. The materials are considered
so confidential that bishops are told to type their thoughts themselves rather
than channel them through a secretary. After reviewing the suggestions, the
apostolic delegate normally forwards his top three nominations to the Pope, in
order of preference.

New York, because of its visibility and power, was a pivotal placement and the
guessing encompassed so many possibilities that the archdiocesan communication
office abandoned the attempt to keep a ready supply of pictures and biographical
sketches of candidates. The choice was of interest not only to Catholics; the
archbishop historically has wielded influence both as leader of the region's
largest Christian denomination and as one of the most powerful voices in the
American church.

For a variety of reasons, Bishop O'Connor had been considered a long shot by
many Catholics. He had been in Scranton, his first diocese, for only seven
months. His age, 64, seemed a bit too advanced to keep him in the running,
inasmuch as retirement age in the church is 75. Moreover, his tendency to savor
personal power in the exercise of a strict conservative theology appeared to
place him more in line with prelates of the past.

On reflection last week, however, church officials began to see the logic of the
appointment. For one thing, Bishop O'Connor knows New York. From 1979 until last
May, when he went to Scranton, he had lived in the city, serving as an auxiliary
bishop in charge of Catholic military chaplains under the late Terence Cardinal
Cooke. He also fit the bill as a polished speaker with a first-rate mind and
sharp wit which comes across well. One of his first acts as Bishop of Scranton,
which has 370,000 Catholics, was to hire a public relations consultant to pursue
television appearances.  A Staunch TheologianMore significant was the affinity
between Bishop O'Connor's theology and that of the Pope. In a 23-page letter to
his priests last summer, Bishop O'Connor set down his basic perception of the
church. His underlying premise was that the church is a hierarchical structure
in which truth and order flow from top to bottom. Doctrine has been fixed by the
great councils of the church, the bishops and the Pope. Accordingly, he wrote,
the church must teach these truths free from error without expanding upon them.
''In all of our communications,'' Bishop O'Connor wrote, ''of course we are
completely open to the widest variety of ideas and opinions and enthusiastic
about listening to others discussing issues of interest and concern. At the same
time, certain teachings of the church are quite clearly determined and while we
are anxious to discuss them to dispell misunderstandings, we raise unfulfillable
expectations if we pretend that such teachings can be changed through
discussion.'' In addition to Bishop O'Connor's theological staunchness, he has
other qualities that presumably appealed to the Pope. He earned a reputation as
a disciplinarian during his 27 years in the Navy chaplaincy, where he served in
Korea and Vietnam and rose to the rank of rear admiral as Navy chief of
chaplains. He also served on the committee of five bishops who wrote the recent
bishops' pastoral letter on nuclear arms, emerging as the member most hesitant
to renounce all use of nuclear arms.

Bishop O'Connor appeared to measure up by educational and administrative
standards as well. He has an academic background unusual for a bishop, including
master's degrees in ethics and clinical psychology and a Ph.D. in political
science. He has taught in high schools and colleges, written books and helped
design Navy training manuals.

Another factor often mentioned was his capacity for hard work. Bishop Joseph T.
O'Keefe, who has administered the archdiocese since Cardinal Cooke died on Oct.
6, described the bishop as ''almost a workaholic.'' An insomniac, he often works
late into the night. He is considered an excellent administrator, and also
seemed to meet the criterion of ecumenical experience, an important element in
the pluralistic city of New York.

In short, the choice of Bishop O'Connor struck many Catholics as fitting many of
the Pope's personal standards. Within the scope of the reforms brought about by
the Second Vatican Council (1962-65), the Bishop was clearly among those who
place a very conservative construction on the Council's preachment. While some
bishops have moved toward sharing leadership with clergy and laity, Bishop
O'Connor represents a style more in keeping with the powerful archbishops of the
past. His politics, moreover, are farther to the right than more liberal
bishops.

Some wondered whether the Pope had attempted to balance his choice of Joseph
Cardinal Bernardin of Chicago, the chairman of the war and peace committee,
whose politics are slightly left of center, with the assertive conservatism of
Bishop O'Connor. There was no clear indication, just as there could be no solid
forecast of how the new Archbishop would do. He will write his own record
following his installation in St. Patrick's Cathedral on March 19.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bishop John J. O'Connor

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

3 GOLD MEDALISTS' WORDS OF ADVICE

SECTION: Section 5; Page 2, Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 416 words


As members of the 1984 Olympic hockey team, you've already distinguished
yourselves as the best amateurs in the United States.

I know how you feel. I was in the same position four years ago in Lake Placid,
and will be with you in Yugoslavia for your opening game against Canada on
Tuesday.

You are about to experience the greatest athletic opportunity of your lives - to
represent your country. You're not playing for your college, or even a National
Hockey League club, where you'd be playing for a certain city. Your sweater
reads ''USA.''

What will never leave you when the Games are over is that feeling of camaraderie
that you have developed as teammates. I still don't know if what happened at
Lake Placid in 1980 and afterward has set in. When I look back, I think of that
team cohesiveness. We played 62 games leading up to the Olympics, practiced at
least two hours per day, and spent six months with one another. We became
friends.

Upon reaching the Games, our aspirations were high. We thought we had a shot at
the gold, but we didn't really know how good the competition would be. Our goal
was to make it to the medal round.

These are just games. They have nothing to do with America's political status,
even if many people may look at it that way.

In 1980, we were emotionally ready for our opponents. Every athlete grows up
preparing for big-game situations. After defeating the Soviet Union and then
winning the gold medal, however, I didn't have a clue as to what was going on. I
thought it was pretty funny, how all of a sudden we were celebrities. That was
the highlight of my athletic career. There are people in the world who have
accomplished far greater things and have gone unnoticed. Vietnam veterans, the
people who tried to free the hostages in Iran - those are real heroes.

I knew that nothing - not even playing for a Stanley Cup champion - could top
winning the gold medal. For that reason, I chose not to pursue a career in
hockey. I thought that it was time to prepare for the future.

Granted, the Olympics opened doors to us as victors: my job with Madison Square
Garden Network is proof of that. Yet I feel I've been doing a good job as an
announcer.

Enjoy the chance to play - it's a height to which millions aspire. Take it for
what it is: a chance to display your skills and compete against the best from
the rest of the world. Best wishes.

MIKE ERUZIONE

Mike Eruzione is a hockey analyst for Madison Square Garden Network.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mike Eruzione

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BARRING REPORTERS FROM THE BATTLEFIELD

SECTION: Section 6; Page 37, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2250 words


Drew Middleton, The Times's military correspondent, has covered most major
conflicts involving American troops since World War II.  By Drew Middleton

 ILITARY TEXTBOOKS OF THE future will probably cite the United States invasion
of Grenada as a swift and effective operation carried out with minimal
casualties and the accomplishment of major objectives. But the textbooks, being
military, will probably omit one unfortunate consequence of the operation - the
worsening of relations between the news media and the military resulting from
extraordinary restrictions placed on the former by the latter.

The significance of this deterioration lies as much in its carry-over effect as
in the immediate impact. The increasing number of global flash points, such as
Lebanon, the Persian Gulf, South Korea and Central America, seems to insure that
other American military operations will soon provide new testing grounds. How
both sides meet the challenges to come will have a profound effect on a
relationship of great importance not just to the parties involved but to the
American public as a whole.

The decision to deny access to press, radio and television reporters during the
early stages of last October's operation in Grenada ran against the course not
only of military precedent but of a history of considerable media freedom in
covering American military conflicts that dates back to the Civil War. Although
the armed forces had frequently raised objections and barriers, often for
reasons of security, there had, on the whole, been a balance, with the military
benefiting as much as the media. The exception was the Vietnam War, the final
years of which were the nadir of media-military relationships.

There is little doubt in the minds of experienced observers that post-Vietnam
military attitudes influenced the decision to shut the media out of the landing
in Grenada and of the earliest mop-up operations. The majors and commanders of
the Vietnam War who believed the media had worked against the American command
there had become influential generals and admirals determined not to expose the
Grenada operation to what they continue to view as a hostile adversary. That
attitude was reflected by President Reagan during a December press conference
when he said that in Vietnam the press was not on ''our side, militarily.''

The media track record has, in fact, been creditable. In Vietnam, as in earlier
wars, members of the press proved their ability to preserve the security of
military actions and landings. And they have routinely exposed themselves to
danger while covering conflicts involving American troops, including at present
the action in Lebanon.

Their interest in continuing to do so was expressed strongly in January when 10
major news organizations issued a joint statement calling on the Reagan
Administration to affirm the right of journalists to cover United States
military operations. Leaders of the news groups indicated they could agree on
limited restrictions, such as delayed filing and military censorship, so long as
reporters were not excluded from combat missions and thus denied the right of
independent reporting. The White House said it was trying to arrange a meeting
with the group's leaders, and the Defense Department announced that the Joint
Chiefs of Staff were creating a special panel to study the issue, with hearings
to begin sometime in February, in which the organizations issuing the statement
have said they would voluntarily participate.



 THE CIVIL WAR, THE GREATEST CONFLICT ever fought on this continent, marked the
emergence of the American war correspondent. The writers and artists who covered
the war between the states enjoyed extraordinary freedom. Many of them passed
easily from one side to the other. By modern standards, their accounts were less
than objective and, in many cases, unduly prepared to accept the military's
version of the situation. For instance, despite the example before them of the
disclosure of medical breakdown in the Crimea by The Times of London's
correspondent William Howard Russell, the horrors of military hospitals and
prisoner of war camps received scant attention at the time.

Even so, reporters earned the enmity of some top soldiers on the Union side.
Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman, who led the North's march through Georgia to the
sea, complained of correspondents ''picking up dropped expressions, inciting
jealousy and discontent and doing infinite mischief.''

Relations improved during the Indian Wars that occupied the Army for a third of
a century after the South's surrender at Appomattox, largely because there were
so few reporters on the spot. But correspondents did ride with Gen. George A.
Custer and Gen. George Crook, and they subscribed, in the main, to the
then-popular doctrine that the only good Indian was a dead Indian.

Relations deteriorated during the Spanish-American War. Maj. Gen. William R.
Shafter, commander of American troops in Cuba, had little use for reporters,
including the famous correspondent, Richard Harding Davis, who stridently
supported the Government's position in The New York Journal. It was left to
Lieut. Col. Theodore Roosevelt, who had his eyes on summits beyond San Juan
Hill, to cosset the press and leave the reading public with the impression that
''Teddy'' had won the war.

The American Army entering World War I found itself wrapped in the censorship
already established by Britain and France, the senior allies, who instituted it
for purposes of security. There is little doubt but that Gen. John J. Pershing,
the commander of the American Expeditionary Force, found the restrictions
congenial. Before the First World War I began, having persuaded the War
Department to keep the press away during his pacification of Mindoro Island in
the Philippines, Pershing had managed to fight a successful campaign without any
media scrutiny.

Reporters assigned to the A.E.F., like those assigned to the British and French
forces, had a certain freedom of movement but a thin diet of news. What they did
write was largely favorable to the Allies. But because of the censorship,
neither they nor their allied colleagues reported one of the major events: the
French Army mutiny in 1917.

By the time World War II came along, the British had learned a lot about the
uses, and usefulness, of censorship. To a people fighting for their lives, as
the British did following the defeat of the French and before the Americans
entered the fray, censorship was an acceptable if not particularly attractive
practice. With his feel for the


MILITARY JUMP








Page 69


This situation was exacerbated by the widespread belief among military personnel
that the news media, by emphasizing in print and pictures the enemy's foray into
the United States Embassy in Saigon, had obscured the true dimensions of their
victory in the Tet offensive in 1968.  That view was disavowed in a recent
Columbia Journalism Review article by Charles Mohr of The New York Times, one of
the most respected correspondents in Vietnam. He and other reporters, Mohr
wrote, did not ''give the embassy attack prolonged, obsessive coverage while
ignoring the subsequent course of battle.''

After Tet, reporters were often attacked by officers for giving false
impressions. Flying in a helicopter with a colonel of infantry, I, for instance,
was told that the valley below us had been completely pacified - we put down at
one village to prove the point - but that ''your damned newspaper and the damned
TV make it sound like a hotbed of Vietcong guerrillas.''

The armed forces emerged from the Vietnam War psychologically scarred. They were
embittered by their failure to defeat the Vietnamese because of what they
considered political manipulation in Washington and, above all, by the media's
treatment.

The inability of the military in the field to comprehend the intricacies of
television journalism was one reason enmity reached such proportions. The
military did not realize that prime time, no matter how important the material,
is short, and that the electronic media's news editors are likely to pick the
most sensational shots.

These photographs may be gory. War is gory. But to argue, as some officers still
do, that such selections were made to intentionally reduce popular support for
the war is nonsense. So is the contention that this support was lost in American
living rooms. The Vietnam War was lost, if indeed it was lost in the military
sense, on university campuses and in the Congress.

The search for truth begins with a skeptical attitude. Most reporters,
especially those who have dealt with governments, develop this attitude early in
their careers. It is seldom encountered in government public-relations people
whose jobs and careers depend on accepting and relaying what they are told by
those in higher echelons. Newly designated press officers receive instruction in
how the media works at special courses conducted at Fort Benjamin Harrison in
Indiana. Particular attention is paid to the media's problems of time and space,
and how best to utilize that knowledge in presenting the military's position in
the best possible light.


The military is not solely responsible for muzzling the press during the first
days of the Grenada operation. Blame must also be attached to the Reagan
Administration, which, though constitutionally in control of the military,
abdicated that control when media accessibility came up for discussion before
the operation began. It was James A. Baker 3d, then White House chief of staff,
who accepted on behalf of the President restrictions imposed by the military on
the media. He has since said he would do it again in a similar situation
involving what he has called a ''commando raid.''

Danger to correspondents was cited by Baker and others as a reason for the
exclusion. But reporters had gone on similar commando raids during World War II.
They were also present during fierce fighting at Alamein, Tunis, Salerno, Anzio,
Iwo Jima and Guadalcanal and a hundred other battlefields in Europe and the
Pacific. Danger is part of a war correspondent's job. Every reporter, every
editor knows that. But they also know that battles have to be covered, and that
the media, not the military, is the best vehicle for conveying what occurred.

What about military security? If the Administration feared that some
correspondents selected to accompany the invading forces would reveal the facts
in advance, there were ways to prevent that. A pool of correspondents could be
taken to a military compound where they would be informed of what was

Page 92 about to happen and assured that when the time came they would go in
with the first wave. There are precedents for such an action. Before the raid on
Dieppe during World War II, for example, reporters were spirited away to Bath in
England and kept incommunicado for four days before joining the units to which
they had been assigned. This procedure was employed again recently by the
British who, after keeping their press under wraps at sea, permitted reporters
to go ashore with landing teams sent to regain the Falklands from the
Argentines.

Another excuse put about by the American military for excluding the press in
Grenada was that some new techniques were to be employed in the invasion. If
they were, they were not evident to knowledgeable observers. Dropping Rangers
and airborne troops from 500 instead of 550 feet is not a new technique but
rather a tactical change enforced by the exigencies of combat.


A Navy source has suggested that the use of the service's Seals (sea, air and
land underwater demolition and landing teams) was an innovation. Again,
nonsense. Similar operations by Britain's Special Boat Squadron were employed
and reported on in detail during the Falklands operations.

The impression left by the American Government's reporting of the first two days
of the Grenada operation leaves the distinct feeling that the objective was not
to present the full facts of the matter but rather to make the most favorable
impression on the public at large.

What if the operation had gone wrong? Would the Government have told the public
that an ill-assorted group of Grenadians and Cubans was kicking the tripes out
of some of our finest troops?


The continuing dispute over the restrictions placed on the media in Grenada
reached a good deal further than that tiny Caribbean island. This is a period of
limited, local wars - Grenada, Lebanon, the Falklands - any of which by a
combination of circumstances can expand into a deadly serious conventional war
in which vastly greater forces could quickly become involved.

Can the American people, whose servants are both the military and any
Administration, be fed pap churned out by the powers that be? Everything in our
experience shows that even if they are they will soon discern the truth behind
the headlines.

The present tendency to muzzle the media is dangerous. Democracies only win wars
when they have popular support. That support can only come from an informed
public. If there is censorship, then let it be flexible enough to tell the bad
with the good. If correspondents are killed, so be it. A lot of good men will
die. These are dangerous times. Only an informed America will weather them.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of reporters in Virginia during Civil War page 36; photo of
reporter in Grenada page 37

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN FARMERS ARE PLOWED UNDER

BYLINE: By Julian Moynahan; Julian Moynahan teaches English at Rutgers, The
State University of New Jersey.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1242 words


LEAVING THE LAND

By Douglas Unger.  277 pp. New York: Harper & Row. $13.95.

AT its best, this fine first novel courts comparison with Willa Cather's classic
and epic account of homesteading on the Western prairies, ''O Pioneers!''
(1913). But there is a big difference, since ''O Pioneers!,'' for all its
moments of painful tragedy, is about beginnings, while ''Leaving the Land'' is,
sadly and disturbingly, about endings. It shows family farming giving way to
corporate farming and agribusiness. A lively community in western South Dakota,
Nowell, becomes a virtual ghost town. One wonders why that had to be and
whether, after all, it is good for the land, our nation and the world at large.

It was not because the men and women of this land were unequal to its challenge
and demands that it came to be left. In language as luminous and rhythmic as the
opening pages of ''The Rainbow'' by D. H. Lawrence, the eloquent Douglas Unger
makes that clear: ''The autumn earth was hardest. Summer had baked it hard. The
seasonal drought was at its peak and gray chips of earth peeled back like old
shingles. The ripe wheat had stood its last days, then was planed over by
harvesters with wooden arms beating the golden heads into their teeth. . . .
Brush was cleared from the ditches around the fields, torches set to the stubble
on windless days, and straight walls of flame made their own winds across the
fields. Smoke rolled and tumbled up. . . . Men ran along beside the fields with
cans of fuel to keep the fires going, calling out to each other, waving their
arms, watching out for maverick flames ripping off like orange flags into the
surrounding pastures.''

And here is a young girl lending a hand during the fury of autumn harrowing.
''Marge struggled over a ditch and across the black strip of burned grass . . .
feeling the earth hard as stones under the soles of her tennis shoes. She
stopped to catch her breath and set down a heavy can of tractor fuel. She spat
into the palms of her hands, using a finger to rub saliva over the red welts. .
.  She changed hands on the bare wire handle of the fuel can and started walking
again. She looked out at her father shuffling slowly toward her from his empty
tractor. . . . She was almost all the way to the tractor before she met up with
him. She set the fuel can at his feet. 'Not a bad day for a walk,' he said as he
took up the can.''

''Leaving the Land'' provides a clear diagram of how farming changed. Around
Nowell at the end of the 1930's, the owner-occupied farms raised a variety of
crops and animal products that were disposed of in a variety of local and
regional markets. When World War II came, it was thought best for the war effort
for these farmers to raise turkeys and give a single food wholesaler, called
Nowell-Safebuy, a market monopoly. After the war, Safebuy, which had grown fat
buying cheap from the turkey growers and selling dear on Government procurement
contracts and in their own rapidly extending chain of supermarkets, began to
acquire land and run their own farms with displaced family farmers as salaried
unit managers.

The banks went along, foreclosing rural mortgages and conducting forced sales of
farm property. Then Safebuy went out of turkeys and into wheat. With giant
cultivating machines and aerial seeding and crop spraying, ever fewer hands were
needed, and the old service establishments in town weren't needed at all. When
the company started letting most of its vast acreage lie fallow to qualify for
the Federal Wheat Subsidy program, the region and the town were finished. Most
of the houses in Nowell were abandoned, not sold, as people went where they
could, while those too old to run stayed on, living in the ruins on meager
pension checks and Medicare.

Marge Hogan, the main character, has spent the war years emerging from girlhood
and helping her father manage his flocks of maddeningly eccentric white turkeys
and substituting for two older brothers killed in action. She is an appealing
combination of warm heart and wrong head, of sensitivity to nature, naive
ambition and pride in her family's homesteading traditions. When she comes into
town in 1945, she is ready for almost anything except what she gets, a quick,
intense and virtually public affair with Jim Vogel, an attorney new to Nowell
who has the job of writing Safebuy's one-sided contracts with turkey suppliers
like her father. A hasty, unhappy marriage follows.

The second half of ''Leaving the Land'' is narrated by the Vogels' only
offspring, Kurt, a university-educated would-be writer of the Vietnam War
generation who returns to Nowell at Christmastime for a brief visit after an
eight-year absence. Kurt has his father's habit of drifting about, but Marge has
stayed put, living out the long slow years of her grass widowhood, raising her
son, burying her parents on the Hogan farm, which she refuses to sell out to
Safebuy, even though it is no longer in cultivation. Over the decades, she's
been Saturday night hostess in an Elks Lodge and has been involved off and on
with a prosperous Sioux sheep rancher and former rodeo star named Dan Gooch. Now
she is the sole waitress at Nowell's sole surviving eatery, the Cove Cafe. It
would seem that her life is running down in failure and isolation as the coyotes
invade the nearby darkened houses and uncollected litter is blown about the
streets on the icy Dakota blast.

Yet it doesn't feel that way, and she doesn't feel that way either. Marge has
stuck to her guns and refused to be dislodged. She has love and concern for her
neighbors, even though half are senile and most have one foot in the grave. She
has the Hogan homestead deed to hand over to Kurt as a Christmas gift, though
she surmises that he will never come back to the land. This is the other meaning
of the title phrase, that of inheritance.

Marge has character, which is probably not inheritable. It is a rare commodity
in modern novels. Character is the bottom line that beats the bottom line of the
Safebuy Corporation right into the ground.

A Writer's Roots That familiar maxim for the novelist - write about what you
know if you want your imaginative powers to work - is borne out by Douglas
Unger's first published novel. (Actually, it's his second novel; he's now
rewriting his first.) Mr. Unger knows all about Western farming, about the
perils of Government-encouraged agribusiness, about what it means to plow under
old family homesteads.  ''My wife and I and her sisters are now fighting to hang
on to a heritage farm in Washington State,'' he said. ''Her grandfather first
began to homestead it in 1886, but we've been hit with Federal and state tax
bills. We're trying to raise money by clear-cutting trees, but we've only got
till April 1 to come up with $40,000. The characters in my novel are faced with
a similiar situation.'' Mr. Unger has spent about half of his life on farms and
ranches in the West. He was born in 1952 in Moscow, Idaho, managed a sheep ranch
with a brother in South Dakota and makes his home on that Washington homestead.
A graduate of the University of Iowa Writers' Workshop, this year he is teaching
writing at Syracuse University.  Why didn't he tell the story in nonfiction? Mr.
Unger said, ''Fiction is the best place to express the emotional truth.'' -
Herbert Mitgang

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Douglas Unger

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3450 words


FICTION

A FINE AND PRIVATE PLACE. By John Simpson. (St. Martin's, $13.95.) When Alex
Serafin, a Polish defector ensconced at Cambridge University, learns that his
father is dying in a village south of Cracow, he refuses to return to his native
country, fearing arrest for a terrorist act he committed 15 years earlier. But a
reassuring mentor at Cambridge who has ties with British intelligence and a
former lover who works for the Paris branch of Poland's outlawed Solidarity
organization convince him to make the trip. They also convince him to smuggle in
radio parts for the Solidarity group that has become a target for Polish secret
police in the Cracow area. Serafin's mission becomes more dangerous when his
contact in Poland is shot and he assumes responsibility for warning Solidarity's
leaders of an impending raid. Through it all, the inexperienced hero of ''A Fine
and Private Place'' struggles to reconcile two conflicting personas - ''the
dissatisfied, flippant academic on the borderland of middle age, and the
enthusiast who had believed in passion as the most important human quality.''
John Simpson's second thriller contains obligatory elements - a double agent, a
mysterious informer, a race against time and a number of chase sequences, the
most spectacular involving a cable car, a helicopter and an avalanche. Along
with the action, Mr. Simpson, a foreign correspondent and editor for the BBC,
provides interesting bits of Polish history and glimpses of the beauty and
austerity of present-day Cracow. Most of the book is narrated by Serafin, whose
concise, erudite voice rarely lapses into melodrama. The book's theme - that the
real forces at work in contemporary Poland are overwhelmingly more powerful than
the efforts of well-meaning individuals - emerges convincingly in an ending that
is both somber and revelatory. - Thaddeus Rutkowski

* THE ASSASSINATION OF JESSE JAMES BY THE COWARD ROBERT FORD. By Ron Hansen.
(Knopf, $14.95.) Jesse James's life brings together so many popular themes it
seems almost fictional. He felt wronged by the Government and became a
guerrilla, outlaw and murderer. He was frequently thought to be a Robin Hood and
was probably a mystic. Finally, ensuring his place as a folk hero, he was
martyred by a coward. True to the generally accepted facts, Ron Hansen's Jesse
struggles to be both bandit and family man, which brings to mind Dylan Thomas's
remark - ''the conceit of outlaws is a wonderful thing; they think they can join
the ranks of regularly conducted society whenever they like.'' The book begins
with Jesse at the height of his notoriety. Waiting to hold up a train with his
brother, Frank, and their gang, he meets Robert Ford, the 19-year-old brother of
one of the gang members; Ford idolizes Jesse and turns into a sort of
doppelg"anger who eventually murders. As in his first novel, ''Desperadoes,''
Mr. Hansen's depiction reflects an attempt to invent a history at once fabulous
and legitimate. This time, however, he twirls his lariat and circles his subject
for some time without ever snaring it. In the long chapter in which Bob, Jesse
and the gang hide out in the Jameses' bourgeois household, Mr. Hansen finds his
true story, as assassin and victim are locked in a danse macabre that finally
destroys them both. That chapter and the novel's conclusion - which describes
Bob's re-enactment the murder on stage and his life as a saloonkeeper and
whoremaster trying to live down his reputaton as a coward - are the most vivid
and sustained in the novel. Mr. Hansen is a gifted writer who falters a bit in
this meditation on violence, celebrity and America but recovers near the end. -
David Freeman

* TRUE DETECTIVE.  By Max Allen Collins. (St. Martin's, $14.95.) Max Allan
Collins telegraphs the generic aspirations of his first novel, ''True
Detective,'' by his title and Dashiell Hammett epigraph - this is hard-boiled
enough to break a tooth on. The scene is Chicago in the wisecracking,
rumrunning, hard-shooting 1930's. Nate Heller, the city's one honest cop (his
daddy was a union man), is set up as part of a police attempt to bump off
Capone's heir, Frank Nitti. Since everyone knows Mayor Anton Cermak is in the
mob's pocket, it's incomprehensible; but it happens anyway, and in the shootout,
a child gets killed by Nate's automatic - the gun that had been his father's
until the old man killed himself. Nate feels guilty, so he turns his badge in
for a private detective's license. Next thing you know he's hired by Capone
(from the Atlanta Federal penitentiary) to protect Cermak from Nitti's revenge.
Mr. Collins has done his research well. He makes sense of Cermak's 1933
assassination by having it committed not by a crazed Italian anarchist who aimed
at President Roosevelt and hit Cermak by mistake but by a hit man working for
Nitti. There are enough other questions to keep the pages turning. Why did
Nate's father kill himself? Why is an old pol like Cermak trying to clean up
Chicago? The author throws in plenty of local color and dated slang, as well as
cameo appearances by a galaxy of stars like Eliot Ness, Walter Winchell, F.D.R.,
Richard Daley, George Raft and the young Dutch Reagan, an Iowa broadcaster. But
the main characters and their relationships are flat. Nate's girlfriend is
particularly inert, although neither he nor the author seems to notice she's too
dumb to cross the street and chew gum at the same time. All of which goes to
show it takes more than a good plot and period decor to play in Hammett's
league. - Meredith Tax

* BLUE DRAGON WHITE TIGER. By Tran Van Dinh. (Triam Press, Philadelphia,
$14.95.) At a time when much fiction and nonfiction is being published about
America's involvement in the Vietnam War, it is appropriate that a novel should
examine that war from a Vietnamese point of view. ''Blue Dragon White Tiger''
tells the story of Tran Van Minh, the son of an aristocratic family of Hue.
After many years of living and teaching in America, Tran leaves his American
girlfriend and returns to Vietnam in 1967. While teaching at Hue University, he
is recruited by the Vietcong. Because of his background, Tran is assigned to
analyzing the American press. Through his examination, he correctly predicts
that the United States will not retaliate effectively if Saigon is attacked. He
also becomes a member of the Vietcong delegation at the Paris peace talks. After
the war, he works in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon. He becomes
disillusioned by the way Communism is affecting Vietnamese culture, joins the
boat people and returns to America. Although the novel is not wholly successful,
it has an oddly compelling power. Its characterizations are not sparkling or
arresting, but it more than compensates by its descriptions and expositions of
Vietnamese culture and Buddhism. The author, a professor of international
politics at Temple University, presents evocative and moving scenes of family
and cafe life and lyrical descriptions of Hue and Vietnamese cuisine. He also
aptly uses extensive quotations from Vietnamese poetry and folk tales. If no
single character comes wholly alive, a people does, and this is an achievement.
The author has provided an illuminating insider's view of his native land; one
hopes other works are forthcoming. - Julius Lester

* RAINSONG. By Phyllis A. Whitney. (Doubleday, $14.95.) Hollis Sands, the
narrator of Phyllis A. Whitney's ''Rainsong,'' is the young widow of Ricky
Sands, a famous popular singer found dead of a seemingly intentional drug
overdose. Hollis, having written many of her husband's hit songs, becomes a
target for the press and Ricky's bereaved fans. This prompts her to accept a
mysterious offer from her father's old girlfriend to take refuge at a rambling
Long Island estate. There Hollis finds herself in a Gothic world of fleeting
shadows, taciturn servants and secrets suggesting a more sinister explanation of
Ricky's death. She tells her story in a flashback, describing her terror,
lingering grief, depression and subsequent triumph in a detached, guarded tone
that tries our sympathy and renders the dubious convolutions of plot and
character more improbable. Are we to accept, for instance, that a woman as
determined and spirited as Hollis seemingly believes herself to be would allow
her husband to exclude her so completely from his work that she would not
recognize a member of his band when he later turns up at the estate? Or that
Hollis, on the advice of Ricky's manager, would subject herself to a humiliating
confrontation with her husband's mistress to dissuade the desperate woman from
''going public''? Surely it is unrealistic of her to expect sympathy from her
rival, yet this implausible meeting is one of the story's linchpins. When a
character conveniently appears from nowhere to move the plot along, Hollis
explains, ''I didn't ask how he happened to be around at this particular time. I
didn't care.'' Evidently, Phyllis Whitney didn't either. - Carol Verderese

NONFICTION

THE WAY OF DUTY: A Woman and Her Family in Revolutionary America. By Joy Day
Buel and Richard Buel Jr. (W.W. Norton, $19.95.) Mary Fish (1736-1818) left no
mark on the world of affairs, nor was she, like Abigail Adams, married to a man
of prominence. Almost all of her 82 years were spent in Connecticut. There she
was born to one minister, married another, bore and raised children and was
widowed three times. Eighteenth-century women were not, of course, allowed to
move too far from the domestic sphere; but what Fish could legitimately do, she
did. Above all, she wrote, leaving a wealth of letters as well as a journal that
records her life in unusual detail. Joy Day Buel and Richard Buel Jr. used those
sources to reconstruct the story of Fish and her family. They did not break
firmly from the journal format, and ''The Way of Duty'' is organized
chronologically, as lives are necessarily lived. It juxtaposes Fish's life
against the great events of her time, which are seen from a familial
perspective. The religious changes that came with the Great Awakening tore apart
her father's church; the Revolution of 1776 brought fear, loneliness and a
heritage of debt; the Westward movement meant separation from beloved children.
The book's story is, however, not in those events so much as in Fish's struggle
with the deaths of those she loved and needed, with the problems of supporting
and educating fatherless children, with the agonies of children and
grandchildren gone wrong. Through it all, she emerges a person of strength and
authority. If heroism lies, as I suspect, in a capacity to survive and grow
through the crises of private life, then this book has a certain timeless
significance. - Pauline Maier

* THE MIND OF THE ACCUSED: A Psychiatrist in the Courtroom. By David Abrahamsen.
(Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) The debate over the concept of criminal insanity
reached a peak when John W. Hinckley Jr. was found not guilty by reason of
insanity. How could the behavior of a man who for months had systematically
stalked both Presidents Carter and Reagan be called impulsive and out of
control? Was there no relationship between criminal intent and a criminal act?
Did the public have no protection against antisocial individuals who murdered
and then claimed, as in the case of David Berkowitz, the famed ''Son of Sam''
killer, that ''the devil made me do it.'' In ''The Mind of the Accused,'' David
Abrahamsen, a pioneer in the field of forensic psychiatry, addresses these and
other questions concerning the criteria and methods used in defining criminal
responsibility. Drawing from his own research and courtroom testimony, he
profiles some of the most widely publicized murderers of our time - Nathan
Leopold of the infamous Leopold-Loeb child murder case; George Metesky, New
York's ''Mad Bomber''; Lee Harvey Oswald, Hinckley and Berkowitz. He attempts to
distinguish between willfully malicious criminal behavior and those character
disorders that have rendered individuals incapable of assuming responsibility
for their actions. If some of his conclusions seem rather pat, his re-creation
of these murderers' bizarre behavior and skewed thinking makes fascinating
reading. Although Dr. Abrahamsen's intention is to justify the existence of the
insanity plea in the light of the recent public outcry against it, his success
is limited by the modest scope of his book. But this is not intended as a
scholarly work, though it is lucid, well organized and, at times, insightful. -
Andrea Barnet

* BRIDGES TO INFINITY: The Human Side of Mathematics By Michael Guillen. (Jeremy
P. Tarcher, $12.95.) Even in our age of widespread scientific literacy,
mathematics continues to mystify. In this collection of 17 brief essays, Michael
Guillen patiently and unthreateningly presents such redoubtable concepts as
number theory, non-Euclidian geometry and abstract symmetry. Drawing on his
experience as a ''math for poets'' professor at Cornell, he employs clever
nonmathematical examples to help us grasp abstruse ideas. According to Mr.
Guillen, the clutching fear most of us feel when reckoning with a monthly bank
statement is a function of what we believe mathematics can and cannot do. He
dispels ''math anxiety'' by relating how Bertrand Russell and Kurt G"odel
discovered the logical fallacies inherent in Aristotelian logic and thereby
cracked the foundation upon which mathematics had rested for 2,000 years.
Because it operates independently of common sense, Mr. Guillen says, modern
mathematics is endowed with the ability to reach realms outside everyday
experience. And in the chapters on multiple infinities and fractional
dimensions, we catch a glimpse of the possibilities of the mathematical
imagination. At the conclusion of each essay, Mr. Guillen inevitably treks into
the foothills of philosophy and metaphysics. Here, venturing beyond his
expertise, he sometimes becomes facile, and his analogies are unconvincing. This
is especially evident when he attempts to draw equivalences between math and
human nature. In sum, however, the pluses of ''Bridges to Infinity'' outnumber
its minuses. And Mr. Guillen's presentation of math's mysteries is accessible
and entertaining. -M. S. Kaplan

* TRAVELING LIGHT By Bill Barich. (Viking, $15.95.) Although he travels all over
the world to gather material, Bill Barich, the author of ''Laughing in the
Hills,'' doesn't aspire to write about nations or grand tours. If one were to
judge solely from this collection of essays, many previously published in The
New Yorker, the three passions in his life are fishing, horse racing and beer
drinking. It is anybody's guess as to their relative order of importance. They
lead him from California to Long Island and through the environs of London and
Florence. This thin volume and the measured, informal style of Mr. Barich's
prose belie the amount of knowledge and humor packed into ''Traveling Light.''
We learn the history of the streams and racetracks that he frequents, and he
lets us in on the intricacies of casting, brewing ale and playing the horses.
His descriptions of his haunts are colorful and seductive, but the best moments
come in the snippets of dialogue that pop up in the brief portraits of his
fellow travelers. Mr. Barich is a silent witness to various displays of excess
(like that of the man who pays $1 million for a horse - as a tax shelter), and
his book is a record of his attempt to fight off despair and cynicism at the
rising prices and declining quality of simple pleasures. -Jonathan Elukin

* ARSENAL: Understanding Weapons in the Nuclear Age. By Kosta Tsipis. (Simon &
Schuster, $16.95.) As a member of a newly galvanized group of nuclear-arms
experts, Kosta Tsipis has recently been heard on Capitol Hill lobbying against
Reagan Administration plans to develop space weapons. In ''Arsenal,'' he takes
his case to the people, arguing that laser beam and other directed-energy
weapons, while attractive in theory, are not practicable. Among other
difficulties, he estimates that it would take more than 1,000 years to transport
fuel to sustain the number of satellites and laser pulses necessary to provide
global protection. But the intractability of space weapons is only one of many
problems he explores in this accessible, though sometimes solecistic, layman's
primer on America's present and planned nuclear arsenal. Writing from a
scientific, not a political, perspective and drawing on unclassified government
documents, Mr. Tsipis addresses vital questions: How, theoretically, does the
hardware work? What are its vulnerabilities? Will it work in practice? Does it
enhance American security? Mr. Tsipis' assessments are unsettling; he shows each
weapons system to be seriously flawed. Since 90 percent of all nuclear weapons
are deployed to destroy enemy weapons, one begins, for instance, to question the
point of maintaining land- based strategic ballistic missiles if, as Mr. Tsipis
calculates, the probability is slim of an ICBM actually hitting so specific a
target as a Soviet missile installation. That his conclusions are arguable
appears to be part of Mr. Tsipis's design. As he inauspiciously notes, it is his
hope that a basic understanding of nuclear weapons systems will encourage
informed debate while words are still a defense. - Sue M. Halpern

* ''SON'': A Psychopath and His Victims. By Jack Olsen.  (Atheneum, $17.95.) In
1978 someone in Spokane, Wash., went on a rape spree that ended three years and
40 victims later with the arrest of Fred Coe, the only son of a prominent local
family. He was charged with six of the rapes and convicted of four, receiving
sentences that added up to life imprisonment plus 25 years. His doting mother,
incensed at the ''scapegoating'' of her son, sought revenge and was soon
arrested for hiring a hit man to kill the judge and prosecutor in his case.
Convicted of solicitation of murder, she is now free on parole, after serving
eight months in the county jail of her choice. This lurid tale is the subject of
Jack Olsen's equally lurid book. Written like a crime novel in the you-
are-there style of journalism, it reconstructs in often gratuitous detail three
years in the life of Fred Coe. Mr. Olsen, the author of ''The Bridge at
Chappaquidick'' and ''Have You Seen My Son?,'' catalogues Mr. Coe's sexual and
hygienic habits and includes graphic accounts of several rapes, narrated in what
are supposed to be the victims' own voices. This is the stuff of which
television movies are made, and it only detracts from Mr. Olsen's much worthier
report on the more intriguing, less sensational aspects of the case. For years,
people close to Mr. Coe ignored or made excuses for his obviously psychotic
behavior, while police downplayed what became for them the embarrassing series
of rapes he committed, which they were unable to solve. Mr. Coe's sexual
psychosis is depressingly familiar; what is noteworthy about his case is the
incompetence of the police and the blindness of his friends and associates that
allowed him to get away with so much for so long.  - Wendy Kaminer


Entrepreneurs and Innocents Apart from eliminating some group and family
photographs, toning down some chauvinism and providing a sturdier binding, it
would be hard to improve on Allon Schoener's

AMERICAN JEWISH ALBUM: 1654 to the Present (Rizzoli, $45).  Its attractions are
mainly pictorial - a colonial-style tombstone with Hebrew lettering, a newspaper
advertisement for ''Sutro Brothers, Manufacturers and Importers of Soutache,
Hercules, Tubular, Square, and Fancy Braids . . . Rick-Rack, Feather- Edge,
Star-Braid, Gold-Braid,'' the sheet music for ''A Boychik Up-to-Date,'' the
young Norman Mailer trying to look like James Dean, the winners of the 1982
Yiddishe Grandma Beauty Contest. But the documentary text also offers pleasures
and surprises, like the unsuccessful appeal of a New Amsterdam minister that
given the colony's ''Papists, Mennonites . . . Puritans . . . Atheists and
various other servants of Baal,'' the West India Company at least ban ''the
obstinate and immovable Jews.'' Or like the reminiscences of Israel Elkin, who
peddled dry goods in the Indiana countryside - this movable Jew followed a
friend's suggestion that he seek accommodation by asking, ''Lady, can I sleep
with you?'' and politely ate all of the first pie he was ever offered. An
annotated bibliography completes a ''collage'' of great historical, esthetic and
psychological richness. -Martin Levine Blackfoot Indians pose with the brothers
Albert, Isaac, Nathan and Isidore Rose, 1911.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1304 words


February 5, 1984

Fiction1

214

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  2

123

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain.  (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  3

3

23

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  4

4

33

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco.  (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  5

5

7

BERLIN GAME, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $15.95.) Espionage on both sides of the
Iron Curtain.  6

10

2

THE STORY OF HENRI TOD, by William F.  Buckley Jr. (Doubleday, $14.95.) Superspy
Blackford Oakes carries out a mission in Berlin at the time The Wall goes up.  7


7

22

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  8

6

12

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfilling a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  9

8

12

MORETA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  10

13

10

THE NEVERENDING STORY, by Michael Ende.  (Doubleday, $15.95.) A lonely boy meets
challenges and finds his true self in a magical land.  11

9

20

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  12

12

27

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.  13

11

12

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov.  (Doubleday, $15.95.) A detective from
Earth investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  14

1

THE JOURNEYER, by Gary Jennings.  (Atheneum, $17.95.) Marco Polo's journey to
the Orient in the 13th century.  1514

14

THE SAGA OF BABY DIVINE, by Bette Midler.  (Crown, $11.95.) The entertainer
imagines what her infancy was like in a fable lushly illustrated by Todd Schorr.




 Nonfiction 1156

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  2220


MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  3323

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  4614

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.  5521

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  675

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random, $25.) Man's search to know
himself and the world over the centuries.  785

APPROACHING HOOFBEATS: HORSEMEN OF THE APOCALYPSE, by Billy Graham. (Word Books,
$11.95.) The evangelist's interpretation of the Book of Revelation.  8911

WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.

91413

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley. (Dodd, Mead, $15.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.  101016

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $22.50.) Profusely illustrated
history of the war: tie-in with the recent PBS television series.  11465

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $17.50.) Predictions about America in the
next decade based on an analysis of conditions today.

12117

THE KINGDOM BY THE SEA, by Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) A
novelist's journey around Great Britain.  13125

LATE NIGHT THOUGHTS ON LISTENING TO MAHLER'S NINTH SYMPHONY, by Lewis Thomas.
(Viking, $12.95.) Essays on a wide range of subjects by the physician-medical
administrator.  14133

CORONER, by Thomas T. Noguchi with Joseph DiMona. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.)
The controversial Los Angeles County medical examiner discusses the deaths of
Marilyn Monroe, John Belushi and other celebrities.  15 11

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (Putnam, $17.95.) The case of Jeffrey MacDonald,
Ivy League graduate, respected physician and convicted killer of his wife and
daughters.  Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 1334

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  242

THE PRITIKIN PROMISE: 28 Days to a Longer, Healthier Life, by Nathan Pritikin.
(Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A regimen by the operator of two ''longevity
centers.'' 3260

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money: a 1980 book.  4118

THE BODY PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Exercises
for women by a television personality.  5 4

WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY, SECOND COLLEGE EDITION.  (Simon & Schuster,
$14.95. Indexed, $15.95.) A standard reference work updated in 1982.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.  And Bear in Mind(Editors'
choices of other recent books of particular interest)

CHARLES DE GAULLE, by Don Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A highly

readable biography by a veteran American journalist with 38

years' experience on Europe's political beat.

THE COLLECTED PROSE, by Elizabeth Bishop. (Farrar, Straus &

Giroux, $17.50.) Memoirs and stories, previously uncollected, by

one of our greatest poets, who died in 1979.

FEMININITY, by Susan Brownmiller. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.)

An illuminating step toward awareness of a subject at once

instantly familiar and surprisingly unexplored.

THE GREAT DEPRESSION: America, 1929-1941, by Robert S.

McElvaine. (Times Books, $19.95.) How the American people

learned to grapple with their greatest economic crisis.

THE HEYDAY OF AMERICAN COMMUNISM: The Depression

Decade, by Harvey Klehr. (Basic Books, $26.50.) A tightly written

narrative of the Communist Party, U.S.A., in the 1930's.

THE HIGH WALLS OF JERUSALEM: A History of the Balfour

Declaration and the Birth of the British Mandate for Palestine, by

Ronald Sanders. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $24.95.) The dramatic

story of the gestation of the Zionist state.

AN INTERRUPTED LIFE: The Diaries of Etty Hillesum, 1941-43.

(Pantheon, $12.95.) Written in Holland by a young Jewish woman

who ultimately chose to accompany a group of Jews bound for

Auschwitz and death, these diaries provide a unique story of

spiritual growth.

THE TRUE ADVENTURES OF JOHN STEINBECK, WRITER, by

Jackson J. Benson. (Viking, $35.) This biography gives us the

totally American materials of Steinbeck's life and career.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPEAKING PERSONALLY;
A SENSE OF BLACK HISTORY

BYLINE: By REGGIE SIMS; Reggie sims lives in Livingston.

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 29, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 924 words


PERHAPS one of the darkest tragedies of black history for me was my ignorance of
it as a child.

I was the sheltered offspring of a colored (as we called ourselves then)
middle-class family, and the only visible black Americans making contributions
in society were on television. And there were only two of them, Louise Beavers
and Ethel Waters, both of whom portrayed maids.

Although born in Newark, I was reared in East Orange from the late 50's to the
mid-60's. I remember the times as less-complicated periods in my life because I
lived in a world of school trips, summer vacations, allowances and Saturday
matinees at the Hollywood, a movie theater.

The only habit-forming drug my parents were concerned about was penny candy.

The Vietnam War entered my life between 6 and 7 o'clock on the evening news. And
while there was a civil-rights movement, racial problems, I was led to believe,
existed only in the South.

As the child of a black middle-class family seeking upward mobility, I was born
not with a silver spoon in my mouth, but a silver-plated one. This is because I
lived in a mortgaged house in a class-conscious environment surrounded by loving
parents and status symbols.

Among all the figures of my youth, I remember Barbara Darden, one of my
teachers, the best.

From my youthful perspective, having a black teacher was a novelty, one that
eluded me until the fall of 1966, when I entered the eighth grade at Vernon L.
Davey Junior High School.

I remember Mr. King, the charismatic gym teacher. (Everyone at V.L.D. looked up
to him because not only was he more than 6 feet tall, but was also a titan in
character.)

And then there was Theodore Huff, my mathematics teacher. He not only taught the
''new math,'' but also stressed the importance of the ''old math'' and of using
good judgment and common sense.

But among all my black instructors, Mrs. Darden stands out.

Although it has been more than 15 years since my junior high school days, I can
still remember my love of eighth-grade American history. It was the last period
of the day and, for me, a special time of my life - a time when dreams were made
and magic invented.

Mrs. Darden brought something special into the classroom. She spoke in a
Southern cadence and made history not just a series of events strung together by
names and dates, but a study of what happened to real people.

From the Articles of Confederation to the formation of the Constitution to the
causes of the Civil War, I became absorbed in each lecture, hanging on every
sentence.

To ignore one word of a Darden lecture was like leaving the last drop of wine in
a glass. There were days when I felt she was instructing only me.

When I entered the eighth grade, the only thing I knew about black history was
the names Booker T. Washington, George Washington Carver and Hattie McDaniel.

Washington was an educator and a spokesman; Carver had worked miracles with the
peanut. These were names mentioned in passing in elementary school. By the sixth
grade, I had become bored with both.

(Hattie McDaniel, by the way, played Mammy in ''Gone With the Wind.'')

That was all I knew about black history because that was all that was taught.
And then came that certain week in February that opened my eyes.

February is Black History Month. When I was in junior high school, there was a
Negro History Week, a period that included the birthdays of Abraham Lincoln and
Frederick Douglass. Its purpose was to observe the contributions of
Afro-Americans.

It was just a week, but what a week! It was a period during which I learned that
Benjamin Banneker, a free, black mathematical genius, helped to plan and survey
Washington, D.C.

Mrs. Darden introduced the name of Crispus Attucks, another free black, who shed
his blood in the Boston Massacre. And it was not until she presented the facts
to my history class that I became aware that Blanche K. Bruce had represented
Mississippi in the United States Senate during Reconstruction.

But while informing us about the past, Mrs. Darden put an emphasis on the
present. It was during that same week that I learned that Ralph J. Bunche
preceded the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in winning the Nobel Peace Prize.
In the field of science, Dr. Hale Williams performed the first successful
open-heart operation.

Yet, sometimes in history there is irony.

Dr. Charles Drew, a brilliant surgeon, perfected a modern blood bank that saved
many American lives during World War II. Dr. Drew died as a result of an
automobile accident near Burlington, N.C.; he was turned away from the nearest
''white hospital'' and consequently bled to death before he could get help.

It was an exciting week, just as the mid-60's were exciting times. The Civil
Rights Law had been enacted, Edward Brooke had been elected to the United States
Senate and Robert Weaver was a member of President Lyndon B. Johnson's Cabinet.

But most importantly, I was becoming aware of black contributions to American
history.

It has been many years since my days at Vernon L. Davey Junior High. And, as I
think back, I realize that Mrs. Darden meant more to me than being just a
teacher; each day, she taught the value of accomplishment, scholarship and
self-esteem.

A sage once said, ''Youth must find its own voice,'' but until that time comes
it would be well if it could hear another inspired message. I am so glad that in
my youth the inspired message was from Mrs. Darden.

She was more than a teacher or acquaintance. She was a role model.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN VS. THE MILITARY

BYLINE: By John Kenneth Galbraith ;
John Kenneth Galbraith, professor of economics emeritus at Harvard University,
is author, most recently, of ''The Anatomy of Power.''

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1578 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


It is well accepted in politics and public life that, with a certain kind of
friend, one is not greatly in need of enemies. Everyone who observes the
relationship between the Administration of President Reagan and the military
establishment, in particular the armed services, should surely agree. The
Administration, and notably its spokesmen, are strongly in support of the
services, the Pentagon and the military budget in particular. This is taken for
granted by all. At a deeper level, I would urge that no administration since
1815, not even those of the Vietnam years, has been more comprehensively
damaging to the military's reputation. It is surprising that this has not been
more discussed.

There is, first, the matter of the budget. In the years following World War II,
with the Great Depression still strong in the national memory, military
expenditure was seen as a benign, even useful stimulus to private spending,
investment and employment and thus to economic performance in general.

These outlays emerged as a somewhat unsettling factor in the Vietnam

War - a cause of inflation and of the need for a tax increase. Now under the
Reagan Administration, there has been a further major step. Military spending
has become the principal and the most highly visible cause of the present and
prospective budget deficit. And, a more compelling matter, this spending has
been presented by the Administration as a basic reason for curtailed or reduced
spending on behalf of the poor. The second had to make way for the first. So it
will still be in the fiscal 1985 budget, which has gone to Congress.  Those
concerned with the public reputation of the armed services must surely wonder if
it is enhanced by placing it in direct, even cruel opposition to the needs of
families with dependent children, of the aged and impecunious poor, of the
minorities in central cities, of food-stamp recipients, of the others who have
been affected or threatened by the Reagan budget cuts.  Next has been the effect
of more bad wars on military prestige and reputation. The armed services came
out of World War II with their prestige at the highest possible level. From
Vietnam, as few will doubt, they emerged with a deeply diminished position. The
difference was that World War II was perceived as a necessary war; the military
was supported by an all but unanimous sense of national purpose. In Vietnam, our
commitment was to a distant and different culture; we supported a corrupt and
unpopular Government and an army of accomplished malingerers. Our crusade was
against Communism in a village community where the difference between capitalism
and Communism has little relevance. In consequence, there was no strong sense of
national purpose. And those who most visibly questioned the purpose took it out
on the services. When the protesters came to Washington, they went to the
Pentagon. And on the campuses, to the R.O.T.C. Or they burned draft cards, the
immediate symbol of military commitment.

Now in Nicaragua and Honduras and in Lebanon the Reagan Administration is again
engaged in operations superbly designed to repeat the error and deepen the
damage to the reputation of the armed forces.  Dissidence and revolt in Central
America are rooted in appalling inequities in the distribution of land, wealth,
ethnic privilege and political power and a resulting sense of injustice that has
far more to justify it than that which produced our own revolt 200 years ago.
Soviet and Cuban sponsorship are of course compulsively cited; one never hears
of this in countries where there is a sense of equitable participation in
economic life and fair and decent government. (It is evident, indeed, that the
principal purpose of reference to the Soviet Union is to silence those who live
in grave fear of ever seeming sympathetic to Communism.) The military forces we
support and guide in El Salvador have, it is abundantly clear, a taste for
battle that is even more exiguous than was that of the South Vietnamese. Unable
or unwilling to recognize real causes, the Administration falls back on our own
forces - the wrong cure for the wrong problem. This, and the associated lack of
public support, have been more than adequately recognized by military leaders
and especially by Gen. Edward C. Meyer, the recently retired Army Chief of
Staff. Noting that the problems of the area are rooted in deep-seated economic
and social causes to which a military remedy is irrelevant, he added, ''Soldiers
should not go off to war without having the nation behind them.''

The problem is not different in Lebanon where, in default of other available
action, a handful of Marines are expected to subdue religious and communal
conflicts that began when the First Crusade, called by Urban II, reached Antioch
in October 1097, and that have continued with the aid of increasingly lethal
instruments of destruction ever since. No one will now doubt that the reputation
of the Marine Corps and its commanders has suffered there from a military
commitment to a wrong war.

Next there has been the impairment, even collapse of civilian control in and
over the Pentagon. In his best-known public statement, President Dwight D.
Eisenhower broadened the concept of military power from the armed services to
include the supplying corporations - the military-industrial complex. It is this
that requires effective civilian control.

The Reagan Administration has abandoned any effort at such control by according
major authority in the Defense Department and over the armed services to
executives from the weapons firms or recruits from their Washington
representatives or lobbyists, now politely called consultants. This is not
civilian control but rather incestuous administration of the military-industrial
complex by the military-industrial complex for the military-industrial complex.
And it is the services again that suffer; no one can accord them their much-
valued reputation for disinterested patriotism and public service if they are
seen as the agency of and the conduit for revenues to the great weapons firms -
firms that from this largesse have recently been reporting records gains in
profits and an unprecedented concern as to what to do with their large
accumulations of cash.

Finally - and most important of all for the attitudes toward the services and
the Administration policy and rhetoric concerning them - there is the nature and
effect of modern weaponry. Anciently, the soldier with his weapons has been seen
as a source of the citizen's security - of protection against invasion, rapine
and pillage from beyond the borders. No longer. All reference to modern weaponry
has a connotation of destruction not only for the enemy but for the citizen and,
increasingly, for all life on the planet. Modern weaponry has made the military
seem not a protector of life but the custodian of horror and death. And
increasingly it is seen as horror without even a military purpose. Speaking a
few weeks ago in Los Angeles, former Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara
concluded by saying that we face an unacceptable risk of nuclear war until we
recognize that ''nuclear weapons serve no military purpose whatsoever.''

None of this truly awesome development seems to have affected the thought and
expression of the Administration. Instead, there has been the unrelenting
commitment to new weapons and weapons systems and to the deployment of those now
becoming available. All of this has had a well-advertised priority over the
pursuit of effective arms control. This has stimulated an unprecedented wave of
concern over the effects of nuclear weapons and war - the weapons and war with
which the military is so intimately associated.

To the policy has been added the rhetoric. From high civilian officials in these
last years we have had a flow of statements on the possibility and acceptability
of limited nuclear war, on the possibility of protracted nuclear war and on
prevailing in a nuclear war, and the emergence of civilian defense proposals and
plans that bear closely and vividly on the insane.

It would be hard to imagine anything better calculated to associate the military
establishment with the nuclear horror. It is hardly surprising that a very
considerable number of high officers - Admirals Gene R. La Rocque, John Marshall
Lee, Noel Gayler and not least Hyman G. Rickover - have emerged from their years
of service to express themselves strongly on the need for effective arms
control. Nothing, they clearly feel, is more important for the reputation of the
profession in which they have made their careers.

The lines of remedial action are obvious: a military budget that respects
civilian needs; a total curb on unneeded or irrelevant military operations
abroad; control of the Pentagon by civilians who actually control, who are
wholly divorced from corporate interest; strong affirmation of the principle of
no first use; acceptance of the bilateral freeze as a first step toward arms
control; arms control viewed as something to be achieved and not as a political
gesture. Only then will the military services again be seen as the instruments
of a nation's protection, not of its - and the world's - destruction. It is to
such ends that in the years ahead and especially in the election campaigning of
the coming months all who wish to present themselves as friends of the military
establishment should commit themselves.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUA ELECTIONS LIKELY IN '85 DESPITE NEW SNAG, DIPLOMATS SAY

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1801 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Feb. 5


Western diplomats here say that Nicaragua's Marxist leadership is still on a
path leading to multiparty elections in 1985 despite the Government's
announcement Saturday that it had postponed indefinitely an important step
toward elections.

But the diplomats say that at the same time Nicaragua hopes to force the United
States to accept its legitimacy without giving up significant power to
democratic opposition groups.

The officials - both American and Latin American diplomats and some experienced
Nicaraguan political authorities - assert that a combination of economic,
military and political pressures are pushing the country's nine- man Sandinista
military directorate to hold elections for the presidency and a constituent
assembly next year.

In announcing Saturday that it was postponing the promulgation of electoral
laws, the Nicaraguan Government cited rebel air attacks Thursday and Friday that
it said had been ordered by the United States. But in Brazil today, Secretary of
State George P. Shultz offered a different opinion, saying the postponement was
''a transparent device to back away from elections.'' (Page A8.)

One United States diplomat here said, ''The rational thing for them is to make
their offer, to loosen up a bit, to have the elections which they expect to win
on the assumption that they are strong and the opposition parties are terribly
weak and divided, and thus to disarm the United States publicly.''

''If they can convince people their concessions are adequate,'' the diplomat
added, ''that would put the Reagan Administration in the position of either
acquiescing in their power or having to invade a country to get rid of an
elected government.''

In this view, the four-year-old Sandinista regime is politically strong, secure
and confident; it feels significantly harassed but not seriously endangered by
attacks from American- backed Nicaraguan rebel forces, and it is deliberately
using the promise of elections to try to achieve greater political acceptance in
Latin America and Western Europe, to gain badly needed financial aid for its
stagnant economy and to disarm the Reagan strategy.



Some Concessions Promised

In the last few days, Sandinista leaders such as Interior Minister Tomas Borge
and Sergio Ramirez, a member of Nicaragua's three-man executive, have said the
Government plans to modify the state's 1982 emergency law and thus ease press
censorship and to allow opposition political parties to hold outdoor rallies.

According to these officials, it will also offer the opposition equal time on
the two Government-owned television stations, restore some of 22 radio news
programs banned two years ago and even provide up to $4 million in election
subsidies for all political parties.

Even if carried out, these concessions fall well short of opposition demands for
an end now to all censorship, clear separation of the Sandinista Front from the
national army, national police and other state functions, total lifting of the
1982 emergency law and full restoration of human rights, negotiated election
rules and a political campaign long enough to give opposition parties a genuine
chance.

Skeptical About Elections

The Democratic Coordinating Alliance, which bands together four opposition
parties, two independent trade unions, the Superior Council of Private
Enterprise and six professional and commercial associations, presented its
written demands to the Government on Dec. 28. They were published by La Prensa,
the opposition newspaper.

Some opposition leaders, such as Enrique Bolanos, who heads the Superior Council
of Private Enterprise, are skeptical that fair and open elections will be held
next year. Others contend the regime will seize on any pretext, such as the air
attacks last Thursday and Friday by Nicaraguan rebel planes against two
Nicaraguan radio installations, to slow the electoral process, to justify
continuing restrictions and to delay consideration of a draft electoral law that
had been scheduled by the State Council on Tuesday.

But American and Latin American diplomats say they believe that, barring
outright war with Honduras, the Sandinista leadership is too far along with its
election strategy to turn back now and that it is prepared to offer enough
flexibility to satisfy many Latin American and European countries.

''This is a very cool game they are playing,'' said a veteran conservative party
politician privately. ''It is a chess game with your American leaders and with
our people, with the opposition.

''The Sandinistas are playing for time. What they are after is greater
legitimacy. You should understand they are very serious and very clever, and
they work very hard, many hours a day.''

Solid Front Expected

Some Nicaraguans as well as foreign diplomats assert that in four years of rule,
the Sandinista Front has developed too much political muscle and too much
control over many walks of Nicaraguan life to be seriously challenged, even in
an open election.

Its most serious political problem, they say, will be selecting its own
presidential candidate. Privately, Nicaraguans close to the military directorate
say that both Mr. Borge and Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the directorate's low-key
coordinator, or leader, want to be the presidential candidate. So far, the
nine-man directorate has carefully avoided any signs of public division, and
some here believe the presidential choice could test that unity. But most expect
the directorate to maintain its solid front and avoid picking a strong man.

With broader concerns, some critics, such as Antonio Lacayo, chairman of the
Chamber of Industry, contend that the Sandinista leaders are convinced
Marxist-Leninists and ''expecting free elections from them is like saying you're
going skiing without snow.''

But others, like Pablo Antonio Cuadra, chief editor of La Prensa, see the
Sandinista leaders torn between ideological purity and pragmatic recognition
that their survival requires some political flexibility and relaxation of tight
controls.

''I think two ideas exist within the Sandinista leadership,'' said the 71-
year-old editor, who daily battles Government censors. ''Some of them want the
Nicaraguan revolution to become a democratic socialist revolution, something we
accept. Others want to use that notion as a disguise to radicalize the
revolution.''

'Concrete Actions' Demanded

''What is important for us is the concrete actions they take, not what they
think or say,'' he went on. ''So far, they haven't put forward anything
concrete, just words. What we want is no theater. When revolution becomes a myth
which offers a paradise on earth, we become supcious that what is coming is a
totalitarian state.''

Since the first Government promises of concessions last October, the Sandinista
leadership has been engaged in a tug of war with its opposition, the Democratic
Coordinating Alliance, La Prensa and the Roman Catholic Church hierarchy over
potential changes in the Nicaraguan political system, which the Sandinistas have
monopolized since they took power in 1979.

''They gave us an 'apertura,' a little opening, and we are fighting to widen
that hole,'' asserted Mr. Bolanos, a short, trim, middle-aged cotton farmer who
was jailed in 1981 for previously urging economic reforms.

''In Cuba, we think the opposition made a mistake by leaving. We are staying
here to struggle. We're telling the world: stop and think. Don't be fooled.
Please keep the pressure on and let us inside Nicaragua make our demands for
democratization of Nicaragua, hoping no blood will be shed.''

For the record, Mr. Borge, greeting a reporter in Sandinista fatigues with a
large star on his epaulets marking his guerrilla rank of comandante, asserted
that ''theoretically'' the Sandinistas are prepared to risk electoral defeat and
that the Sandinista national army and the Sandinista national police will bow to
the outcome if another candidate wins the presidency.

But the tight conditions envisioned by the Sandinistas and their forecasts of
overwhelming electoral victory suggest they intend to dole out doses of
pluralism rather than accept transformation of their one-party domination of
Nicaragua.

''If we have a mixed economy, we must have a political system that corresponds
to that,'' said Carlos Fernandez Chamorro, editor of the Sandinista newspaper
Barricada. ''We want to institutionalize dissent and opposition.''

No Sandinista leader has said publicly that liberties granted for the election
campaign will be guaranteed permanently, leading to suspicions within the
opposition and among foreign diplomats that they will be withdrawn after the
elections.

The Nicaraguan Government contends that it cannot grant political freedom now
because of the threat from attacks by Nicaraguan rebel groups.

Sandinista Losses Cited

In an interview, Mr. Borge said that Sandinista forces had suffered ''more than
1,000 dead, and for a country the size of the United States, that would mean
80,000 dead, more than you had in Vietnam.'' Guerrilla attacks, he added, have
caused roughly $35 million in damage to the economy.

The main disruptions, other Government officials said, have been interference
with the harvesting of the coffee crop in the north-central regions and the
destruction of oil storage tanks last summer at Corinto on the Pacific and near
Puerto Cabezas on the Atlantic.

In an economy that had estimated exports of $400 million in 1983 against imports
of $850 million and that must import all of its petroleum, the energy situation
is particularly troublesome. Last year, Mexico provided an estimated $175
million worth of petroleum without requiring payment to help Nicaragua bridge
its trade gap. Other Western countries provided roughly $70 million in aid and
credits.

But Nicaragua is becoming increasingly dependent on aid from the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe to meet foreign exchange needs. Western diplomats estimate
that aid from these sources has risen from roughly $45 million in 1980 to
between $200 million and $250 million last year.

Last month, with Mexico no longer able to deliver oil without any payment,
Nicaragua turned to the Soviet Union. Two Soviet tankers brought in 242,000
barrels of crude oil and 25,000 barrels of jet and aviation fuel and a third
Soviet tanker is due to arrive any day, American officials reported.

Many Nicarguans believe these economic needs exert greater pressure on the
Sandinista leaders to open up their system than the Nicaraguan rebel campaigns.
But others contend that fear of American military intervention, which rises at
times of cross-border tensions with Honduras, is the regime's greatest fear and
biggest incentive to make political changes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A AND B DISCUSS THE SOVIET UNION

BYLINE: By Marshall D. Shulman ;
Marshall D. Shulman is professor of international relations and director of the
W. Averell Harriman Institute for Advanced Study of the Soviet Union, at
Columbia University. In the Carter Administration, he served as special adviser
on the Soviet Union to Secretaries of State Cyrus R. Vance and Edmund S. Muskie.
This article is adapted from a lecture delivered at Columbia last week.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1242 words


Reasonable people often come to fundamentally different views about the Soviet
Union. Take, for example, two persons whom I shall call A and B.

A tends to take a dark view of the Soviet Union and the threat it represents,
and this leads him to conclude that the United States' relationship with the
Soviet Union is one of stark confrontation - not by our choice but because of
the intractability of Soviet ambitions. While B has no sympathy for the Soviet
Union, he sees it as more pragmatic and cautious in its behavior, and he fears
that confrontation is dangerous and counterproductive. A is not hawk. B is not a
dove. They do not represent the extremes of right or left; rather, they are
loosely grouped around the middle of the spectrum of American politics. They are
equally aware of the dangers of nuclear war and equally concerned about avoiding
it. They have the following dialogue.

A. ''The trouble with you is that you think the Russians are like us. But how
can you explain the Soviet Union's enormous military buildup except as a
reflection of its intention to use force to dominate the world - or at least to
achieve the same effect by intimidation? They have achieved superiority over us
by building up when we allowed ourselves to become weak. Their ideology teaches
hostility and conquest, and even before the revolution they expanded their power
and control unceasingly.'' B. ''I do not deny that they have built up militarily
beyond reason, but it is wrong to say that they have achieved superiority over
us. Neither they nor we can have a usable superiority over the other. And it is
not true to say that we allowed ourselves to become weak; we were improving our
forces at the same time, and the Soviets saw parity as a moving target. I agree
that they did more than they needed to, but so did we. For all practical
purposes, we have a condition of mutual deterrence; it is excessive, but it is
not a fragile balance. I would agree that we need to look to our conventional
forces, which need to be strengthened in Europe and elsewhere, but we have no
reason to fear the strategic nuclear balance - unless we make the deterrent
balance less stable. As for ideology, whatever the apocalyptic claims of
Marxism- Leninism, in practice the Kremlin been pragmatic and cautious.''

A. ''How can you call the Soviet Union cautious in the face of its aggressive
conduct in recent years? Are you overlooking Angola, Ethiopia, Yemen, Vietnam,
Afghanistan? Look at what the Soviets are doing in Poland, and how they maintain
their illegitimate dominion over all of Eastern Europe. They have a base in this
hemisphere, in Cuba, and are trying to get a foothold in Central America.
Wherever there are trouble spots, it is because they are still trying to spread
their revolution.'' B. ''What you have said adds up to a persistent effort by
the Soviet Union to expand its influence wherever opportunities present
themselves. But those opportunities are not created by the Russians: They seek
to exploit upheavals caused by local conditions to which we have not responded
effectively, and they are quick to take advantage of our shortsightedness and
ignorance. We think every radical movement is created by the Soviet Union, but
it is we who drive these revolutionary movements into the Soviet Union's arms.

''Afghanistan is another matter. What the Soviets did was wrong and should be
condemned, but it should be understood as a political and military
miscalculation that grew out of their paranoiac fears about the security of
their borders.

''As for Poland and Eastern Europe, Soviet hegemony over this area goes beyond
any reasonable justification, but it cannot be rectified by force or pressure.
Only long-term measures can restore autonomy to these unfortunate countries, and
the Soviet Union's troubles in Eastern Europe may lead it in time to appreciate
that it does not need hegemony over Eastern Europe in order to insure the
security of its western borders.''

A. ''Can you deny that the Soviet system is a totalitarian abomination? How can
we deal with a country that was built with gulag labor, that is run by the
K.G.B., that throttles any opposition and refuses to allow emigration? Don't we
have to change the system to be able to have peaceful relations with the Soviet
Union?''

B. ''I would agree that the Soviet system is heavily autocratic - as Russia has
been for centuries. I would join you in condemning its repression of dissent and
the right of emigration. But it does not lie within our power to transform the
Soviet Union into a liberal democracy. It may or may not change in the future -
I think it has changed in some degree since the time of Stalin - but, in the
meantime, we have the problem of living with it as it is.''

A. ''I don't think it can change much without falling apart. It is a brittle
system, and it is close to a state of collapse. Only its overwhelming military
power holds it together.''

B. ''We cannot predicate our policies on the expectation that the Soviet Union
will collapse. It is a large country, with great natural reserves and a large
population that has been accustomed for centuries to living under difficult
conditions. There is no sign of revolutionary dissatisfaction. We have to start
from the assumption that the Soviet Union is here to stay.''

A. ''I don't see why in past discussions you've kept harping on the need for
arms control arrangements. We've had arms control negotiations for 20 years, and
it hasn't even slowed down the Soviet military buildup. The only effect has been
to lull our own side into a spirit of demobilization. The only way to deal with
them is to be stronger than they are - that's the way to keep the peace.''

B. ''Arms control hasn't really been tried. The only agreements we've been able
to reach have been limited, and at such high numerical levels, because we
haven't been willing to let them cut into our planned programs. We may go
through the motions of arms control negotiations to pacify our publics, but
those negotiations won't succeed until we really understand that our security
will be better protected by a stable and moderate- level balance in the nuclear
competition. The alternative is an unregulated nuclear military competition,
with weapons that are less stable and less verifiable and that will make us
less, not more, secure.

''As for trying to regain our superiority, the only effect of that will be to
lead the Russians to keep pace with us. They can and they will, no matter what
it costs them.''

A. ''What do you want - another detente? That was a failure and a deception. Did
it stop the Russians from their military buildup or their aggressions in Africa?
Did you think that because we had a joint walk in space they were going to be
nice to us?''

B. ''No, not another detente like the one we had in 1972. It didn't last because
each side had a different notion of what it meant. The Soviets thought they
could continue to exploit opportunities in the third world without disturbing
our relations, and they were wrong. We didn't ratify SALT II, we granted
most-favored-nation status to the Chinese but withheld it from the Russians, and
so on. If we ever have the opportunity to try it again, it will have to be on
the basis of a more realistic common understanding of the mutual restraints we
expect from each other.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REPUBLICAN CHARGES SHIP MISSILE SYSTEM FAILS

BYLINE: By CHARLES H. MOHR

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 612 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


A Republican Congressman said today that the Navy's tests of a cruiser designed
to protect the fleet from missiles raised doubts that the ship could do that
job.

Representative Denny Smith of Oregon said he had seen the results of operational
tests of the Ticonderoga, the first cruiser to carry an antimissile system
called Aegis, and that he believed a statement by Secretary of the Navy John F.
Lehman that the ship had met or exceeded requirements ''is not true.''

Mr. Smith, a former Air Force fighter pilot who fought in the Vietnam War, said
that the Navy should conduct stringent new tests on the antimissile system,
called Aegis, before spending more than $80 billion to acquire a fleet of
crusiers and destroyers equipped with it.

He Writes Committees


Representative Smith sent a letter to members of five Congressional committees
Friday and also discussed his view of tests conducted in April and September in
an interview today. His letter said that after seeing the test results, which
are classified secret, he believed there was ''a serious mismatch'' between what
the Navy said in public about the performance of the Ticonderoga, and the
''Navy's own test results.''

The Ticonderoga is on duty near the Lebanese coast. A Congressional staff member
said the cruiser was one of many ships that had been supplied with
shoulder-fired Army Stinger antiaircraft missiles in case of terrorist attack,
although the cruiser can counter with high-speed speed missiles or aircraft.

A Navy spokesman said the Navy would not discuss which ships had been given
Stinger missiles.

The armed forces conduct both ''developmental'' and ''operational'' tests of
weapons. Operational tests are meant to be more realistic and to test the worth
of weapons under simulated combat conditions. It is these tests that
Representative Smith said had proved a disappointment.

Data Said to Show Failures


He would not discuss results, but another person who has seen the data said that
in the April tests only 4 missiles of 15 fired by the Ticonderoga hit the target
and in September only two of six did.

This report said that six low-flying missiles aimed at the Ticonderoga were not
knocked down. A seventh, fired on a crossing course, was struck. ''And these
targets were not as low- flying or as fast as the kind the Argentines used
against the British in the Falklands war,'' the informant said.

A Navy public information officer said the Navy would have no comment today on
Mr. Smith's statement or the reported data. However, last fall after The Wall
Street Journal reported that 11 of 15 firings in April had been failures, the
Navy did not issue a denial. It said, instead, that a ''single test series
seldom, if ever, measures the true performance capability of a major weapon
system.''

Mr. Smith said in the interview that he believed it was ''ludicrous'' to
continue buying the Aegis system until much more operational testing. He said
that the Navy planned to buy 24 Aegis cruisers at a cost of $28 billion and to
spend $50 billion on a class of destroyers to be equipped with Aegis radar and
missiles.

In his letter to fellow members of Congress, Representative Smith said: ''The
operational tests performed to date clearly indicate that the Aegis system,
advertised as the 'shield' of the fleet, has fallen far short of its expected
capabilities in countering antiship missile threats. In particular, the tests
reveal a serious lack of successful testing against saturation attacks and sea-
skimming targets similar to the Exocet missile used successfully by the
Argentines during the Falkland Islands war.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE FOREIGN POLICY TIGHTROPE

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


Lawrence S. Eagleburger was talking tough to the House Foreign Affairs
Committee. If Congress passes a resolution calling for the ''prompt and orderly
withdrawal'' of marines from Lebanon, he said last week, the lawmakers would
embolden America's enemies, disrupt its diplomats and endanger its soldiers.

In short, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs was delivering a
blunt message to Congress: Don't meddle in foreign policy.

Representative Gerry E. Studds, a Massachusetts Democrat, replied sharply,
saying: ''We also have a constitutional responsibility as members of Congress.
And we would renege on that responsibility if we followed your advice and simply
kept quiet.''

The current increasingly acrimonious debate on Capitol Hill over the Reagan
Administration's policy in Lebanon has revived a critical set of questions. What
is the proper role of Congress in the making of foreign policy? Should politics
''stop at the water's edge''? How, exactly, does Congress make its voice felt?

The answers are neither clear nor easy, particularly in a Presidential election
year. After Mr. Eagleburger's testimony, the foreign affairs panel postponed
action on the resolution as it sought the proper balance between the concerns of
the diplomat and the lawmaker.

Fears of Acting Too Quickly


The difficulty of finding this balance was demonstrated again today when the
committee's Democrats further postponed action on the resolution. They expressed
fears that if they moved too quickly, the President would have an excuse to
blame them for the situation in Beirut.

The balance the legislators are seeking was best expressed by Representative Lee
H. Hamilton of Indiana, ranking Democrat on the Foreign Affairs Committee.

''I think the President is the chief foreign policy maker,'' said Mr. Hamilton,
who drafted the original measure. ''Congress reacts to the President's policies.
On only rare occasions does Congress initiate policy. We modify, we amend, we
operate more on the margins. But I think we have an obligation, when we think
the President is on the wrong course, to tell him where his policy has failed,
and how to correct it.''

The questions now troubling the capital have been asked for generations, and are
rooted in the deliberate ambiguity of the Constitution. The President is
designated as the Commander in Chief, and given the power to ''receive
ambassadors.'' But it is Congress that has the right to declare war, and raise
revenues to support the armed forces.

This legal division is mirrored by a historic division. Many older members of
Congress were shaped by World War II and its aftermath, and the tradition of a
bipartisan approach to foreign policy. Many younger lawmakers grew to political
maturity in the Vietnam War era, when Congress felt compelled to contradict the
foreign policy of the President.

A third consideration is practical. Some legislators argue that Congress can
never say anything clear on foreign policy and should not try. As Representative
Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican whip, argued: ''Every time Congress
says, 'This is what to do on foreign policy,' we mess it up. We're too sensitive
to the political situation. You've got to have a longer haul plan.''

The Will of the People


But others retort that no President can run a foreign policy by ignoring public
opinion. As Representative Dante B. Fascell, Democrat of Florida who is chairman
of the Foreign Affairs Committee, told Mr. Eagleburger, ''No foreign policy can
be sustained if it is not fully understood and supported by the American
people.''

A related question is whether foreign policy should intrude into a political
campaign, and today, the Republicans say no. They blame the Democrats for
crippling the tradition of bipartisanship, and agree with Representative William
S. Broomfield of Michigan, ranking Republican on the Foreign Affairs Committee,
when he says, ''It's very difficult for anybody in the White House to coordinate
foreign policy in this atmosphere.''

The Democrats reply that no President makes a more important decision than the
commitment of troops to combat, and that the capacity of a candidate to make
that decison should be a major issue in the election. In addition, Democrats
remember that Mr. Reagan effectively attacked President Carter's foreign policy
in the 1980 campaign.

The current debate over Lebanon illustrates how Congress reconciles these
somewhat conflicting impulses. On one hand, most lawmakers reject the idea that
Congress should direct President Reagan to withdraw the marines from Beirut on a
certain date; on the other, they reject the notion that Congress should do
nothing. What they are looking for is a middle ground, an approach that does not
tie the President's hands, but does not pat him on the back, either.

In trying to find this middle ground, Congress has relatively few mechanisms
available. Historically, their only formal power was the power of the purse; but
that power was so crude, it was used only in extreme cases, such as the Vietnam
War.

Post-Vietnam War Period


Ten years ago, Congress passed the War Powers Resolution, and set up a procedure
for exerting Congressional authority in a more systematic way. But all
Presidents since then have denied the validity of the law, and only Mr. Reagan
has signed legislation carrying out its provisions.

Accordingly, many lawmakers believe that Congress's most important role in
foreign policy is an advisory, oversight function, not a legislative one.
Probably the best recent example of that function occurred last week, when the
House Speaker, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., took the occasion of a White House meeting
to lecture President Reagan about the failure of his Lebanon policy. Lawmakers
from both parties worry that Mr. Reagan, like many Presidents before him, has
become insulated from critical opinions.

The resolution coming before Congress shortly has the same intent. ''There's
little the Senate can do other than put pressure,'' conceded Senator Joseph R.
Biden of Delaware, a senior Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee. ''But
this is a significant bit of pressure.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Mr. Reagan's Vietnam Budget

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 555 words


Two decades ago, President Johnson ordered a military escalation in Vietnam but
refused to ask Congress for tax increases or cuts in spending to pay for it. The
eventual result was a $25 billion deficit - extraordinary in those days - and
the start of a virulent inflation that still has not been fully subdued. The
Johnson model finds an ominous parallel today.

Having ordered a massive military buildup to counter the Russians, President
Reagan refuses to ask Congress for tax increases or spending cuts to pay for it.
The results are huge deficits and chaotic wrangling among his lieutenants.

Beyond the chaos, there are two dangers. The Government is left leaderless on
this issue. And if Government doesn't know where it's headed, decision makers in
industry and the financial markets cannot plan for the future with any
confidence. The country and all its citizens stand to be hurt.


The current chaos began when the President in effect renounced his 1985 budget
even before sending it to Congress. He pasted on a last-minute proposal to
negotiate a ''down payment'' on deficit reduction. Martin Feldstein, his chief
economic adviser, promptly declared that the budget ''isn't what we want,'' and
Budget Director David Stockman admitted that the Government's position was like
that of a company about to plunge into bankruptcy. Yesterday the Federal Reserve
Board echoed their warning. Only Donald Regan, the ever-faithful Treasury
Secretary, has stuck with the President.

All the Administration players insist they agree on ''fundamental principles,''
but they are in fact deeply split about how to deal with 1984 politics. The
President, starting his re-election campaign, says wait till next year to take
the painful steps to wrestle the deficit down. Mr. Feldstein, a prestigious
economist with a reputation to protect, reflects the professional consensus: The
deficit is already damaging the economy, and postponing remedies will make
matters worse. Mr. Stockman sees that the basic Reagan strategy simply has not
worked.  In fiscal terms, this noisy affair boils down to the urgency of cutting
spending - particularly the military buildup - and raising taxes to close the
gap. President Reagan has no more taste for it than President Johnson had.
What's the harm of acknowledging that this is an election year? What are the
dangers of not addressing the immense deficits until 1985?  There are dangers
for almost everyone. By waiting, Government heightens the danger of high
interest rates that make it impossible for a family to buy a house, or imprudent
for a business to expand its plant. Running deficits in a period of recovery
threatens renewed inflation that also hurts all. Delaying remedies risks
provoking another recession that will again throw people out of their jobs even
before the anguish of the last recession is erased.  Mr. Reagan believes above
all that the Government is too big. He resists tax increases not only because
they may damage his re-election campaign but because without them, he reasons,
Government won't be able to spend as much. But he is nonetheless committed also
to the opposite - spending ever more for defense. No wonder his advisers are at
war with each other. The President, in his passion to make the country stronger,
threatens to make it weaker.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN TURNS 73 AT HOME IN ILLINOIS, SAYING NATION'S 'SELF-DOUBT' IS OVER

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1149 words

DATELINE: EUREKA, Ill., Feb. 6


President Reagan, sweeping through a birthday tour of his life and times, today
proclaimed an end to an era of ''paralyzing self-doubt'' in the nation and a
restoration of the ''just and legitimate uses of American power.''

''Some nations thought they could threaten or harm the United States with
impunity,'' the President said in a speech here at Eureka College. ''We've
changed this.''

A week into his re-election campaign, Mr. Reagan began his 73d birthday at his
boyhood home in nearby Dixon. He led a parade, had lunch at his old house on
Hennepin Avenue and told a crowd at Dixon High School that he was there to
celebrate the nation's resilience more than his own.

''It's so easy to have faith in America,'' he said, preaching optimism on a
crisply cold and sunny day in the snow- blanketed heartland where he was raised.


Some Protesters Seen


The day was pungent with Reagan memorabilia. The prairie-town setting of wintry
beauty was overrun with the graphic trappings of modern political campaigning.
Dixon offered a warm downtown welcome, though spiced with the handprinted signs
of more than 100 protesters. ''Reaganomics stinks,'' one read.  ''Reagan favors
depression,'' said another. And, near the town arch's welcoming sign: ''This is
your worst movie.''

But the basic mood was celebration and Mr. Reagan beamed in revisiting the roots
of the patriotism that he has made his campaign trademark. ''Believe me, there
are great days ahead for you, for America, and for the cause of human freedom,''
he said.

Dixonites gathered at the high school gym sang as if in counterpoint: ''Every
heart beats true for the red, white and blue.''

Mr. Reagan was jaunty in celebrating ''the 34th anniversary of my 39th
birthday.'' ''I believe Moses was 80 when God first called him to public
service,'' he said, smiling.

Then he added that Jefferson said Presidents should be judged by their deeds,
not their years. ''And ever since he told me that,'' Mr. Reagan added, arousing
laughter at Dixon High School, ''I've stopped worrying. There are those who say
I've stopped working.''

Reagan Reviews 5 Decades


The President capped his visit home with a nostalgic, partisan review of five
decades of Federal history, from Franklin D. Roosevelt's reassuring voice on the
radio to a ''new realism'' laid claim to by Mr. Reagan in his dealings with the
Soviet Union.

''It re-establishes the basis of that broad foreign policy consensus that
existed in the pre-Vietnam era when we understood the moral imperatives of
defending freedom and the importance of taking totalitarian powers seriously,''
the President told the students and faculty here at Eureka College, his alma
mater. He was graduated 52 years ago with a degree in economics and sociology.



A Younger Reagan, in Verse

Visitors who crowded into this area could note how the candidate's now familiar
ebullience was in contrast to some verse written by a 17-year-old Ronald Reagan
that was printed in the day's official souvenir program. The teen-ager's
thoughts, titled ''Life,'' concluded this way: We hang onto a jaded life A life
of sorrow and pain.  A life that warps and breaks us, And we try to run through
it again.

Mr. Reagan's Eureka address, inaugurating a promotional program for Time
magazine cover personalities, included campaign claims of having slowed the
''juggernaut of big government.'' While the Democrats are holding Mr. Reagan
directly responsible for the $180 billion deficit in his 1985 budget proposal,
the President took a different approach.

He Focuses on 'Desert'


''Politicians at the national level must no longer be permitted to mortgage your
future by running up higher and higher deficits,'' he said.

His main campaigning focus was on the ''spiritual desert that is Communism'' and
his emphatic insistence, more gently worded than past denunciations of the
Soviet Union's ''evil empire,'' on the United States's moral superiority over
totalitarian governments.

''For us, human freedom is a first principle, not a bargaining chip,'' the
President said. ''To fail to publicly enunciate the differences between
totalitarian and democratic systems of government would be to foresake this
moral high ground.''

In contrast with earlier addresses, Mr. Reagan offered no blunt denunciations of
Moscow. Instead, the President was pacific in tone, apparently reflecting his
political strategists' counsel about countering Democratic attempts to exploit
the peace issue.

''We've tried to bring a new honesty and moral purposefulness to our foreign
policy,'' he said, ''to show we can be candid about the essential differences
between ourselves and others while still pursuing peace initiatives with them.''
Touching on 1980 Themes


In saying he had reversed ''America's retreat'' in foreign policy, the President
referred to some of his favorite 1980 themes, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
and the seizing in Iran of American hostages. He did not refer to the foreign
event Democrats now consider his major weakness, the death of 241 American
servicemen last October in Lebanon in a terrorist bombing.

''We're trying to see it that American citizens, and it doesn't matter whether
they are Navy pilots in the Gulf of Sidra or medical students in Grenada, can no
longer be attacked or their lives endangered with impunity,'' the President
said.

''It strikes me as odd that some people say today that college students are too
conservative,'' he said, complimenting Eureka students for having discovered
early in life ''the fundamental decencies'' of work, courage, courtesy and
politeness.

Throughout the day, Mr. Reagan struck his favored theme of the homespun morality
he finds in the nation. ''Our greatest strength is not bullets or balance
sheets,'' he told Dixon, ''But the mighty spirit of free people under God.'' He
emphasized the constant he cherishes: ''We know we were never meant to be second
best, and we never will be.''

He Speaks of Fireside Chats


In remembering the ''rich, reassuring tone of Franklin Roosevelt'' on the radio,
President Reagan quickly noted that he was now a ''reformed New Dealer.'' In the
grip of the Depression, he said, ''many of us could not see the enormous and
oftentimes harmful political changes'' he contended had since been wrought by
the Federal Government.

Dixon would have never evolved from a simple ferry stop to its present
middle-class prosperity, the President said, if the founding fathers ''had to
fill out environmental impact statements and report to regulatory agencies in
Washington.''

The President's day ended with one of the more abrupt cultural shifts
imaginable, an evening flight from the frigid, rural charms of the prairie to
the hermetic hotel world of Las Vegas, where he is to deliver a speech Tuesday
to a trade group.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President and Nancy Reagan

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 8, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

2 ASTRONAUTS FLOAT FREE IN SPACE, 170 MILES UP

BYLINE: By JOHN NOBLE WILFORD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1412 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Feb. 7


In a spectacle of bravery and beauty, two American astronauts flew out, up and
away from the space shuttle Challenger today. Free of any lifeline and propelled
into the dark void by tiny jets, they became, in effect, the first human
satellites.

The successful test of the propulsion backpacks - a wireless high-wire act 170
miles above the earth - was an important step toward future operations to repair
and service orbiting satellites and to assemble and maintain large space
stations.

A second test by the same two space fliers, Capt. Bruce McCandless 2d of the
Navy and Lieut. Col. Robert L. Stewart of the Army, is scheduled for Thursday
morning. They are to practice grappling a large object rotating at the end of
the shuttle's mechanical arm, a dress rehearsal for a mission in April to repair
a crippled scientific satellite.



Success After Failures


The success of today's space-walking exercise was particularly sweet for the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, coming as it did after days of
repeated failures. Two satellites deployed by the shuttle went off- course, and
a target balloon burst to disrupt another test for the satellite-repair mission.

All that was forgotten when, at 8:25 A.M. Eastern standard time, Captain
McCandless fired the jet thrusters of his bulky white backpack to rise out of
the Challenger's open cargo bay and move away, untethered to the spaceship. He
was orbiting the earth at the same velocity as the shuttle, 17,500 miles an
hour. In the virtual vacuum of space, however, he sensed nothing of his speed.
The only sensation of motion he had came when he looked down at the rotating
earth, which was going by at four miles a second.

Beginning his excursion as the first free-flying human in space, Captain
McCandless joked: ''That may have been one small step for Neil, but it's a heck
of a big leap for me.''He was referring to the words uttered by Neil A.
Armstrong when he made the first human bootprint on the moon in 1969.

Captain McCandless took his big leap while the Challenger was passing over the
Pacific Ocean, then in darkness. His movements were deliberate, never more than
one foot a second. He said he looked for but could see no stars.

He headed out to 150 feet, a stiff figure with slightly spread legs, looking a
little like a puffy white gingerbread man. He then went out as far as 320 feet
as he and the shuttle, separate but not too far apart, flew over the continental
United States in daylight.

''This is neat,'' he said. Then, casting an eye downward, he remarked: ''Looks
like Florida. It is Florida!''



'It Really Is Beautiful'


He reported seeing clearly Cape Canaveral, where the mission began last Friday
and where it is scheduled to end Saturday. ''It really is beautiful,'' Captain
McCandless said of the panorama.  By the time he returned to the shuttle, it was
cruising over Africa. The astronaut had spent an hour and a half testing and
flying the jet-powered backpack, known as the manned maneuvering unit. Except
for a few minor ''shudders, rattles and shakes,'' which Captain McCandless noted
in certain firings, the maneuvering unit's performance was smooth and all that
the space agency had expected it to be. ''We sure have a nice flying machine
here,'' he said.

Captain McCandless, an astronaut for 18 years before getting his first mission
at the age of 46, spent the last 10 years developing the manned maneuvering
units, which were built by the Martin Marietta Corporation. Each unit contains
two bottles of nitrogen gas, the fuel for the 24 tiny jet thrusters. Controllers
at the end of arms extending forward from the pack are operated by the astronaut
to move up and down, right and left and to go into pitch, roll and sideways
movements.

At all times, Captain McCandless and later Colonel Stewart were in sight of the
Challenger, and the crew on board had them in their sights. Vance D. Brand, the
commander, and Comdr. Robert L. Gibson of the Navy, the pilot, were ready, if
necessary, to steer the shuttle over and scoop up the space fliers in the cargo
bay. And Dr. Ronald E. McNair stood ready at the controls of the shuttle's
50-foot-long mechanical arm to use it to pluck one of the men back to safety.

The need did not arise. John Cox, the flight director in the operations, said
all the equipment ''seemed to work better than anyone hoped for.''

At a news conference, Mr. Cox said, ''This was great confirmation that the plans
made for the Solar Max repair all work perfectly.''

Solar Max, formally known as the Solar Maximum Mission satellite, is the craft
that astronauts wearing propulsion backpacks hope to retrieve and repair on the
next shuttle flight, scheduled for early April. They plan to change defective
electronics parts and, if this revives the malfunctioning systems, redeploy the
satellite.

Captain McCandless and Colonel Stewart worked for almost six hours, breathing
oxygen from the smaller pack built into their pressure suits. While Captain
McCandless was out flying, Colonel Stewart stepped into foot-restraints built
into a metal plate that was attached to the end of the mechanical arm. He had
some trouble fitting his boots under the metal toe bar and the into the metal
heel cup.

Disruption of Schedule


This put him behind schedule, but he was able to perform some tasks working with
tools that would come in handy making satellite repairs. In the absence of
gravity, the foot-restraints kept him from being thrown into a spin or away from
his task as he turned the wrenches or other devices.

On future repair missions, astronauts expect to work in this way from the end of
the mechanical arm, much as workers in orchards and on power lines use the
so-called cherry pickers.

Later in the morning, after Captain McCandless returned and the maneuvering
backpack was refueled, Colonel Stewart got his chance to go overboard and fly.
In about an hour's time, he duplicated most of the same maneuvers, going out as
far as 305 feet.

Returning to the shuttle, Colonel Stewart, a helicopter pilot before becoming an
astronaut, commented, ''The approach to Challenger was a little different than
the helicopter landings in Vietnam.''

Captain McCandless, meanwhile, was taking his turn working from the end of the
mechanical arm. ''O.K., Dr. McNair, throw the bolt,'' he radioed to the
astronaut inside the cabin, Dr. Ronald E. McNair, who was operating the robotic
arm.

With his body extending straight out from the end of the arm, where his feet
were fixed to the restraints, Captain McCandless sometimes evoked images of the
wing-walkers of early aviation. But there was no breeze to flutter a silk scarf.
And it was work he had in mind, not a frolic, as the shuttle passed over Baja
California.

The mechanical arm transported the astronaut within reach of a panel simulating
the electronics modules that astronauts must replace on Solar Max. Captain
McCandless practiced with tools to open, remove and replace those parts.

''You going to want the windows washed or anything while I'm out here?'' he
joked.

Better Than Expected


Mr. Cox, the flight director, said the tests indicated that the fully extended
robotic arm provided a more stable work platform than had been expected.

In one real repair, the astronauts adjusted the setting of a switch on a
scientific instrument attached to a West German payload. This is the shuttle
pallet satellite, a re-usable platform carrying instruments and cameras. It will
serve as the object, attached to the mechanical arm, that Captain McCandless and
Colonel Stewart are to hook up to in Thursday's planned space-walking
activities.

The astronauts also detached a malfunctioning television camera from the cargo
bay, brought it in for repairs and plan to re-install it at the beginning of
Thursday's spacewalk. The camera is expected to provide more television coverage
of the astronauts as they grapple with the rotating pallet satellite at the end
of the mechanical arm.

The mishaps were few and minor. Captain McCandless dropped the checklist
attached to his cuff and had to dump it into a small trash bag. And once, for
reasons not quiet clear, he uttered an expletive of frustration, which proved
that he was indeed a human satellite.

As the two astronauts returned to the shuttle airlock, about 1 P.M., Captain
McCandless said of the experience: ''It was a real thrill. A real honor to be
out there.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Capt. Bruce McCandless 2d ; diagram (page B10)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 8, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN ORDERS MARINES MOVED TO SHIOPS OFF BEIRUT BUT WIDENS AIR AND;
SEA ROLE; REBEL UNITS TAKE LAST OF MOSLEM SECTOR

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words


News

 Analysis

WASHINGTON, Feb. 7 - President Reagan's abrupt decision to redeploy the United
States Marines from the airport in Beirut marked the first time the the
Administration has been forced to reverse itself in a key foreign policy area.
On one level, the redeployment of the marines to ships off the Lebanon coast
eliminates a festering political problem for Mr. Reagan. The President's senior
advisers have long known that public support for keeping the marines in Lebanon
has dropped precipitously in recent months.

But on another level, Mr. Reagan's action raised the possibility of an even
deeper American military involvement on behalf of the government of President
Amin Gemayel of Lebanon, with obvious perils abroad and at home.

This deeper involvement could come in the form of increased naval shelling and
aerial bombardment from United States ships offshore of the Syrian- backed
forces in Lebanon seeking to topple Mr. Gemayel.

A clear measure of the Administration's discomfort on Lebanon was that Mr.
Reagan avoided making the announcement himself in public. Instead, the White
House issued a statement to reporters after Mr. Reagan arrived in Santa Barbara,
Calif., where he planned to spend the rest of the week.

Mr. Reagan's decision came at a time of heightened concern among his advisers
that the deteriorating situation in Lebanon could hurt him politically.



Public Sought Change

Most of the Democratic Presidential contenders have called for a withdrawal of
American troops. In Congress, House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. and other
Democrats have pronounced his Middle East policies a failure.

A New York Times/CBS News Poll in mid-January showed that public confidence in
Mr. Reagan had slipped on foreign policy questions since fall. Specifically, the
January survey found that 49 percent of the public believed the marines should
be withdrawn from Lebanon, as against 38 percent who wanted the force kept there
or enlarged. In October, only 35 percent advocated withdrawal, 52 percent a
continued or enhanced role.

In January, those who supported keeping marines in Lebanon approved of Mr.
Reagan's over-all performance by a margin of 5 to 1, but those who wanted the
marines withdrawn gave him only a 7-to-6 margin of approval.

The President was also dealt a serious blow when an independent Defense
Department commission attributed the deaths of 241 American servicemen in the
bombing of the Marine headquarters last October to failures in the chain of
command from top to bottom.

White House officials have long maintained that, unlike his predecessors, Mr.
Reagan would never reverse course because of the daily shift of events. Having
said that ''consistency'' was a hallmark of Mr. Reagan's leadership style, these
officials may find it difficult to defend his action today.

U.S. Pressure to Continue

Tonight, Mr. Reagan asserted that the removal of the marines from Beirut ''will
strengthen our ability to do the job we set out to do.'' He made clear, as well,
that the United States would continue its policies of military pressure on
Syria, and diplomatic pressure on Mr. Gemayel to achieve a political
''reconciliation'' with his Druse and Shiite foes in Lebanon.

Having been forced to retreat from Beirut, however, Mr. Reagan may have
difficulty persuading others that the American position has been strengthened.

For weeks, the President and his top advisers have warned against redeploying
the marines, even as Democrats and some Republicans in Congress voiced fears
about the troops' safety and their usefulness in propping up the Gemayel
government.

Only last week, Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the No. 3 man at the State Department,
warned against ''cutting and running'' from Lebanon. In language not heard since
the Vietnam War, the Under Secretary for Political Affairs said that ''we may
bring our boys home to safety now'' but that that could mean ''escalating
crises'' down the road.

Repeatedly, Mr. Reagan has not only defended the policy of keeping the marines
in Lebanon, but spoken broadly of Mr. Gemayel's progress in unifying the
factions around him.

It appeared tonight, however, that the decision to move the marines culminated a
reassessment process that began months ago.

The reassessment was coupled with a series of statements by the Administration
that appeared to modify the rationale for keeping the marines in Beirut. To
many, these modifications looked as if the Administration was searching for a
pretext to get them out.

Last year, Mr. Reagan said the marines would not be withdrawn until other
foreign forces were withdrawn. In recent weeks, Mr. Reagan and others hinted
that the troops could be redeployed if Mr. Gemayel simply got better control of
Beirut.

In any case, those definitions became moot as the military situation in Lebanon
collapsed.

Unmentioned Issues

The President's statement tonight made no mention of the Administration's
previous assertions on Lebanon.

There was no talk of the ''chaos'' that would ensue if the marines were to
withdraw. There was no mention of earlier Administration assertions that an
American withdrawal would put Italian, British and French troops in the
multinational force in an impossible position, since they had no ships to which
they could be redeployed.

There was also no mention of earlier assertions that Mr. Gemayel wanted the
troops to stay at the airport as a show of support for his government.

Instead, the statement issued by Mr. Reagan said the decision to redeploy the
marines came ''after consultation'' with others in the multinational forces and
at Mr. Gemayel's request.

It was not clear tonight what the French, British and Italian troops would do
once the American troops were redeployed to ships offshore.

Nor was it clear whether Mr. Reagan's decision would ease the domestic criticism
of his Middle East policies.

It seemed likely that if the redeployment led to a significant increase in
shelling and aerial bombardment of Syrian-backed forces, critics in Congress
might continue to insist on some mechanism to prevent Mr. Reagan from increasing
the commitment.

More than anything else, the political or diplomatic cost of Mr. Reagan's
reversal today will probably depend on the outcome overseas.

The Adminsitration would be damaged the most if the predictions it made about
possible chaos and violence in Lebanon turn out to be true. If the decision
today strengthens Mr. Gemayel's hand in his reconciliation efforts, or in
holding on to his territory, Mr. Reagan would be able to say that his approach
had been vindicated, even though he had to reverse tactics because of pressure
from abroad and at home.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 8, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HART CRITICIZES MONDALE AS LACKING IN LEADERSHIP

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1173 words

DATELINE: COUNCIL BLUFFS, Iowa, Feb. 7


Senator Gary Hart today criticized Walter F. Mondale for what he said was a lack
of strong leadership, contending that ''the pattern is always there - caution
until consensus forms.''

The speech by the Coloradan, a candidate for the Democratic Presidential
nomination, echoed criticism of Mr. Mondale last week by Senator Alan Cranston
of California. It marked a stepping up of Mr. Hart's effort to challenge Mr.
Cranston for third place in this state's Democratic Presidential caucuses Feb.
20.

Senator Hart charged that Mr. Mondale, who is considered the leader in the Iowa
caucuses with Senator John Glenn of Ohio second, had delayed taking positions on
such issues as the invasion of Grenada and the stationing of United States
marines in Lebanon.

The Senator pointed up Mr. Mondale's caution by praising four of his other
opponents for the Presidential nomination, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Senator
Ernest Hollings, Reubin Askew and George McGovern, for examples of ''moral
courage.'' He excluded Senators Glenn and Cranston, his principal competitors as
the alternative to Mr. Mondale.

Mondale 'a Good Democrat'

''I believe the front-runner in this race is a good Democrat,'' Mr. Hart said.

''I believe he would be a far superior President than Ronald Reagan. And Mr.
Mondale eventually ends up on the right side of most issues and that is
important, but it always takes so long, and a President has to lead, not follow.

''Vietnam, Lebanon, Grenada, the pattern is always there - caution until
consensus forms.''

''At the very time our nation needs thought and courage,'' Senator Hart
continued, ''it is being offered a candidacy of the establishment past, a
candidacy brokered by backroom politics and confirmed by a collective sense of
resignation,'' he told some 150 students at Iowa Western Community College here.


Private Opposition Criticized


The Colorado Democrat also criticized Mr. Mondale for ''pleading that he was
privately against the war in Vietnam'' while he was in the Senate and other
issues while he was Vice President.

Senator Hart ticked off such issues as the embargo of grain sales to the Soviet
Union, construction of the F-15 fighter plane and the MX missile, arms sales to
Saudi Arabia, Federal Reserve policies and draft registration, all of which he
said Mr. Mondale now claimed to have privately opposed in the inner councils of
the Carter Administration. .

''This raises two questions,'' the Senator said.

''First, was there ever an issue where President Carter took a popular position
and Walter Mondale opposed him in private, or did Mr. Mondale dissent only from
decisions that now appear to be politically unpopular?'' Senator Hart said.
''Second, if Walter Mondale opposed the grain embargo in 1980, why did he attack
Ted Kennedy's patriotism for saying in public exactly what Mr. Mondale was
supposedly saying in private?'' the Senator asked.

Hart and Cranston Strategies


Senator Hart's speech pointed up the different strategies of Mr. Hart and
Senator Cranston in this key state.

The 69-year-old Senator Cranston increasingly linked his candidacy to the
nuclear issue in campaigning here last week. The 47-year-old Senator Hart, who
campaigned in New Hampshire last week and resumed his Iowa stumping here today,
is emphasizing his relative youth and personal appeal with the message that he
represents ''a new generation of leadership.''

The two are also emphasizing different states. Senator Cranston is concentrating
on Iowa's caucuses Feb. 20 in the hope that a strong run here will affect the
New Hampshire primary eight days later. An increasingly optimistic Senator Hart,
who had initially concentrated on New Hampshire, is working harder in this state
to set up an early confrontation with his principal rival for the alternative
role.

The difference in emphasis is also evident in the time spent in the two states
by the two men. In January, Senator Cranston spent 10 days in Iowa and 5 days in
New Hampshire; in February, 8 days in New Hampshire and 9 here. Senator Hart
spent 11 days in New Hampshire to 8 days here in January. In February there will
be 10 days in each state.

Senator Cranston, who raised $2.7 million to Senator Hart's $1.3 million last
year, carried that advantage into Iowa and New Hampshire. He has more workers,
more television, more phone banks and more offices than Senator Hart. Senator
Cranston expects to spend the Federal Election Commission limit for the two
states, a total of nearly $1.1 million; Senator Hart says he will spend ''close
to the limit.''

Both Heavily in Debt


Both candidates, however, are heavily in debt and are not likely to survive the
first two tests unless they run very strongly. Both seek third place to keep
their candidacies alive.

Senator Cranston chose this state as a major battleground because it is the
first test and because he felt that his candidacy needed early credibility. In
addition, his campaign organization proved successful in straw votes in other
states that required organizational talent rather than personal appeal.
Organization, getting out supporters, is considered the key to success in a
caucus state.

Mr. Cranston says he has benefited from an active peace movement here: The only
sure-fire applause he gets is when he refers to the nuclear issue.

Mondale Said to Be Strong


Both Senators say Mr. Mondale is stronger in this state than in New Hampshire
and that it will be more difficult here not only to finish in third place but
also in a respectable third place, with considerably more than the 5 percent or
less that each is winning in polls here. Senator Cranston has been dropping in
one poll.

Senator Cranston acknowledged in an interview en route here that he was more
confident about Iowa than New Hampshire. Senator Hart believes that his New
Hampshire campaign is better organized and further advanced than his Iowa
effort.

Senator Hart has been campaigning extensively in rural counties here, convinced
that smaller turnouts at caucuses in rural areas can produce nearly as many
delegates as those in the more populous central and southeastern sections of the
state where Mr. Mondale is believed to be strong.

Senator Hart has begun pouring what little money he has into the state and,
according Keith Glaser, his Iowa campaign manager, he hopes to spend nearly
$100,000 on television in three weeks, in contrast to Senator Cranston's
$150,000 over three months.

The Cranston television commercials are backed by 129 paid canvassers, triple
the Hart staff of 41 workers. The Cranston phone banks nearly triple the Hart
effort, so that anything less than a strong third here would be a major defeat
for the California Democrat. Senator Hart, most politicians believe, could
survive a finish lower than third place, but he would have to compensate by a
strong third-place run in New Hampshire or he too would be out of the race for
all practical purposes.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gary Hart

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FOR U.S. CIVILIANS, BITTERSWEET FAREWELL

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1245 words

DATELINE: NICOSIA, Cyprus, Feb. 8


American diplomats and family members who arrived here today from Beirut had few
qualms about getting out, many words of worry for those left behind and some
frightening stories about their final days in a capital where law and order had
fallen apart.

Eric R. Terzuolo, the second secretary of the United States Embassy in Beirut,
had no doubts about his feelings upon getting out. ''How glad am I?'' he asked.
''Somewhere between extremely glad and ecstatic.''

But Carol A. Madison, the embassy's assistant public information officer, said:
''It was hard to leave people behind. The Americans will get out - they have a
place to go.''

Mr. Terzuolo finished her thought: ''At a certain point,'' he said, ''there is a
question of what it will mean for these people to have worked for the
Americans.'' Given the possibility of radical change in Beirut, he suggested,
being an ex-employee of the American Embassy could become as hazardous a former
job as it was for the ''locals'' who worked for the Americans in Cambodia or
Vietnam.

Possessions Are Left Behind

Yet the joy of leaving was the overwhelming emotion of those here, partly
because of some of the things that had happened since last Sunday.

Most left without any of their possessions, and the story told by one of the
evacuees, and confirmed by his colleagues, explained why.

The man - who asked that neither his name nor his job be mentioned, since he may
have to return to Beirut one day - told of leaving the embassy with two
colleagues during the fighting in an effort to retrieve the possessions of some
embassy employees.

''We got taken by the P.S.P.,'' he said in a reference to the Druse Progressive
Socialist Party militia, which has taken over West Beirut in alliance with the
Amal Shiite militia.

''They drove us around for about 30 minutes, during which they were stripping us
of any valuables we had,'' he said. Among the valuables the man lost was his
wedding ring.

'He Saved Our Lives'

The man said that the militia members had identified the group as being
connected to the embassy. ''They knew who we were,'' the man said. ''I thought
they were going to kill us.''

Eventually - ''for no reason I could figure out,'' he said - the militiamen
decided to free their captives. They were dropped off in the center of one of
the heavy battles, at the Corniche Mazra.

''We didn't have the foggiest idea of where we were, and there was fighting
going on,'' he said. ''We finally flagged down a car and asked him if he would
take us to someplace safer. And amazingly he did. And he saved our lives.''

The man added that he saw some of the militia members less as political actors
than as street gangs. ''They could be gangs in the United States,'' he said.
''Only these people have AK-47's and rocket launchers.''

In Fear of Her Life

Miss Madison, who hails from Cleveland, had a frightening experience of her own
on Sunday.

''I walked out of the building with my doggie,'' she said. ''For once, I took
the elevator instead of the stairs, and that may have saved my life.''

She walked out of the building into a parking lot and to her car. Suddenly, a
Lebanese Army soldier - ''I must have walked right by him when I went to my
car,'' she said - began spraying bullets wildly from an automatic weapon. He
eventually emptied two magazines.

Why the shooting? ''He was drunk,'' Miss Madison replied. ''If I had taken the
stairs instead of the elevator I might have walked by him when he started
shooting.''

She crouched behind a car and waited what seemed to her like a very long time
before getting up. She feared she would draw more fire if she showed herself
suddenly in the dark. Finally, she took refuge in the apartment of two embassy
guards.

Many Want to Go Back

Many of those who left Beirut on Tuesday night - they were flown first to the
tank landing ship Manitowoc, where they spent the night on very rough seas, and
then flown here today - have a deep desire to go back to Beirut.

One of those is 21-year-old Danielle Woerz, a student at the American University
of Beirut whose father is the embassy's administrative officer. ''I want to go
back so bad,'' she said. ''I've fallen in love with the place.''

She was at the embassy on Monday afternoon taking an Arabic course when the
shells started falling ''closer and closer,'' she said. She and some friends
were evacuated to an apartment building, ''but the shells started getting closer
and closer there, too.''

Eventually, she said, ''a marine broke in and said: 'Everybody down. We're
getting out.' '' She went to the British Embassy and learned later that the 10th
floor of the building she had been in ''had been blown out by shells.''

Security Rules Tightened

Several embassy employees said that the security situation for them had become
worse even before the heavy fighting began. Security rules on embassy employees
began to tighten after Dr. Malcolm H. Kerr, the president of the American
University of Beirut, was slain on Jan. 18. They became tighter still when
leaflets began appearing in West Beirut threatening American officials and their
dependents.

''People would try to leave home at different hours every morning,'' said one
embassy employee. ''They'd take different routes every day.''

But over last weekend, many employees began to feel that something important was
about to erupt. ''It was just strange,'' said Miss Madison. ''It was nothing you
could put your finger on.''

Mr. Terzuolo said he began to understand that parts of the Lebanese Army were
collapsing when one soldier asked him if he could provide a couple of pairs of
pants. The pants were for army colleagues who were about to shed their uniforms
- and with them, their connection to the armed forces. Mr. Terzuolo never made
it home to his apartment and so the soldier had to look elsewhere.

Few on the Visa Line

Deborah Park, who works in the embassy's consular office, said she knew that
Monday would be a difficult day.

''When I saw there was practically no one on the visa line,'' she said, ''I knew
something bad was about to happen.'' Normally, she said her office handled about
200 visa applications a day. But before it closed early in the afternoon on
Monday, she said, it had processed only 20.

Many chose to spend Monday night in the basement of the British Embassy - the
main American Embassy building was blown up last year - or in the basement of an
adjacent building. When the shelling let up, some employees decided to spend
time in the less cramped space upstairs. ''If you were in Beirut long enough,
you get used to this stuff,'' Miss Madison said, ''and a lot of it doesn't
bother you.''

Bertha Massabni, whose husband is the embassy's military attache, said she was
sitting on her balcony three days ago, pondering her expected departure. She
wrote a diary entry, which she carried out with her.

''Beirut the beautiful. Beirut the tragic. Beirut the maddest of all cities,''
she began. ''Yet here I am, loving you and hating you. Afraid to stay, and upset
and depressed at the very idea of leaving you.''

She continued: ''So I go to my balcony and stare at the beautiful blue water of
the Mediterranean and say to the winds, 'I love you Beirut and cry for you
Beirut and despise your hate and your lack of understanding for others and your
schizophrenia, but I don't want to leave you, Beirut.' ''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Americans arriving in Larnaca

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON NEWS PANEL HEARS TESTIMONY

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 703 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 8


Executives of seven of the nation's largest news organizations testified today
before a Pentagon panel, saying repeatedly that the press could be trusted to
keep military secrets and that the Government had a responsibility to inform the
public through the press.

The testimony was unusual not because of its message but because it was given by
news organizations that have in the past hesitated to detail their procedures
for covering events. ''We have never testified before anyone,'' said one
witness, Benjamin C. Bradlee, executive editor of The Washington Post.

The panel was created after the invasion of Grenada, when military commanders,
supported by the Secretary of Defense and the White House, barred reporters from
the first two days of combat. The press and other groups protested the curbs,
and the panel was formed to draft principles or guidelines for combat coverage.

The Pentagon panel, made up of eight military representatives and six former
journalists, has already agreed that reporters should be given access to
military engagements ''to the maximum degree possible consistent with the
security of the mission and the safety of troops.''

Affirmation Is Applauded

The news executives applauded that as a needed affirmation of a principle that
they said commanders must accept and practice. They said there was no need for
detailed and possibly confusing or inflexible new rules, because traditional
principles of broad press access to combat zones and to military information
have worked well.

Seymour Topping, managing editor of The New York Times said: ''The common-sense
application of these principles to diverse military situations will continue to
assure security while respecting the right of the public to be informed.
Experienced military public affairs officers know how to cope with the specific
problems that will arise.''

Mr. Topping said that The Times's primary responsibility was to cover an event
''comprehensively, intelligently and objectively to meet the needs of readers to
have information.'' That responsibility does not preclude respect for national
security, he added, noting that the paper had, for example, avoided referring to
information it had about American methods of monitoring enemy messages.

Echoing a statement of principle issued last month by representatives of 10
major news organizations, the witnesses said today that the press had repeatedly
shown itself to be trustworthy and willing to withhold reports that might
endanger national security or the lives of soldiers. Those factors ''have to be
considered in making a news judgment,'' said Jack Smith, Washington bureau chief
of CBS News.

Assignments and Reviews

The representatives of CBS News, The Post and The Times, along with executives
of The Associated Press, The Wall Street Journal, The Los Angeles Times and
Cable News Network, talked about the criteria they use in assigning reporters to
cover combat and their procedures for reviewing material to be sure it does not
endanger security.

All said that when space for reporters was limited, the public's need for
information could be filled temporarily by creating pools, reporting
arrangements in which a handful of correspondents cover an event and later share
their notes with other news organizations.

''The only thing worse than a pool is no coverage at all,'' said William
Headline, Washington bureau chief of the Cable News Network.

Alvin Shuster, foreign editor of The Los Angeles Times, said that when press
access to fighting has to be limited, the Pentagon must make sure its briefing
officers are well informed, a step that he said was not followed in the case of
the Grenada invasion.

One panel member, Capt. Brent Baker, the Navy's Assistant Chief of Information
for Operations, pressed representatives of The Post to discuss as a hypothetical
situation whether they would print a story about mines being loaded into a ship
to be carried to a war zone. Michael Gettler, The Post's Pentagon correspondent,
noted that 12 years ago the paper had published just such a story about
preparations for mining Haiphong harbor in North Vietnam, with no adverse effect
on national security.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET SENDING HIGH OFFICIAL ON A WORKING VISIT TO DAMASCUS

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 8


The Soviet Union announced today that a member of the Politburo, Geidar A.
Aliyev, would visit Syria soon. Western diplomats linked the trip to the abrupt
realignment of forces in Beirut.

The short report published in the Communist Party newspaper Pravda said only
that Mr. Aliyev, who is also a Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister, would make a
''brief working visit'' to Syria in the ''first half of February.'' To Western
diplomats, however, the announcement reflected the degree of Soviet interest in
the situation in Lebanon and the stature Mr. Aliyev seems to have achieved in
the Politburo.

The announcement of Mr. Aliyev's visit followed the recapture of West Beirut by
Druse and Shiite Moslem militias, and President Reagan's decision to move United
States marines from the Lebanese mainland to ships offshore.

Although the Soviet press has not yet directly commented on these developments,
most diplomats assumed Moscow would see new opportunities to raise its profile
in the Middle East and to strengthen its bid for a role in any Lebanese
settlement.

Support for Syria

The Russians have staked their policies in the Middle East on extensive military
support for Syria, and the victories by Syrian-backed leftist militias in
Lebanon are almost certain to give Damascus - and thereby Moscow - leverage in
fashioning the future Lebanese Government.

Diplomats said Moscow's hesitation in commenting on the latest developments in
Beirut suggested that the Russians had yet to complete their assessment of the
new situation. But the diplomats said Moscow was likely to seek to assume the
role of peace-broker in lieu of Washington, perhaps trying to bring President
Amin Gemayel, the embattled Maronite Christian leader, into a coalition with the
Moslem leaders that would be more obedient to Syria and less likely to deal
separately with Washington.

Though Moscow's options in Lebanon were not immediately apparent, diplomats said
that in dispatching Mr. Aliyev, the Russians were sending a man who would
command attention in Damascus and who would probably have broad license to make
on-the-spot assessments and decisions. Although he is 60 years old, which is
relatively young by Politburo standards, and has been a full Politburo member
only since November 1982, Mr. Aliyev has emerged as one of the more active and
competent members of the ruling body.

Serious Talks Expected

The description of his trip as a ''working visit'' reinforced expectations that
his meetings in Damascus would involve serious talks rather than symbolic
demonstrations of unity. Mr. Aliyev will be the most senior Soviet official to
visit Damascus since Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko made an official call in
1980, when Moscow and Damascus signed a friendship treaty.

Whatever brief Mr. Aliyev carries to Damascus, Western diplomats said Moscow
must certainly be satisfied with the developments in Beirut, and probably
believed that its policy of the past 18 months is paying off. When the Israelis
invaded Lebanon in 1982, the Soviet Union stood carefully aside, even when
Israeli fighters decimated Syria's Soviet-supplied air and ground forces and air
defenses.

Immediately afterward, the Russians replenished and modernized Syria's arsenal,
dispatching several thousand military advisers along with the new materiel. Then
the Russians again stayed on the Mideast sidelines, even when the Syrian
President, Hafez al-Assad, turned against Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, who has also been Moscow's ally.

The Soviet calculation was evidently that any effort to install a government in
Beirut without the cooperation of Syria and the Moslem militias was doomed.
Walid Jumblat, the Druse who leads some of the strongest anti-Gemayel forces,
visited Moscow last month.

Criticism of Marines

The Soviet press has meanwhile maintained its steady criticism of the United
States marines in Beirut, blaming them for the fighting and the failure of
various Lebanese groups to achieve national reconciliation.

For Mr. Aliyev, the assignment to Lebanon offered new evidence of rapidly rising
stature in the Politburo. Mr. Aliyev, who was made a full member of the ruling
body shortly after Leonid I. Brezhnev's death in November 1982, had risen
rapidly through the ranks of first the K.G.B. security and intelligence
organization, and then the party organization, in Azerbaijan, a Transcaucasian
Soviet republic on the Caspian Sea, just north of Iran.  Since transferring to
Moscow, he has been made a First Deputy Prime Minister, and his responsibilities
have reportedly expanded from supervision of the troubled transport sector to
international affairs and even culture. Last fall, he made a much-publicized
state visit to Vietnam.

Soviet sources who follow Kremlin movements said Mr. Aliyev seems to have made
his mark more through competence and energy than through any special bond with
Yuri V. Andropov, the Soviet leader. Mr. Aliyev is regarded as a man to watch,
although his heritage as an Azerbaijani is considered a major obstacle to
promotion to the top Soviet political office. The Azerbaijani are
Turkic-speaking Shiite Moslem people of Persian culture.

Mr. Assad is a Shiite Moslem of the Alawite sect, and there were suggestions
among diplomats that Mr. Aliyev's Moslem heritage may have played a role in his
dispatch to the Middle East. Mr. Aliyev's biography shows that he has been to
Syria before, in April 1972, and was in Egypt in June 1973. On both occasions he
led Communist Party delegations to formal state events.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WOMEN EMERGE IN KEY ROLES IN PRESIDENTIAL RACE

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words


Kathy Bushkin recalls some incidents after she became press secretary for
Senator Gary Hart of Colorado, now one of eight contenders for the Democratic
Presidential nomination.

Not infrequently, she said recently, a reporter on the telephone, assuming she
was a secretary, not the press secretary, would say: ''Hi, Hon, will you have
the press secretary call me back?''

Eight years later, Mrs. Bushkin says she is accepted as a professional, along
with two other women who are press secretaries for Presidential candidates:
Maxine Isaacs, a longtime aide to Walter F. Mondale, and Florence Tate, who is
on the Rev. Jesse Jackson's staff.

The emergence of women in the once exclusively male domain of press secretaries
is just one of a number of signs of the growing leadership role of women in
campaigns, particularly the current Democratic Presidential primary campaign.

Coming of Age Since 1972


''In the 10 years since the McGovern campaign, women have literally come of age
in politics,'' Mr. Hart said.

He managed George McGovern's 1972 Presidential campaign, which attracted many
political amateurs who sought a way of expressing their opposition to the
Vietnam War.

Mr. Hart said half the state coordinators for his campaign were women. In
addition to Mrs. Bushkin, his national staff includes Dottie Lynch, a pollster,
who also plays a major role in campaign decisions.

''This is the breakthrough year,'' said Susan Casey, deputy director of Mr.
Hart's New Hampshire campaign. She is one of at least a half-dozen women who
have graduated from volunteer and ''gofer'' work to day-to- day direction of the
Democratic campaigns in New Hampshire. On Feb. 28 that state will provide the
first primary test of strength for the Democratic Presidential contenders.

Women in Key Posts


Women head the campaign efforts for Senator Alan Cranston of California in Maine
(Maggie Shandera) and Massachusetts (Gail Tuzzolo), and a woman is second in
command in his campaigns in New Hampshire (Deborah Beard), Massachusetts (Elisa
Speranza) and Iowa (Karen Kapler).

The New Hampshire coordinator for Senator Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina
is Jacki McGinnis.

It is not completely accidental that Senators Hart, Cranston and Hollings drew
so many women to help lead their campaigns, at least in New Hampshire. Several
women active in politics agreed that because most women had served in the past
as underlings in campaigns it was less likely they would be given major
responsibilities in the campaigns of candidates placed higher in the polls, like
Mr. Mondale and Senator John Glenn of Ohio.

Yet the national headquarters of all the candidates, front-runners or not,
reflect the emergence of women in campaign leadership.

Among the women on Mr. Mondale's national staff are two deputy campaign
managers, Miss Isaacs and Rebecca McGowan, and four others in top posts.

On the Glenn national staff, Kathy Belle is the director of scheduling and
Roxanne Conlin is chairman of the campaign's national policy council. In
addition, one of six department heads, Caroline Hines, is a woman.

Mr. Hart, who has emphasized women's issues in his campaign, has backed up his
words by appointing a national co-chairman, United States Representative
Patricia Schroeder of Colorado; a direct mail consultant, Teresa Sullivan; Mrs.
Bushkin, the press secretary, who is one of the Senator's closest advisers, and
Miss Lynch, the pollster.

Role in Raising Funds


Senator Cranston's national finance chairman is a woman, Sharon Fallack. Fund
raising has been one of the first major campaign roles for women.

Twelve of Mr. Jackson's top national staff members are women, including Miss
Tate and State Representative Maxine Waters of California, who is a member of
the campaign policy board.

Mr. Hollings's campaign has two women as co-chairmen, Lieut. Gov. Martha
Griffiths of Michigan and Nancy Stevenson, a former Lieutenant Governor of South
Carolina, as well as Delores Davies, finance director, and Nancy George,
national field director.

Two daughters of former Senator McGovern, Mary and Ann, hold top national
positions in his low-budget campaign, and his director of scheduling is also a
woman, Ruth Claveloux.

In the campaign of former Gov. Reubin Askew of Florida, two women, Collette
Kemper and Dori Corrado, are on the national staff and another woman, Maria
Menne, is coordinator in Iowa.

No Longer Volunteers


Miss Beard, the Cranston deputy campaign director in New Hampshire, said she
represented ''a certain amount of change'' because she was paid for her
political work. ''In other campaigns in the past, there were no paid women, only
volunteers,'' she said.

A veteran of the National Woman's Political Caucus in Boston, she said she
brought to the campaign ''a feminist attitude that only women have.''

However, she and Mrs. Shaheen, who heads the Hart campaign in New Hampshire,
brought up a problem for some women who are campaigners. Mrs. Shaheen noted she
had two young children and would not be able to move on to other primary states
if Mr. Hart's candidacy survived the New Hampshire primary and the Iowa
caucuses.

Miss Beard, who has no children, nevertheless said women were not as inclined to
give up their personal lives for politics. ''My job is my life is more a male
attitude,'' she said.

Does a woman bring any special talents to a campaign?

Two active New Hampshire women, Mrs. Shaheen of the Hart campaign and Susan
Colwell of the Cranston camp, offered different views. Indeed, the two discussed
that question last October at a conference on Women and Political Power in
Manchester, N.H. .

''Basically, I don't think there's a whole lot of difference,'' Mrs. Shaheen
said in an interview. She said a minor difference was that as a housewife and
mother she was likely to be more tolerant of tardiness. ''I figure if I can't
get to work on time, I can't expect other people to, either,'' she said.

Mrs. Shaheen and her husband were co-chairmen of the long-shot Jimmy Carter
campaign in New Hampshire in 1976. She was the Carter campaign coordinator in
New Hampshire in 1980 and was courted by the Mondale camp last year.

Decision by Consensus


Miss Colwell, who was chairman of the New Hampshire Conference on the Status of
Women, said she found women ''more reflective and more sensitive'' than men and
more likely to reach decisions even in political campaigns ''by consensus.'' In
the past, many political campaigns have been known for autocratic rule by
campaign leaders.

Mrs. Bushkin, the Hart press secretary, said she had found that women worked
harder in campaigns.

She and others also noted that women in leadership positions were likely to
attract more women into future campaigns and that if the history of male workers
was a guide, women as campaign managers would inevitably lead to more women as
candidates.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Maxine Isaascs; photo of Kathy Bushkin; photo of Susan Casey;
photo of Deborah Beard

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SCOUTING

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 5; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 255 words


New to the Game

Long Island City, which won the Queens Division 1 basketball championship of the
Public Schools Athletic League last season, is at the other end of its division
ladder this season. With only 1 victory in 20 games, the Stars finish their
season tonight at Grover Cleveland.

''In December we lost five players for academic reasons and it shattered our
team,'' said Coach Ed Beglane, who is finishing his second season.

The coach said that one bright spot had been Ben Chong, a 15-year-old,
5-foot-5-inch refugee from South Vietnam. He entered the school as a sophomore
last fall, four years after coming to the United States with his parents and
four other children.

''Ben had never played basketball in Quinhon,'' said Beglane. ''He learned to
play here in public parks. He doesn't score much, but has a great ability to see
the whole court and to make fine passes. He got a chance to play when we lost
the five players and he's improved with every game.''

''He loves basketball and watches it on television all the time,'' Beglane went
on. ''He prefers the pro game to college basketball, which he thinks is too
slow. Ben tends to play out of control sometimes. He tells me: 'I love to play
100 miles an hour. I'm like Micheal Ray Richardson.' ''

Beglane estimates that Ben Chong is ''the most popular player'' with his
teammates because of his energy and ''his ability to keep everyone loose.''

''It will be great to have him around for two more years and watch him
progress,'' said the coach.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GALA IN WASHINGTON HONORS DEAN RUSK



BYLINE:
By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb 9


A former First Lady, three former Secretaries of State and scores of elder
statesmen from the foreign-policy and diplomatic establishment were invited to
the State Department's diplomatic reception rooms tonight to honor former
Secretary of State Dean Rusk.

It was a ritual particularly reflective of Washington, the coming together of
dignitaries to honor one of their own. Old rivalries were put aside for the
moment, partisan politics forgotten.

As portraits of Thomas Jefferson, John Jay and George Washington gazed down
benignly from the paneled walls, equally legendary but more contemporary movers
and shakers reminisced and drank champagne under the crystal chandeliers. Those
invited included Henry A. Kissinger, George F. Kennan, Lady Bird Johnson, Clark
Clifford, Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin of the Soviet Union, Alexander M. Haig
Jr., William P. Rogers and Kurt Waldheim, former Secretary General of the United
Nations.

The black-tie dinner, given by Secretary of State George P. Shultz and his wife,
Helena, and co-sponsored by Georgetown University and the Southern Center for
International Studies in Atlanta, was to announce the establishment of the Dean
and Virginia Rusk Fellowship at Georgetown's School of Foreign Service. A
$500,000 fund will provide an annual Rusk Fellowship in international law and
diplomacy, said George C. McGhee, chairman of the campaign, now well under way.
And today was, as well, Mr. Rusk's 75th birthday.

Mr. Rusk, professor of international law at the University of Georgia in Athens
for the last 15 years, served as Secretary of State for eight years in the
Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, one of the longest tenures in the post.

''He is a very modest man, and we weren't sure we could get him to go along with
this,'' said David D. Newsom, a former State Department official who directs
Georgetown's Institute for the Study of Diplomacy. ''Dean (Peter F.) Krogh of
our School of Foreign Service had been a White House Fellow under Rusk, and we
began to talk about the fact that there was nothing in Washington that honored
his name. As the word began to get around, Secretary Shultz heard about it and
suggested the announcement be made at a dinner here at the State Department.''



200 Colleagues and Friends

As a string quartet played in the background, more than 200 colleagues and
friends of the Rusks passed through the receiving line only to peel off and
greet other old friends with embraces and back slaps.

''The common denominator, what binds all these people together this evening,''
observed William B. Macomber, president of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and a
former high- ranking Foreign Service officer, ''is a respect for character and
brains, and Dean Rusk has both.''

''The thought of being here to salute our former leader and his wife was
irresistible,'' said his wife, Phyllis Macomber, who had served as a personal
assistant to Secretaries John Foster Dulles and Rusk. ''Mrs. Rusk had her own
office at the department and carried a tremendous load,'' she added, explaining
that the early 1960's were a time when developing countries were gaining
independence and establishing embassies in Washington. Virginia Rusk was
instrumental in organizing a hospitality and information service for diplomats
stationed here.

Clark Clifford, Secretary of Defense under Preiident Lyndon Baines Johnson,
first worked with Mr. Rusk in the Truman Administration and characterized him as
''a professional's professional.''

Among those who were invited to tonight's dinner were such familiar names as
Theodore and Gillian Sorensen, Alice Acheson, Orville and Jane Freeman, Sargent
and Eunice Shriver and Harry and Trish McPherson. Also expected were former
ambassadors and State Department officials who over the years have been
associated with such issues as the Berlin blockade, the Panama Canal treaties,
Middle East peace negotiations, Southeast Asia and disarmament: Sol M. Linowitz,
U. Alexis Johnson, Lucius D. Battle, Jacob D. Beam, Ellsworth Bunker, Gerard C.
Smith and Henry A. Byroade.

''I think Dean Rusk's contributions to the office of Secretary of State will
probably prove greater than was appreciated or realized during the years he was
in office,'' said Robert J. McCloskey. ''For just one reason - Vietnam. He
became so increasingly identified with that one issue that it overshadowed all
the other things he did, such as clearing away in a couple of meetings with
Gromyko the real underbrush that was holding up the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.''
Mr. McCloskey, who has had a long association with Mr. Rusk, serving as a State
Department spokesman during his tenure, paused and added: ''He went through one
of the toughest periods a secretary of state has ever experienced. He was a man
for all seasons.''

In recalling those years at the State Department, George W. Ball chuckled and
said: ''We worked every day of the week - Sundays, holidays. My wife and
Virginia Rusk would put out colored shirts on Saturday night so that when we
dressed to go to the State Department, we would know it was Sunday.''

As Under Secretary of State, Mr. Ball was at odds with the Administration over
its Vietnam policy. ''I disagreed constantly and incessantly and was rather a
nusiance,'' he recalled. ''But it never affected my relations with Secretary
Rusk - he encouraged me to express my dissent to President Johnson, and the two
of us have remained very good friends.''

The plans for the dinner in the Benjamin Franklin State Dining Room were
glitteringly formal: white linen, crystal, salmon-pink roses and white freesias.
After a four-course meal of lobster bisque, tenderloin of beef, cheeses and
strawberries Virginia, the serious toasting and honors were scheduled to begin
with Mrs. Johnson, Secretary Shultz, Mr. McGhee, C. Douglas Dillon and Benjamin
Read and offering verbal bouquets.

At the end of the evening, two Rusk granddaughters, Samantha Smith and Monica
Rusk, were to present a candlelighted cocoanut cake marking the 75th birthday of
the man Mr. McCloskey called ''totally self-effacing.''

''When he took that job his office was furnished with Government- issue ersatz
leather stuff,'' Mr. McCloskey continued. ''He used to say, 'When I leave all I
need to do is take my hat, my coat and my checkbook,' and that is exactly how he
left office eight years later - the Government- issue furniture was still
there.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of guests at party for Dean Rusk

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CRISIS IN LEBANON;
THE DISPUTE AT HOME: WAR POWERS ACT

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 357 words


The dispute between President Reagan and Congress on the War Powers Act focuses
on a resolution that became law last fall. It provides that the Marines could
remain in Lebanon for 18 months and that United States air and sea forces could
be used to take ''protective measures'' that might be necessary ''to insure the
safety'' of the American troops.

In announcing on Tuesday that he was moving the marines from their base at
Beirut International Airport to United States Navy ships offshore, President
Reagan said he had authorized the use of naval gunfire and air support against
units that have been shelling Beirut. The President said this was ''consistent
with the compromise joint resolution worked out last October with the Congress
with respect to our participation in the multinational force'' in Lebanon.

On Wednesday, the Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Democrat of
Massachusetts, said the use of the American firepower to suppress the shelling
of Beirut was ''absolutely not'' within the authority granted by the resolution
adopted last fall.

Mr. O'Neill and most other members of Congress had agreed that naval and air
power were necessary to protect the marines on duty in Beirut. But he and others
questioned whether the air and sea power would still be needed, and could be
used, after the marines pulled back.

'Certain Prerogatives'

Yesterday, a White House spokesman said that although protection of the marines
during their move to the ships was the legal basis for the new policy of
shelling in Lebanon, ''the President has certain prerogatives in other areas
outside the October 1983 resolution.''


The resolution last fall declared specifically that the War Powers Act of 1973
applied to the conflict in Lebanon.  The 1973 act, a consequence of the United
States' involvement in Vietnam, requires the President to notify Congress within
48 hours after he sends United States troops into certain combat situations, and
it prohibits him from keeping the troops in those areas for more than 90 days
unless Congress declares war or passes a joint resolution approving such action.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

3 CANDIDATES CRITICIZE SHELLING

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 387 words


Three of the eight candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination
yesterday applauded President Reagan's decision to order a pullback of the
marines in Lebanon. But they voiced concern about the future American naval and
air role in the region.

The Rev. Jesse Jackson told reporters in New York that Mr. Reagan was
''perpetrating a crude deception on the American people.'' He said that the
President's actions would escalate the fighting in Lebanon and that American
shelling of Syrian-held positions would cause ''massive destruction of Lebanese
villages.''

''Our boys are not dying,'' he said, ''but countless numbers of civilians are
being murdered by this latest assault. It's happening with a kind of blind,
racist arrogance that is a reminder of Vietnam.''

Senator John Glenn of Ohio said the President's action had ''brought a great
deal of relief to the country.'' But he said at a news conference in Cedar
Rapids, Iowa, that the country's mood had ''turned into very great concern''
because the President had not withdrawn American forces altogether.

U.S. Shelling Criticized

Mr. Glenn criticized the President's decision to shell Druse and Syrian
positions. ''Instead of bringing this tragedy to a halt, it is expanding,'' he
said. ''It is the worst of all options,'' he said.

Senator Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina said withdrawing the marines from
ground positions in Beirut was ''a victory for common sense.'' But he, too,
criticized the naval shelling, saying it was bound to undermine support for
President Amin Gemayel.

''The shelling is more bluff and gusto,'' he said in Washington, adding that it
was ''actually hurting what we want to help.''

''What we want to help is Gemayel,'' he said. ''What we want to help is American
influence. Now, when you shell, you lose your influence. Gemayel loses any
support he has, and there will be vindictiveness.''

On Wednesday, Walter F. Mondale, who is widely regarded as the front- running
Democratic candidate, called for Congressional hearings on the United States
military role in Lebanon.

''I stand for the continued stationing of U.S. naval forces at sea,'' Mr.
Mondale said at a news conference in Nashua, N.H. ''What my question is now is
it's not clear to me just what the nature of their new orders are.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'THE RINK'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1116 words


WHEN Chita Rivera steps down front to put over her first John Kander-Fred Ebb
song in ''The Rink,'' you feel a surge of relief. Liberated from the draconic
attire of ''Merlin'' and looking in every way terrific, Miss Rivera is in
command of a Broadway stage for the first time since her 1975 appearance in the
Kander-Ebb ''Chicago.'' And if her song is more likable than inspired, Miss
Rivera raises it higher: Her voice is firm and sparky; her crinkly smile, often
forced in recent years, is spontaneous; her taut dancer's body is in perfect
concord with the music's beat.

Miss Rivera has been a powerhouse performer for roughly three decades, and it's
a pleasure to see that power unleashed again, its force undiminished by time. As
''The Rink'' lurches forward, the star continues to delight - whether she's
leaping and high kicking in a jitterbug or brassily harmonizing with her
co-star, Liza Minnelli. Indeed, Miss Rivera is a performer you could watch
forever - but, in the end, even she's not enough to save ''The Rink.'' The
show's running time is forever and a day.

The turgid, sour new musical at the Martin Beck is a curious affair. As staged
by A. J. Antoon, much of it is as polished as Miss Rivera's skills. The small
supporting cast is capable, and Mr. Kander's melodies, orchestrated with panache
by Michael Gibson, can linger in the ear. But no glossy Broadway professionalism
can mask the work's phony, at times mean-spirited content - or give credence to
its empty pretensions. It's impossible to care about anything on stage except
Miss Rivera - and we even lose some interest in her, once she passes through a
gratuitous dance number simulating a gang rape.

The idea behind the show - which often seems a forced hybrid of ''Follies,''
John Guare's screenplay for ''Atlantic City'' and a previous Kander-Ebb musical,
''The Happy Time'' - was to create a Proustian- flavored reunion between a
long-estranged mother and her grown-up daughter. The acutely symbolic setting,
designed with ingenuity and affection by Peter Larkin, is a decaying roller rink
along the boardwalk of a tattered Eastern seaboard resort. Anna (Miss Rivera),
the rink's proprietor, has sold the old joint. But just as the wreckers arrive,
her daughter, Angel (Miss Minnelli), returns from a seven-year California exile
to search for roots and settle old scores.

What ensues in Terrence McNally's book is a series of repetitious present- day
squabbles, punctuated by flashbacks. Mr. McNally is a smart and witty
playwright, but you'd never know it from this synthetic effort. His dialogue is
banal, and his characters are ciphers. Anna is merely a spunky widow; Angel is a
caricatured 1960's dropout defined by scruffy clothes. ''The Rink'' is static
because nothing specific or compelling is at stake for the two women. Their only
real conflict is a generalized, all-purpose logjam: they've never learned how to
say ''I love you.''

To inflate the show, Mr. McNally pays lip service to sociological themes (such
as urban decay) and loads the memory segments with lurid, melodramatic
revelations that might well constitute a parody of William Inge. We learn that
Anna's late husband was an alcoholic womanizer; we also hear of an illegitimate
birth, Anna's postmarital promiscuity and a fatal car crash. Though none of
these soap-operatic incidents adds depth to Angel and Anna, they and that rape
do reinforce the evening's distasteful tone. Almost every male character is a
crude sexual adventurer, and both women are presented as reformed ''tramps.''

Mr. McNally paints himself into so many corners that he must resolve the
mother-daughter relationship by fiat. Angel and Anna end up on terms of
endearment thanks to another plot trick and several lines of ''I'm O.K. - You're
O.K.'' psychobabble. Mr. McNally also attempts to pander to the audience in a
climactic flashback: to free the daughter from her past, he presents antiwar
protesters of Angel's generation as bubbleheads who didn't even know where
Southeast Asia was. That cynical judgment is then embroidered in Miss Minnelli's
final song - in which Mr. Ebb's lyrics characterize the idealists of an entire
decade as ineffectual Frisbee throwers and draft-card burners. Somehow this
holier-than-thou indictment of the Vietnam War era lacks authority when couched
in trivial terms befitting Mr. Ebb's last show, ''Woman of the Year.''


Mr. Kander's discordant music for that final song sounds like ''Sweeney Todd''
played at the wrong speed, as does the music for an equally preposterous number
in which Miss Rivera angrily renounces her belief in God. When he sticks to
nostalgic, upbeat, show-biz songs - most of which provide a heavily ironic
counterpoint to the action - the composer writes with his usual flair. The best
number, though formulaic, is the first: a hurdy-gurdy evocation of memory, well
sung by Miss Minnelli and dreamily enlivened by Marc B. Weiss's atmospheric
lighting effects. The title song, though otherwise pointless, perks up Act II by
allowing the six-man chorus to perform some enjoyable Graciele Daniele
choreography on roller skates.

The talented chorus men play all the male roles in the show - and, for no valid
reason, some of the women. Jason Alexander comes off best, as Anna's one
well-meaning suitor. Until the end - when she opens up the floodgates of her
tear ducts - Miss Minnelli is convincing in the thankless role of the unkempt
daughter. But in ''The Rink,'' it's only Miss Rivera who spins.


A Daughter's Roots

THE RINK, book by Terrence McNally; music by John Kander; lyrics by Fred Ebb;
directed by A. J. Antoon; choreography by Graciela Daniele; scenery designed by
Peter Larkin; costumes designed by Theoni V. Aldredge; lighting designed by Marc
B. Weiss; sound designed by Otts Munderloh; hair and makeup by J. Roy Helland;
musical director, Paul Gemignani; dance arrangements by Tom Fay; orchestrations
by Michael Gibson; assistant choreographer, Tina Paul; associate producer, Tina
Chen. Presented by Jules Fisher, Roger Berlind and Joan Cullman, Milbro
Productions, Kenneth-John Productions Inc., in association with Jonathan Farkas.
At the Martin Beck Theater, 302 West 45th Street. AngelLiza Minnelli Little
GirlKim Hauser Lino, Lenny, Punk and Uncle Fausto Jason Alexander Buddy, Hiram,
Mrs. Jackson, Suitor and Junior MillerMel Johnson Jr. Guy, Dino, Father Rocco
and Debbie DubermanScott Holmes Lucky, Sugar, Punk, Arnie, Suitor, Bobby Perillo
and DannyScott Ellis Tony, Tom, Punk, Suitor and Peter Reilly Frank Mastrocola
Ben, Dino's Father, Mrs. Silverman and Sister PhilomenaRonn Carroll AnnaChita
Rivera


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Chita Rivera

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'CELEBRITY,' A MYSTERY IN THREE PARTS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 813 words


FOR those with little or no interest in the winter Olympics being given
saturation coverage on Channel 7, the top entertainment event is likely to be
''Celebrity,'' a six-and-a-half-hour, three-episode mini-series getting under
way on Channel 4 Sunday at 9 P.M. Based on a novel by the late Tommy Thompson,
it is a macho equivalent to the elaborate stories that Judith Krantz turns out
so well.

The story starts in the late 1970's as a shot rings out in a dilapidated country
cabin. After the police get to the scene, the local district attorney arrives,
looks around and says quietly, ''Ain't this a mess.'' It seems three friends
were, for some reason, having a reunion at the place. One is now dead, another
severely injured. The third is apparently the murderer. The viewer doesn't know
which is which as the film goes back to 1950 and the day before the three, known
in their Texas town as ''the three princes,'' are about to graduate from high
school.

Kleber (Ben Masters) the ''Prince of Power,'' has been voted ''most likely to
succeed.'' Mack (Joseph Bottoms) is the ''Prince of Charm,'' the handsome and
outstanding athlete. And T. J. (Michael Beck) is the ''Prince of Temptation,''
the ''most popular,'' with a special talent for seducing young women. When rain
cancels a planned celebration picnic, the boys decide to get drunk at that same
country cabin, which happens to belong to T. J.'s uncle. Before the night is
out, they have become enmeshed in an incident that will affect the rest of their
lives. They agree to a pact of secrecy about the events.

Nearly 30 years go by. Kleber goes to Columbia University and, beginning his
career on a Houston newspaper, becomes a prize-winning journalist. Mack has his
football career cut short by an injury but, after marrying his therapist and
having a son, goes on to become a matinee idol in movies. He lives in Hollywood
with a succession of male lovers. T. J. enters a disastrous marriage with a
woman who, as his uncle recalls, always had one foot in the funny farm. He gets
into trouble, often finding himself in jail, but discovers his true calling as
the head of a questionable religious sect called the Chosen.

All of this is skillfully intertwined in William Hanley's script with the major
events of the times, from President John F. Kennedy's assassination through the
horrors of Vietnam and Watergate.

The three leading roles are played extremely well. As T. J., Mr. Beck has the
flashiest role, but Mr. Bottoms and Mr. Masters prove equally impressive, right
down to the accuracy of their Texas drawls. Then, the producers, Rosilyn Heller
and Richard L. O'Connor, and the director, Paul Wendkos, have recruited an
unusually strong supporting cast.

The D.A. who investigates the case is played by Hal Holbrook, his assistant by
Jennifer Warren. Kleber's first newspaper boss is done to a wily
Senator-Sam-Ervin turn by James Whitmore. The defense attorney at the final
trial is depicted by Ned Beatty, a master of skewering good old boys. Karen
Austin plays a cool playwright, who becomes the object of Kleber's attentions.
Tess Harper, who starred opposite Robert Duvall in the film ''Tender Mercies,''
becomes Mack's neglected wife, while Dinah Manoff portrays T. J.'s disturbed
spouse. This outstanding cast, combined with filming in Texas, New York and Los
Angeles, makes ''Celebrity'' work very nicely indeed.

David Bowie Concert On HBO Sunday

Sunday at 10 P.M., Home Box Office, the pay-television service, continues its
''in concert performance'' efforts with an hourlong production titled ''David
Bowie: Serious Moonlight!'' For a good many years, Mr. Bowie has been juggling,
simultaneously and successfully, careers as a rock musician and an actor, on
stage and in the movies. This concert took place during a 90-city,
four-continent tour with his first-rate band, led by Carlos Alomar and featuring
Earl Slick as a superb lead guitarist. It was taped at the Pacific National
Exhibition Coliseum in Vancouver, British Columbia.

Mr. Bowie is not a terribly dynamic rock performer. In this instance, he appears
to be almost prissy in his pastel suits and ties, topped by his carefully
coiffed blond, just about platinum, hair. But he surrounds himself with energy
in the form of complicated lighting and of occasional playlets, offered in the
shadows by his backup vocalists, Frank and George Simms. In terms of ''action,''
Mr. Slick the guitarist is far more animated than Mr. Bowie, who occasionally
might wriggle his body a bit and throw a coquettish wink at the audience and
cameras.

The music eventually wins out, building up to often seductive images in the
lyrics and to a fine driving force in the sound, helped by three talented
saxophonists. Most of Mr. Bowie's hits are included, ''Let's Dance,'' ''China
Girl,'' ''Young Americans.'' His fans will not be disappointed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ben Masters

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA AND SOVIET SIGN $1.2 BILLION TRADE PACT

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 446 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 10


China and the Soviet Union signed a $1.2 billion trade agreement today.

The announcement came as the Chinese Government announced the death of Yuri V.
Andropov. But it withheld comment on the Soviet leader, whose tenure saw a
continuation of the easing in relations between the two countries that had begun
under his predecessor, Leonid I. Brezhnev.

The trade protocol provides for an increase of about 50 percent in commerce
between the two countries in the next year. It was signed here by Ivan T.
Grishin, a Soviet Deputy Foreign Trade Minister, and Chen Jie, who holds a
similar post in the Chinese Foreign Trade Ministry.

A Chinese Trade Ministry spokesman said the agreement specified that two-way
trade should rise by roughly $400 million - from last year's $800 billion to
about $1.2 billion - in the next year.

Some Foresaw Bigger Increase

There had been expectations that the two sides would agree to double their trade
in line with an accord reportedly reached late last year during a visit by
Deputy Foreign Minister Mikhail S. Kapitsa.

East European officials said transportation and supply problems affecting the
amount of goods the Soviet Union can deliver to China appeared to be one factor
limiting the scope of the agreement.

Western diplomats also noted that the two sides had trouble meeting the targets
in last year's protocol and said they thought any attempt to double trade would
be unattainable.

Details of the agreement were not officially announced, but Soviet officials
said it called for large increases in Soviet exports of machinery, cars and
timber to China as well as steel alloys, a new item.

The Chinese in turn will export more foods, consumer goods and metal ore,
including rare-earth metals, the sources said.

Andropov Death Reported Quickly

The official New China News Agency reported Mr. Andropov's death about an hour
after it was announced in the Soviet Union, quoting the Soviet announcement and
giving a few biographical details on the dead leader.

Chinese-Soviet relations began to improve under Mr. Brezhnev and the process
continued under Mr. Andropov, with trade, cultural and educational exchanges
increasing sharply.

But there were no major breakthroughs in ending a freeze of more than 20 years
in political and diplomatic ties between the two Communist nations, which regard
each other as ideological adversaries and security threats.

China has said relations cannot improve substantially until Moscow removes
''three major obstacles'' - its occupation of Afghanistan, support for Vietnam's
occupation of Cambodia and the large Soviet troop presence along the Chinese
border.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANDROPOV PRESSED FOR ECONOMIC PROGRESS AS DETENTE DECLINED

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3788 words


Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov, who died Thursday in Moscow at the age of 69, came
to the pinnacle of the Kremlin hierarchy in November 1982 after 15 years at the
head of the K.G.B., the Soviet Union's internal-security and intelligence
agency.

During his rule of a little more than a year, Mr. Andropov made tentative
attempts to improve the performance of the Soviet Union's Government-run
economy, which had long been plagued by waste and inefficiency. He did so one
step at a time, explaining his caution with the old Russian proverb, ''It is
better to measure seven times before cutting once.''

But in foreign affairs, East-West relations deteriorated badly as arms control
talks broke down and the two sides deployed new types of medium- range missiles
in Europe, apparently signaling a new round in the arms race.

Mr. Andropov had moved in the inner circles of the Communist Party for many
years. He clearly put himself in position for the top post just six months
before Leonid I. Brezhnev's death when he left the K.G.B. and became one of the
national party secretaries under Mr. Brezhnev, who was the General Secretary.

Mr. Brezhnev had put him in charge of the security police 15 years earlier, to
reorganize the agency after the jolting defection to the United States by
Svetlana Alliluyeva, Stalin's daughter, and to enforce strict party control.

A More Benign Public Image

Freed of his duties as the police and espionage chief, Mr. Andropov moved
swiftly to acquire a more benign public image, then deftly outmaneuvered
potential rivals in what specialists on the Soviet Union dubbed a ''presucession
struggle.''

When Mr. Brezhnev died, Mr. Andropov took over as General Secretary with
astonishing ease, even though he apparently won the first vote in the Politburo
by only a narrow majority. He then added two more titles that had taken Mr.
Brezhnev years to acquire: the largely ceremonial one of chairman of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, or President of the Soviet Union, and the more
important one of chairman of the National Defense Council, supervising the armed
forces.

Mr. Andropov wasted no time to impress on citizens and officials alike that he
meant business: The Soviet Union would maintain its defenses and its strength
abroad at whatever cost. But at home there was to be a truly new regime to root
out corruption and sloth, from top to bottom. Indifference to work discipline,
pervading a country where ideology and exhortations had turned into soporific
rituals, would no longer be tolerated.



Younger Officials Were Sought

''The main thing,'' he remarked in his first speech as General Secretary of the
party, ''is to speed up work to improve the entire sphere of economic
management, including administration, planning and the economic mechanism.''
Sloganeering, he declared, was not enough.

For some time, Brezhnev holdovers at the top and their dependents at the middle
level of the party bureaucracy stood their ground. Mr. Andropov countered with a
campaign to bring younger people to the fore through regional party elections.

A cautious program to invigorate the stagnant economy through greater autonomy
on the factory level was announced last July. It, too, hardly dented the
entrenched system of centralized economic planning, which feared private
initiative.

Russian shoppers noticed some improvement in their food supplies, although most
ascribed it more to favorable weather and a somewhat more abundant harvest than
to Mr. Andropov.

Dissidents Harassed

Some inroads were made against corruption, but the political and factory bosses
who had grown fat over the years did not suddenly mend their ways. They just
became more careful.

Harassment of dissidents continued, and any notion of a loosening of state
control over culture and the arts had long been squelched.

Abroad, the Soviet Union remained mired militarily in Afghanistan, its efforts
to improve relations with China hardly moved and the confrontation with the
United States worsened.

The Soviet downing of a South Korean airliner last September further complicated
diplomacy.

Two weeks before the plane incident, Mr. Andropov disappeared from view, and he
was kept out of public sight for nearly six months by the illness that led to
his death.

Missile Talks Collapsed

In this period, Soviet relations with the United States worsened as nuclear arms
control talks on both strategic, or long-range, arms and medium-range missiles
in Europe collapsed last November.

President Reagan, apparently under pressure from his European allies, sought to
stem the deterioration in Soviet-American relations last month by urging the
Russians to forge ''a constructive working relationship'' with the United States
and to return to the negotiations on arms control.

Mr. Andropov responded, in a statement in Pravda, by saying the Soviet Union
valued contacts with the United States but looked to ''practical deeds'' from
the Americans to show that they were serious. He insisted that the United States
and its allies would have to ''display readiness to return to the situation''
that existed before deployment of the American medium-range missiles in Western
Europe began in December.

Ineffective Ministers Retired

At the beginning of his rule, Mr. Andropov (pronounced ahn-DROH-puff) promptly
shook up the Government, retiring some ineffective ministers and shifting others
to less critical spots. Proven performers moved into key positions. Ministries
began to tackle some of the worst bottlenecks, such as the national railroad
system, whose service as the primary freight hauler matched the inefficiency of
many of the industries it served.

Government agencies received notice that their personnel must strictly observe
work hours. The public at large found that out, too, when officers fanned out to
stores, movie theaters and bath houses for identity checks to corral truant
workers. It was a general but short-lived offensive on an attitude encapsulated
in the Russian saying: ''They pretend to pay us, and we pretend to work.'' Mr.
Andropov visited factory workers and told them that widespread loafing, drinking
and arriving late to work or not arriving at all did nothing to relieve the
shortage of goods. But discipline, he said, was not just for workers. ''It
applies to everyone,'' he declared on a Moscow factory floor, ''starting with
ministers.''

Heard Workers' Complaints

In a performance recalling a predecessor, Nikita S. Khrushchev, he did not
merely hector but spoke with the workers and listened to their complaints.
Within months, there was a marked rise in labor productivity, and the
performance of the Soviet economy in 1983 turned out to be a significant
improvement over the previous year.

But while Mr. Andropov's succession provided a psychological jolt at home, the
opportunity for new departures in foreign affairs seemed to come and go.

He himself was in the background after a Soviet fighter shot down the South
Korean airliner on Sept. 1 with the loss of 269 lives, causing a worldwide
outcry.

Aside from having a large Soviet military force tied down in a costly and
seemingly endless war in Afghanistan, Moscow remained burdened with expensive
commitments in Angola, Ethiopia, Vietnam, Cuba and elsewhere.

Talks to improve relations with China failed to overcome mutual suspicions. The
initial outcome amounted to a tentative agreement to tone down mutual
accusations and to expand trade, leaving the bothersome political and border
issues for another day.

A Wariness in Washington

The missed opportunity appeared most glaring in respect to the United States,
where the Reagan Administration was wary of Mr. Andropov's overtures and stuck
to a firm tone in its denunciations of the Soviet Union.

In his early statements on arms and negotiations to control them, Mr. Andropov
vowed to keep the Soviet Union strong. He denied American assertions that Moscow
had superiority or sought it, and he softened his language with conciliatory
phrases, calling for a return to detente and, specifically, improved relations
with the United States. Lesser commentators answered American talk of ''evil''
in Moscow with predictable indignation.

The confrontation took an ominous turn in the spring of 1983, with President
Reagan's call for antimissile defenses in space that might, years hence, render
the Soviet Union's nuclear forces useless, at least in theory.

Mr. Andropov struck back. He accused Mr. Reagan of making a ''bid to disarm the
Soviet Union,'' warning that the two sides would be heading into a ''runaway
race'' in offensive and defensive nuclear weapons.

Impudent Distortions'

He charged Mr. Reagan with ''impudent distortions of the Soviet Union's policy''
and ''deliberate untruth'' about a buildup of Soviet missiles in Europe. Mr.
Andropov said that Washington was trying to bolster its ability to fight and win
a nuclear war and that this was ''not just irresponsible, it is insane.''

At home, it had become evident that the early impetus of the Andropov regime had
to a large extent fallen victim to backstage political in-fighting. There was
the recalcitrance of lower- level officials who owed their allegiance to the old
guard of Brezhnev allies on top. And the old guard seemed too entrenched for Mr.
Andropov, without a clearly defined power base of his own, to carry out the
sweeping changes he had evidently envisioned.

Mr. Andropov had brought with him a past of no-nonsense intolerance of the
flickers of political protest, which his K.G.B. - the Committee for State
Security - ruthlessly stamped out under his chairmanship.

As Ambassador to Budapest, he had a hand in the violent suppression of the
Hungarian uprising in 1956. And as a ranking member of the hierarchy, he figured
in the decisions to invade Czechoslovakia in 1968, to send Soviet troops into
Afghanistan in 1979 and to make the Polish Government squelch the Solidarity
movement, and perhaps in the declaration of martial law in Poland in December
1981.

A Cautious Attitude Perceived

Some people in Moscow suggested that he urged caution on Afghanistan and,
drawing on his Hungarian experiences, resisted others who were ready to order
the Soviet Army into Poland.

There were facets to Mr. Andropov that set him apart from the old men who ran an
enormous country largely on momentum.

By height alone, Mr. Andropov stood out at state occasions among his colleagues
on the ruling Politburo. His steady gaze from behind rimless glasses and his
donnish appearance suggested a scholar rather than a functionary or ideologue.
His intelligence was undisputed. Some Russians also liked his style and bearing,
believing he might do them proud in meetings with foreign leaders.

Despite his disciplinarian traits, Mr. Andropov struck many Russians as an
independent thinker, a straightforward leader and a capable politician.

Unlike his predecessor, Mr. Andropov avoided the sort of personality cult that
had grown around Mr. Brezhnev and his predecessors - the portraits hanging
everywhere and functionaries treating his every utterance as a revelation worthy
of Marx or Lenin.

In contrast to most Soviet leaders, Mr. Andropov also knew about the outside
world, if only by having lived abroad during his assignment in Budapest. It was
an Eastern European capital but one with a Western flair.

Before and after his rise, it was said in Moscow - not denied and not confirmed
- that his dour, enigmatic countenance masked a man very different from the
Kremlin norm.

He was said to have studied English at some point - perhaps in connection with
his service in Hungary as a diplomat - but no foreigner ever reported hearing
him speak anything but Russian.

Well Informed on the World His espionage sources and inherent intelligence made
him the best-informed of the party leaders - on Western affairs as well as his
own country's, about which he had kept the dossiers.

Little is known about Mr. Andropov's family, in keeping with the tradition among
Communist leaders of not publicizing their private lives. A son, Igor, studied
at the Moscow Institute of International Relations and became a specialist on
the United States. He is a delegate to the East- West talks in Stockholm on
security in Europe. A daughter, Irina, is reported to have studied the
humanities at Moscow University, developed an interest in the theater and
married Aleksandr Filipov, an actor of Moscow's Taganka Theater.

Yuri Andropov had his origins in the workaday world of prerevolutionary Russia
that bred most of his peers in the upper reaches of the party.

Mr. Andropov was born June 15, 1914, at the railroad settlement of Nagutskoye,
in the Northern Caucasus region, into the family of a railroad worker. He went
to work at 16, holding jobs as a telegraph operator, Volga boat worker and
apprentice film technician before completing a course at a technical college in
1936.

His education continued at a state university in Petrozavodsk, capital of
Karelia, later to become the Karelo- Finnish Republic for a time. There he also
began the party work that earned him admission to the Higher Party School of the
Central Committee.

Started as Youth Leader

He was an organizer and functionary for Komsomol, the Young Communist League, in
Russia proper before being put in charge of the Karelian Komsomol in 1940, a
post he held for four years. Inducted into the party in 1939, he rose through
the ranks and during World War II used the Karelo-Finnish party organization to
field guerrilla units behind German lines.

Mr. Andropov's diligence drew the eye of Otto V. Kuusinen, a prominent figure in
Cominform, the Soviet-dominated world organization of Communist parties that was
dissolved in 1943. Backed by Mr. Kuusinen, a survivor of the Stalinist purges,
Mr. Andropov's career thrived.

He was made a party secretary in Karelia in 1947, and in 1951 was called to
Moscow to serve on the staff of the Central Committee as an inspector and
section chief.

Mr. Andropov was attached to the diplomatic service in 1953. He served as
counselor in the Soviet Embassy in Budapest and, in 1954, was promoted to
Ambassador. It was this stint that made him the only Soviet leader since Lenin
to have lived abroad for any length of time.  It was a time of trouble in
Hungary, with unrest building toward the uprising of 1956. Budapest became a
battlefield that November. Soviet tanks poured across the border to overwhelm
what Moscow regarded as a threat to its security buffer in Eastern Europe.

Fateful Decision in Hungary

This came despite the Kremlin's assurances via Mr. Andropov to Imre Nagy, the
reform-minded Hungarian leader, that no intervention was taking place. Angered
by such duplicity, the Hungarians then made the fateful decision to pull out of
the Warsaw Pact and so informed Mr. Andropov.

The commander of Hungary's national guard at the time, Gen. Bela Kiraly,
bitterly reflected later in American exile on an encounter he had with the
Ambassador.

''Here was this man Andropov who clearly understood what was going on,'' Mr.
Kiraly said, ''yet he pretended until the last moment to me and to the Prime
Minister and to others that everything was business as usual. Even pirates,
before they attack another ship, hoist a black flag. He was absolutely
calculating.''

Various accounts identify Mr. Andropov as the one who planned Hungary's future
and persuaded Janos Kadar, a Hungarian party leader, to join the Kremlin's side.
And as the pincers closed around Budapest, Mr. Andropov apparently talked a
reluctant Mr. Khrushchev, the Kremlin chief, into installing Mr. Kadar as Mr.
Nagy's successor.

Mr. Andropov returned to Moscow in 1957 but kept a close watch on Hungary. As
Mr. Kadar evolved the economic decentralization program sometimes referred to as
''goulash Communism,'' Hungarians made their peace with the authorities, and Mr.
Andropov was given credit for Moscow's tolerance of Budapest's unorthodox ways.

Roamed the Countryside

Hungarians who knew Mr. Andropov said after his installation as Kremlin chief
that he had been like no other Soviet diplomat. They remembered his roaming the
countryside to talk with villagers and workers. Many noted the quality of his
mind, describing him as a man who thought before he spoke.

Referring to the events of 1956, a Budapest editor, Janos Berecz, said in an
interview: ''He learned from that experience. He knows perfectly well that the
crisis here, and similar crises elsewhere in Eastern Europe, have nothing to do
with Western imperialists arriving here and manufacturing difficulties. He knows
that crises arise from within and have to be solved from within. That counts for
a lot.''

Westerners also pointed out that Mr. Andropov had arrived in Hungary as a
40-year-old bureaucrat and turned proconsul in remarkably short order. When
Hungary fell apart, this normally would have been the ticket to oblivion for
somebody in his position, they said. Instead, Mr. Andropov moved up.

His first task back in Moscow in 1957 was to head the Central Committee's
department for relations with other Communist countries, a job requiring great
diplomatic skill after Hungary.

No Return to Terrorism

That year coincided with the 50th anniversary of the Soviet security service.
Mr. Andropov was quoted on that occasion as having said there was no return for
the K.G.B. to the methods of the dreaded predecessors notorious for murderous
excesses in the Stalin era.

Mr. Andropov became a member of the Central Committee in 1961 and joined the
Secretariat a year later.

Mr. Khrushchev fell from power in 1964 and Mr. Brezhnev soon emerged as the sole
leader. In 1967 he promoted Mr. Andropov to nonvoting candidate membership in
the all-important Politburo and sent him to K.G.B. headquarters on Moscow's
Dzerzhinsky Square.

Mr. Brezhnev's purpose was to clamp firm political control on a service that
commanded nearly a million people and whose reputation for legality or respect
for the individual was nil.

In its various incarnations, the agency had usurped vast powers, functioning as
a political and security police force as well as an intelligence and
counterintelligence service. Its internal-security role waned only after
Stalin's death in 1953 when its longtime chief, Lavrenti P. Beria, was secretly
tried and shot in a power struggle.

By the time Mr. Andropov arrived at Dzerzhinsky Square, the watchword was
''socialist legality'' and the K.G.B.'s main concern was external security -
including espionage and covert operations.

No Squeamishness at K.G.B.

The terror had gone for the average citizen, but there remained enough internal
police work for Mr. Andropov to show his ideological mettle and to disabuse
those among his peers who suspected him of squeamishness because of his
comparatively easy-going style.

Doubters who voiced their views in public could no longer be shot or simply
herded to prisons and forced-labor camps. Instead the K.G.B. under Mr. Andropov
had poets and writers bundled off to psychiatric clinics when they overstepped
the line. Others were tried on political charges such as slandering the state,
for which they were given jail sentences.  The most prominent and most
inconvenient cases presumably were decided at the highest level in the Kremlin.
Still, it was Mr. Andropov's K.G.B. that deported the writer Aleksandr I.
Solzhenitzyn and banished Andrei D. Sakharov, the physicist and rights advocate,
from Moscow to Gorky to sever his contacts with foreigners.

The Politburo decided in May 1982 that it was safe to put a career security
official in charge of the K.G.B. again.

Gamble for a Power Base

Mr. Andropov's move from the agency was seen as a gamble in which he yielded his
power base to put some distance between himself and the K.G.B. This presumably
improved his standing in the contest for the mantle of Mr. Brezhnev.

Mr. Andropov had won full membership in the Politburo in 1973. His status grew
further with the army general's rank he added to his many decorations, including
two Orders of Lenin. And he promptly showed his skill at political infighting.

His public speeches showed him second to none in upholding the leading role of
the party in society, ruling out ''bourgeois pluralism'' in a Communist country,
decrying ''Eurocommunism'' and insisting on a strong military.

The difference in his approach lay in remarks, for instance, that Marxism-
Leninism was ''intolerant of all stagnation'' - which meant he believed urgent
changes were needed - or that armed might without a healthy economy did not make
for security.

Suslov's Death an Opportunity

Mr. Andropov went into action after the death of Mikhail A. Suslov, the
Stalinist party ideologue, in early 1982. There was word in Moscow that Mr.
Andropov told a Central Committee meeting that he wanted to leave D zerzhinsky
Square and take over Mr. Suslov's duties.

His principal rival was thought to be Konstantin U. Chernenko, long a Brezhnev
aide, friend and favorite. Mr. Andropov was perceived as more intelligent,
enlightened and, above all, pragmatic.  In addition, he apparently had the
backing of the K.G.B., the military and two key members of the Politburo,
Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko and Defense Minister Dmitri F. Ustinov, who
engineered the outcome. High- ranking party officials, preoccupied with
Soviet-American relations, reportedly thought his familiarity with American
affairs equipped him to deal with the adversary.

Rumors of a Power Play

Mr. Brezhnev died on the morning of Nov. 10, 1982, after 18 years at the helm,
and Mr. Andropov was installed as his successor as General Secretary of the
Communist Party two days later. There were rumors of a brief power struggle. But
when the country returned to business after Mr. Brezhnev's burial, Mr. Andropov
was plainly in command.

At first a group of Brezhnev loyalists led by Mr. Chernenko appeared to block
some of Mr. Andropov's moves toward the thorough housecleaning that might have
cost them their positions and influence.

But as Mr. Andropov's first year in office wore on, he appeared to consolidate
his authority. The appointment of two new full members of the Politburo last
December was widely interpreted as enhancing the position of Mr. Andropov, and a
further gain in strength for the party leader was seen in a shuffle of regional
officials in January.

By this time, however, he had already been out of public view for five months.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Yuri Andropov in 1955, 1958, at Brezhnev funeral; table of
highlights of Andropov's tenure

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHINESE REFUGEES FROM VIETNAM THRIVE IN CHINATOWN

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 796 words


When everything finally came apart in South Vietnam in April 1975 and it seemed
that all of Saigon was trying to scale the American Embassy walls to get out,
Henry Chao, who owned a match factory, says he found seats for himself, his wife
and his six children on the last airplane out of the country.

''One of the officers was a friend,'' he said.

Mr. Chao's journey eventually brought him to New York's Chinatown, where, like
other ethnic Chinese from Vietnam, he has found success. He is president or
general manager of three Chinatown restaurants and an import-export company.

''I have relatives here,'' he said, in explaining his good fortune.

As a Chinese, Mr. Chao benefits from a worldwide network of more than 21 million
overseas Chinese whose family and clan connections link them across national
boundaries as a powerful economic force.

The Chinese community in pre-Communist Vietnam was a mainstay of its economy.
And although not all ethnic Chinese refugees from Vietnam have had the success
here Mr. Chao has had, these same connections have helped make their transition
to American life much smoother than that of another refugee group - the ethnic
Vietnamese.

Many of the ethnic Chinese refugees in New York have gravitated to the city's
Chinatown, where, usually in joint partnerships, they have set up a score of
restaurants, grocery stores or other small businesses.

Ethnic Vietnamese can also be seen hard at work in Chinatown, but they are more
likely to be manning street stalls selling vegetables, toys or cheap clothing.

''Some of the Vietnamese selling on the street rent the sidewalk from a Chinese
refugee store,'' said Mr. Chao, who is now president of an organization called
the Vietnam-Cambodia-Laos Chinese-Descent Association.

Simon Chow, director of the refugee assistance program for the Chinatown
Planning Council, recently conducted a study of refugee businesses in the area
for the State Department of Social Services. He found 20 to 30 small businesses
run by refugees from Vietnam, virtually all of them ethnic Chinese.

''They live in a very thrifty way, with five or eight people in a one-bedroom
apartment, and they keep their capital in gold tiles,'' he said. ''They came in
1975 and some of them received government assistance, and now suddenly they own
a restaurant.''

Mr. Chao, the restaurant owner, said: ''At the beginning you work very hard
because you are a refugee and you have no money. You work 12 hours a day with no
day off. After one year you have $5,000 or $6,000. After two years you have
$10,000.

''Once you have money, it's easier to do business. We already have experience
from Vietnam in how to do business with money,'' he said.

But hard work is not the only secret of Mr. Chao's success. The other secret is
his connections in the Chinese community.

Life Same as in Vietnam

A number of ethnic Chinese businessmen and their employees interviewed in
Chinatown who came from Vietnam said they felt themselves to be Chinese more
than they were Vietnamese.

Their flight from Vietnam, therefore, in which many simply moved from one
Chinatown to another, has not been as great a wrench as for many ethnic
Vietnamese.

Duong Nguyen, for example, selling fish at the Vietnamese-owned Wo Sing Food
Company on Mott Street, said that life for him feels no different in New York's
Chinatown than his native Cholon, the Chinatown of Saigon, which is now known as
Ho Chi Minh City.

Friends Around the World

Howard Duong, working at the Tan Duc Trading Corporation, a grocery owned by his
father, said, ''We lived among other Chinese in Vietnam,'' just as they do here.

He said his father was helped in his new life here by friends in the import-
export business with whom he had dealt in the past.

Such connections are often closest within the different Chinese regional groups.
Mr. Chao, like many Chinese in both Vietnam and America, is a Chao Chow.

''If I go to Hong Kong, I have friends,'' he said. ''If I go to Singapore,
Malaysia, Thailand or Taiwan, I have friends. Now I go anywhere, I have
friends.''

He added: ''There are many Chao Chow now in Europe, Canada, Australia, Japan. I
have friends in America, too, especially in California, Houston, Louisiana and
Washington.''

Relatives who had come to the United States ahead of him gave Mr. Chao his start
here, and he spent his first two years as a bookkeeper for three Chinese
restaurants before setting up his own business.

It is the kind of start few non-Chinese refugees can hope for.

''If the 100 percent Vietnamese people open up a business here it is more
difficult for them,'' Mr. Chao said.

''They can only do business with the Vietnamese people,'' he added, ''not the
Chinese.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Chinatown shops

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
 Jersey to Conduct Study of Dioxin

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 86 words

DATELINE: PATERSON, N.J., Feb. 10


The first comprehensive medical study in the country on the effect on Vietnam
veterans of dioxin in Agent Orange is scheduled to begin within a month at a
hospital here, officials said today.

The study will involve a number of tests, which are expected to take six months,
at the Barnert Memorial Hospital Center. The tests will be paid for by the New
Jersey Agent Orange Commission and will be conducted by Dr. Henry Velez,
director of the hospital's Center for Occupational and Preventative Health Care.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

V.A. CRITICAL OF OFFICIALSAT WESTCHESTER HOSPITAL

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 655 words


A report by investigators from the Veterans Administration has recommended a
major leadership reorganization at the Franklin D. Roosevelt Hospital in
Montrose, N.Y., the largest psychiatric facility in the V.A. system.

The report cites ''dismal surroundings,'' ''ineffective medical leadership,''
widespread staff shortages and ''serious deficiencies'' in patient care there.
It recommends that the hospital director, Corydon Heard Jr., and the chief of
staff, Dr. Gaston Trigos, be relieved of their positions.

Dr. Trigos was reported to be out of the country on vacation and the hospital
said he could not be reached. Mr. Heard's secretary said he was away for the day
and was unreachable.

However, in past interviews, Mr. Heard has said that he was being made a
scapegoat for the hospital's problems and that the real problem was a history of
the V.A. in Washington not providing enough funds for the hospital, which is in
Westchester County.

''The report confirms many of the misgivings that I had about the hospital,''
said Representative Hamilton Fish Jr., a Republican from Millbrook, who
requested the investigation.

It was spurred by the Dec. 2 suicide of Karl Lerchenmueller Jr., a V.A.
psychiatric patient who hanged himself at a local jail while on an unsupervised
day pass from the hospital. The suicide became a rallying point for community
and veterans' leaders, who have been critical of the 1,400-bed facility.

The report, made public yesterday, points out that at the Vietnam Veteran Stress
Unit, where Mr. Lerchenmueller was a patient, there were ''substantial internal
problems'' that ''were not perceived'' by hospital officials. These problems
include drug and alcohol abuse by patients and a lack of firm direction by the
psychiatric staff, the report said.

It also criticizes the hospital for being too quick to call the police when
patients act up. Mr. Lerchenmueller was arrested by the state police last fall
after arguing with a hospital cafeteria worker.

Local Relations 'Unacceptable'

The report sides with community leaders from nearby Peekskill who had complained
for months that hospital officials would not meet to discuss what to do about
patients wandering aimlessly through the city. ''Community relations at this
medical center are at an unacceptable level,'' the report states.

These were some of the deficiencies in medical care at the hospital that the
report cited:


- ''The numbers of physicians, nurses and nursing assistants are short of the
number needed to meet minimal standards of patient care.'' The staff- to-patient
ratio is the third lowest among the 172 V.A. hospitals.


- At night there is only one physician on duty at the hospital, so ''it is
unlikely that sufficient coverage will be provided.''


- ''The intensive-care unit is poorly designed.''


- The lack of therapists ''is reflected in the lack of adequate programs on most
units.'' The V.A. did not release all its corrective recommendations because of
''privacy considerations'' for personnel involved, said Vernon Clayton, a V.A.
spokesman. However, those recommendations were given to Representative Fish, who
made them public.

Besides the removal of Mr. Heard and Dr. Trigos, the recommendations include
these:


- A probationary period of six to nine months for the chief of psychiatry, Dr.
Frank Gold, and the chief of nursing, Hugh McGowan, to see whether they make
progress in correcting deficiencies in their departments. Both declined to
comment yesterday.


- The immediate establishment of an ''active and open relationship with
community leaders.''


- An improvement in relations with the hospital's affiliated medical school, the
New York Medical College, in Valhalla.


If those funds are insufficient, the V.A. would have to go to Congress for an
increased appropriation, according to Nicholas Hayes, an aide to Representative
Fish.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Sovfoto

MISSILE CONFRONTATION: The Soviet strategy of trying to dissuade Western
Europeans from accepting U.S.-made medium range missiles collapsed last fall as
the rockets arrived in Britain and other countries. The Russians responded by
walking out of the medium-range talks.
CONSUMER LINES: Despite continued shortages of consumer goods and foods, there
have been no signs of serious dissatisfaction among the Soviet people apart from
widespread grumbling. They seem capable of tightening their belts to an extent
few in the West would tolerate.

Associated Press

UNREST IN POLAND: After months of upheaval in Poland, relative quiet has
returned to Warsaw. The Soviet Union has applied additional political pressure
on the Polish leaders and has also consolidated its influence over the other
Warsaw Pact countries.

Associated Press

THE WORK FORCE: High-technology industry remains decades behind the West's and
Soviet farms are unable to supply the nation's food needs. But a war on
tardiness, drunkenness, inefficiency and mismanagement has, Soviet officials
say, led to improvements in labor productivity, food and energy supplies.

Sygma/Alain Dejean

AFGHANISTAN OCCUPATION: The police operation to salvage a Communist regime has
developed into a nagging, drawn-out tangle with armed mountain men, with no easy
end in sight. Moscow also remains saddled with expensive allies in Angola,
Ethiopia, Vietnam, Cuba and elsewhere.  United Press International

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOST OF PROBLEMS FACE NEW LEADER

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 11


Whoever takes the place of Yuri V. Andropov as leader of the Soviet Union will
face a host of problems that he might be called upon to address immediately.

Around the Soviet Union's far-flung borders, the policies of the last two
decades have saddled the Kremlin with costly and unproductive dependencies, with
a vexing war in Afghanistan, frustrated ambitions in the Middle East and, most
seriously, with a stalemate in disarmament talks and the worst relations with
the United States in at least two decades.

This weekend, in well-appointed parlors and suites around Moscow, powerful men
are probably gathered in clusters, their thoughts and schemes focused on the
vacancy in one of the world's most powerful offices.

The complex maneuvering may never come to light, since all that the world is
likely to see sometime soon is a ''unanimous'' decision by the Central Committee
of the Communist Party on a successor to Yuri V. Andropov.

And sometime next week, one of the late leader's comrades from the Politburo
will have to stand alone on the figurative ramparts of the Kremlin and survey
what he had fought so arduously to take charge of.

Vice President Bush, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and Chancellor Helmut Kohl
have all announced plans to come to Moscow for Mr. Andropov's funeral, and all
will be looking for signals from the new chief on the future of East-West
relations.

On the domestic front, the new leader will inherit a system choked by
inefficiency, lack of motivation and corruption, despite the campaigns his
predecessor launched against these evils.

With a military machine crying for resources to meet what it sees as the threat
of American rearmament under President Reagan, the new chief will be pressured
to accelerate the economic experiments and tinkering that Mr. Andropov set in
motion before illness sent him to the sidelines.

The new man will take charge of an agricultural system unable to supply the
nation's needs, a high-technology industry decades behind that of the West and
falling ever farther behind, and a sluggish, bloated bureaucracy.

These challenges are essentially the same ones Mr. Andropov faced in his
15-month tenure. But in contrast to the current contenders for the job, the late
chief came to office armed with the prestige and power of a man who had spent 15
years at the head of the K.G.B. security police, and who had the backing of the
military and majority support in the Politburo.

A Few Advantages

The advantages a new leader will face are those offered by a totalitarian
system. Once in office, he is unlikely to face serious challenges to his job,
and in the highly centralized system political powers will naturally gravitate
toward him, especially as the old power brokers like Dmitri F. Ustinov, Nikolai
A. Tikhonov or Andrei A. Gromyko pass away.

For all the occasional talk in the West of a crisis in Soviet morale because of
the lack of consumer goods or food, the reality is that Russians seem capable of
tightening their belts to a degree few in the West could tolerate, and there
have been no tangible signs - beyond widespread grumbling - of serious
dissatisfaction.

The dissident movement, once reasonably organized and widely publicized, has
been effectively decimated. The most immediate challenge to any new leader will
be to find ways out of the freeze in East-West relations and the deadlock in
arms talks.

In the bitter dispute over the new American missiles in Europe, the Kremlin had
staked its strategy on dissuading the Europeans from accepting the rockets. The
policy failed last November, and the Russians walked out of the talks on
medium-range missiles and refused to set a date for resumption of the talks on
strategic arms.

Another Daunting Problem

Since then, the Soviet position has been that negotiations can resume only if
the Americans return to the situation that existed before the beginning of the
deployment of medium-range missiles. Washington is hardly likely to do this,
especially if President Reagan is re-elected. And the harsh words slung between
Washington and Moscow in the past months will make reconciliation difficult even
for a new leader.

Most diplomats here believe that the Soviet military, in the person of Marshal
Ustinov, and the Foreign Ministry, in the person of Mr. Gromyko, are unlikely to
let a new chief make overtures to Washington after the slights they feel they
have suffered in the negotiations and at Mr. Reagan's hands. Most diplomats,
however, believe the prospects of huge new investments in a continued arms race
must persuade the Russians to find a way back to the negotiating table, if
necessary with Mr. Reagan.

A more promising arena for Soviet foreign policy is the Middle East. Against a
background of recent military successes by leftist Moslem militias in Beirut,
the United States has decided to move its marines out of the city to ships
offshore. Those militias' successes have given new leverage to their Syrian
backers.  After years of supplying Syria with costly weapons, the Kremlin can
hope at last to get some returns in the the Middle East.

On other fronts, Mr. Reagan's demonstrated willingness to use force has made
Soviet foraging for gains in Central and Latin America far more risky. In Africa
and Asia, those allies gained at such expense in the 1970's - Angola,
Mozambique, Ethiopia, Vietnam, Cambodia - remain in serious economic trouble.

With Poland now seeming to be effectively back in harness, Moscow seems to have
bought temporary peace in Eastern Europe. But pressures for greater economic
independence, and dissatisfaction with East-West tension, demand permanent
vigilance in Moscow.  In Afghanistan, a police operation to salvage a Communist
regime has developed into a nagging, drawn-out tangle with armed mountain men.

More generally, Soviet leaders face the fact that infatuation with Soviet- style
ideology waned long ago outside the country's borders. In international forums,
where for a while Moscow could count on automatic support from third-world
allies, the Soviet Union has found itself under attack on issues such as
Afghanistan or the downing of the South Korean jetliner.

No prospective party secretary will be able to sharply reverse foreign policies
in force today, especially with the extensive authority Mr. Gromyko has forged
over all foreign affairs. But it is on the domestic front that the next leader
will ultimately be judged.

In the 15 months Mr. Andropov was in office, labor productivity nudged upward
and agriculture production registered a slight improvement. Mr. Andropov also
experimented in less centralized management techniques, began a shakeup of party
cadres, ordered a crackdown on inefficiency in the workplace and took stern
measures against corruption.

It was an impressive effort by Soviet standards, but Western diplomats believe
that even were they followed through with vigor, the measures would have fallen
short of solving Russia's economic woes.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Politburo members at the House of Unions

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA IS LOOKING TO BETTER RELATIONs

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 601 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 11


China sent ''deep condolences'' today on the ''unfortunate death'' of Yuri V.
Andropov and voiced hope that relations with Moscow would continue to improve.

The message, sent at the state level rather than the party level, went to the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, the collective presidency headed by Mr.
Andropov, and was signed by Li Xiannian, China's chief of state, and Peng Zhen,
chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. Excerpts
were made public by the New China News Agency.

''President Andropov expressed on several occasions his desire to improve
Chinese-Soviet relations,'' the message said. ''It is the sincere desire of the
Chinese Government to see relations between the two countries normalized.''

Improvement Is Noted

The press quoted the message as having said that relations, which soured a
quarter century ago, ''have improved in recent years, in what conforms to the
fundamental interests of the people of both countries.''

''We hope,'' the message said, ''that, through joint efforts, the relations
between China and the Soviet Union, two big neighboring countries, will be
further developed.''

The hope for better relations alluded to the exploratory talks that got under
way in October 1982 in an effort to improve the relationship. Today's message
made no mention of the three preconditions that Peking has placed on any
normalization of ties.

They are an unconditional withdrawal of Soviet forces from Afghanistan, an end
to Soviet support for Vietnam's intervention in Cambodia, and a reduction of
Soviet forces deployed along the Chinese border.

Next Round of Talks in March

The talks, which have shown little progress, are expected to resume in a fourth
round in Moscow next month.

There has been an increase in contacts in sports, education and tourism. On
Friday, the two countries signed a new trade agreement providing for a 60
percent increase this year, to $1.17 billion. This is little more than a quarter
of China's trade with the United States.

Under the new Soviet agreement, China will import pig iron, steel products,
nonferrous metals, timber, chemical fertilizer, cement, plate glass, chemicals,
machinery, vehicles and spare parts. It will export nonferrous metals, canned
and frozen meat, vegetable oil, textiles and apparel, tea and consumer goods.
Two additional border-crossing points opened recently in the Far East and
Central Asia.

Mr. Andropov's death was reported without comment on the front pages of Chinese
newspapers. The papers noted Mr. Andropov's death from illness and offered a few
biographical details.

The Communist newspaper Ta Kung Pao of Hong Kong, which reflects Peking's views,
said in an editorial: ''Although Chinese-Soviet relations improved during
Andropov's rule, they have not changed fundamentally, as the Chinese leaders
have pointed out.''

Brezhnev Funeral Recalled

When Leonid I. Brezhnev died in November 1982, China sent the then Foreign
Minister, Huang Hua, to the funeral. Mr. Huang met with Mr. Andropov and with
Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko.

A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman had no information on who would be sent
this time. The present Foreign Minister is Wu Xueqian.

Although the improvement in relations thus far has been modest, the continuing
talks have provided a channel for increased dialogue. A Soviet Deputy Foreign
Minister, Mikhail S. Kapitsa, who is a China expert, was here last fall, and a
First Deputy Prime Minister, Ivan V. Arkhipov, is expected to come to China in
May, after President Reagan visits.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TSONGAS DECISION SPURS 'WILD RACE'

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 33, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 873 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Feb. 11


A scramble for the Senate seat being vacated by Paul E. Tsongas has turned into
the most widely contested election here in recent years, pitting several liberal
Democrats against one another and enticing Elliot L. Richardson, a Republican,
back to his home state.

''It's a wild race, with North against South, brother against brother,'' said
Representative Edward J. Markey, one of six Democratic contenders for Senator
Tsongas's seat.

Interest in the contest was heightened Friday when Mr. Richardson disclosed he
had decided to run for the Republican nomination. The 63-year-old Mr.
Richardson, now a lawyer in Washington, has held four Cabinet posts, more than
anyone, and gained prominence when he resigned as Attorney General rather than
dismiss Archibald Cox, the Watergate special prosecutor, as ordered by President
Nixon.

Tsongas Was Favored


Mr. Tsongas, a liberal Democrat, unexpectedly announced last month that he would
not run this November because he was suffering from cancer. He was a strong
favorite to win, with the only challenge coming from Raymond Shamie, a wealthy
Republican businessman badly defeated in 1982 by Senator Edward M. Kennedy.
Besides Mr. Markey, James M. Shannon, another Democrat in the House, and Lieut.
Gov. John F. Kerry, have declared they will run for the nomination. All three
are considered popular and effective liberals. Two Democrats who are moderate to
conservative have also entered the contest, David M. Bartley, a former Speaker
of the state House, and Michael J. Connolly, the Secretary of State. A former
director of the state Teachers Association, William H. Hebert, is also in the
race.

Some Democrats view this stampede with concern. Both Mr. Markey, a 37- year-old
who advocates a nuclear freeze, and Mr. Shannon, a 31-year-old protege of United
States House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., will give up their House seats.

Domino Effect Evident


A domino effect has been set off, with perhaps a dozen candidates trying to
succeed Mr. Markey and Mr. Shannon in the House. Most of the candidates are
state legislators, so they in turn will have to give up their state posts. This
may affect a major effort now under way to reform the autocratic leadership of
the Massachusetts Statehouse.

Most politicians believe the race for the Democratic nomination for Senate, to
be decided in a primary in September, is a close contest, with three or four men
capable of winning.

Several recent public opinion polls by the candidates show Lieutenant Governor
Kerry, a 41-year-old decorated Navy officer in Vietnam and later an antiwar
activist, in the lead. He is the only one to have run statewide in the past. Mr.
Markey, Mr. Shannon and Mr. Bartley are bunched together behind Mr. Kerry.

On the Republican side, Mr. Richardson had spent the past few weeks consulting
with state Republican leaders.

''The responses I've had are very encouraging,'' Mr. Richardson said in a
telephone interview.

Help From White House


He said he had received offers of help from the White House, although as a
liberal Republican he has not been on close terms with President Reagan.

The White House's interest, he conceded, was because he appears to have a better
chance than Mr. Shamie to wrest a Senate seat from the Democrats. Mr. Richardson
still commands great respect in Massachusetts, where he served as Lieutenant
Governor and Attorney General before leaving for Washington in the Nixon
Administration.

Nevertheless, he faces formidable odds. Massachusetts has become an increasingly
Democratic state since he last ran here in 1966, with Democratic registration
now outrunning Republican 45 percent to 14 percent.

Moreover, some Republicans resent Mr. Richardson's Brahmin background and ways
and say he has not done anything to help the state party in recent years.

'Service to the State'


Mr. Richardson, who maintains a voting residence in Brookline, a suburb of
Boston, said he had decided to run because ''my lifelong interests have been in
public issues.''

In addition to being United States Attorney General, Mr. Richardson also served
as Secretary of Defense, Secretary of Commerce and Secretary of Health,
Education and Welfare as well as Ambassador to Britain. With such experience, he
said, ''I could be of service to the state.'' He said that he would formally
announce his candidacy March 19 but that he had already begun to put form a
campaign organization.

For the Democratic candidates, the first key hurdle will be the state party
convention in June, when they must win at least 15 percent of the delegates to
be eligible for the primary in September. Gov. Michael S. Dukakis, a liberal, is
expected to control the convention, but he has declared neutrality in the Senate
race.

Mr. Markey, who likes to describe himself as ''a maverick'' who will shake the
Senate ''by its lapels,'' is receiving support from antinuclear groups, which
are particularly strong in Massachusetts. Mr. Shannon has the backing of Speaker
O'Neill and is focusing on economic issues to distinguish himself from Mr.
Markey.

Delegates to the June convention were chosen at caucuses around the state today.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INDIAN LEADER FACES TRIAL IN PANTHER SLAYING

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 37, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: LA BELLE, Fla., Feb. 11


The chairman of the Florida Seminole tribe faces trial next month on charges
that he killed an endangered Florida panther on an Indian reservation.

Seminoles have defended the killing on the ground that the panther is used in
Seminole religious and healing ceremonies and that Indians have a legal right to
kill even endangered animals on Federal reservations.

The 1,500-member tribe's chairman, James Billie, has pleaded not guilty and will
be tried in Hendry County Circuit Court March 19. If convicted, he could receive
a maximum penalty of five years in prison, a $5,000 fine or both.

James Shore, a Seminole tribal attorney who will represent Mr. Billie, said the
killing of the panther for ceremonial use would be a possible defense.

''Only when the trial is over will we know whether Indians have the right to
kill animals on their own reservations,'' he added.

Case With Broad Implications


Robert Greene, Assistant State's Attorney, who will prosecute the case, said,
''The trial could have historical implications since it would challenge basic
Indian rights and the enforcement of state laws.''

Tom Oxendine, a spokesman for the Bureau of Indian Affairs of the Department of
the Interior, asserted that state and Federal law applied both on and off Indian
reservations.

Acting on an informer's tip in December, officers of the Florida Game and Fresh
Water Fish Commission discovered the panther's hide and skull in Mr. Billie's
camp in the Big Cypress Indian reservation about 55 miles northwest of Fort
Lauderdale.

A Seminole medicine man, Sonny Billie, who is a cousin of James Billie, said the
panther offered powerful medicine for healing. He said panther claws, scratched
lightly on the skin, could help relieve such muscle degenerative diseases as
muscular distrophy. The medicine man also said parts of the tail are put in a
mixture to rub on boys' limbs to make them run faster and jump higher.

Sonny Billie said his cousin was training to be a medicine man, requiring seven
years of rigorous discipline still kept secret among the Seminoles.

Issue of Religion


For centuries Seminoles have used panther skins as part of a secret religious
ritual held deep in the Everglades in June, said Guy Osceola, a Seminole
businessman who lives in adjoining Collier County.

''The Indians didn't make the panther endangered,'' said Mr. Osceola. ''The
white man did by hunting the panther to near extinction.''

Panthers are thought to number only 30 in the Everglades region of southwest
Florida.

Charles Lee, vice president of the Florida Audubon Society, said the Department
of the Interior had made provisions to accommodate the Indian tribes' religious
activities as they related to endangered species such as the bald eagle and
panther.

''Many tribes can obtain the feathers of recently dead eagles recovered by
Wildlife officers, but, historically, Indian tribes have not come forward and
sought to obtain panthers in the same way,'' said Mr. Lee.

He suggested that the Seminole tribal chairman, a Vietnam veteran, had departed
from Indian tradition. He said Mr. Billie was an entrepreneur who pilots an
airplane and oversees a lucrative bingo industry on the five Indian reservations
in Florida.

''This image of the noble savage pursuing his religious beliefs stretches things
a bit from my point of view,'' Mr. Lee said. ''But assuming he had the best of
all motivations, he shouldn't have shot a panther, even on a reservation.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE CONSIDERS IN FATAL FILM CRASH

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 666 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 11


A preliminary hearing to determine if the director of the movie ''Twilight
Zone'' and four members of his crew should stand trial on charges of involuntary
manslaughter has ended in Los Angeles Municipal Court.

After four and a half weeks of sometimes emotional testimony and the showing of
a film clip of the helicopter crash that killed the actor Vic Morrow, 53 years
old, and two child actors, Judge Brian Crahan said Wednesday that he would
return his decision April 10.

The hearing came as a result of a county grand jury indictment handed up June
24, 1983, the same day the film opened in theaters around the country. John
Landis, the film's director; Paul Stewart, the special effects coordinator, and
Dorcey Wingo, the pilot, were charged with involuntary manslaughter by using a
combination of explosives and the helicopter ''in a reckless manner'' that
brought the deaths.

In addition, Mr. Landis, Dan Allingham, the special production manager, and
George Folsey Jr., the associate producer, were charged with two separate counts
of involuntary manslaughter for alleged violation of the state's child labor
laws and a state penal code statute on endangering children.

Judge Will Decide Two Issues

The judge will decide the case on two issues. One is whether the crash was a
result of recklessness on the part of Mr. Landis, Mr. Stewart and Mr. Wingo or
if, as the defense argued, the helicopter was damaged in the filming in a manner
that was unforseeable.

Judge Crahan will also decide if Mr. Landis, Mr. Folsey and Mr. Allingham placed
the children in an inherently dangerous situation. The children who died, Myca
Dinh Le, 6, and Renee Shin Chen, 7, were Vietnamese. The three were killed on
July 23, 1982 in the filming of a mock Vietnam War scene at a recreational park
40 miles from here.

As a helicopter hovered overhead, cameras in the craft filmed Mr. Morrow dodging
gunfire as he crossed a river with the two children in his arms. Special effects
explosions that were planted in huts on the set were detonated. One of the
blasts damaged a rotor on the helicoptor, causing it to pitch into the river. As
it crashed, the main rotor struck the actors.

Prosecutors charged at the hearing that the helicopter spun out of control when
a blade was dented by debris generated from one of the special effects
explosions planted on the ground.

Gary Kesselman, the Deputy District Attorney, also said there was evidence that
problems similar to the ones leading up to the fatal crash were encountered in a
rehearsal of the scene.

Testimony by Randall Robinson, a camera assistant, indicated that he, along with
Mr. Wingo and another camera operator, had complained about the intensity of the
special effects blasts after the rehearsal the day before the crash.

Mortar Changed for Scene


''We were discussing if anybody realized how intense that blast was,'' Mr.
Robinson testified. ''I didn't think it was much fun. Then the director turned
around and said, 'That's only a warmup for what's coming.' ''

Jerry Williams, a member of the special effects crew, testified that the next
day Mr. Landis and Mr. Stewart decided to replace a special effects mortar with
a potetially more powerful one. Mr. Williams said that a cylindrical mortar,
which has special effects designed to explode outward, had been designated for
the scene. But shortly before filming the fatal scene, the director and Mr.
Stewart changed their minds and decided on a rectangular mortar, with special
effects that exploded both outward and upward, Mr. Williams said.

Prosecutors said the mortar used, placed in a thatched hut on the set, might
have been the one that caused the helicopter to crash.

Defense attorneys contended that heat from the explosion caused the aluminum
skin of one of the helicopter's tail rotor blades to peel off. This, they said,
caused vibrations in the tail rotor assembly, causing it to detach and send the
craft out of control.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

V.A. TO STUDY 30,000 VETERANS WHO ARE TWINS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 667 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 11


The Government is about to undertake a nationwide search for 30,000 veterans who
are twins so it can compare the health of men who served in the Vietnam War with
their brothers who did not.

The purpose is to see if anything in the Vietnam experience was damaging to
servicemen's physical or emotional health or had a long-term effect on their
readjustment as civilians.

All 15,000 pairs of fraternal and identical twins will be surveyed by mail. From
the results, researchers will select for interviews, physical examinations and
close scrutiny 360 pairs of identical twins who split up in the war, one twin
going to the war zone and one posted elsewhere.

Researchers hope the investigation will shed light on whether Agent Orange has
damaged the health of men exposed to it, as thousands of veterans contend.
Twelve million gallons of the plant killer and its dangerous contaminant dioxin
were sprayed in the war to reveal Communist troops' hiding places and to destroy
crops.

Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder


The study will also provide information on a psychiatric syndrome similar to
what older veterans called ''battle fatigue'' or ''shell shock.'' But this
syndrome, post-traumatic stress disorder, is said to be an even more serious
problem for Vietnam veterans because of the hostile reception many encountered
when they came home.  In addition, broader findings into the entire relationship
''between service in Vietnam and long-term health and socio-economic status''
are expected, according to the Veterans Administration.

''We believe that this study will provide the most sensitive means for detecting
subtle effects of Vietnam service and will therefore justify the necessary
considerable expenditure,'' Dr. Donald Custis, the V.A. medical director, told a
Congressional subcommittee last year in outlining preliminary plans.

Since identical twins share the same genetic and environmental influences in
their developing years, they provide an ideal group for comparison. Whatever
health differences show up can likely be ascribed to the Vietnam experience.

Search Starts April 1


The search for the twins will get under way April 1 and will probably take two
and a half years and cost $480,000, the agency estimated in papers submitted to
the Office of Management and Budget.

''Although the first use of this register will be to assess the effects of
Vietnam service, the twin register will be an important national resource for
future studies of the influence of inheritance and environmental factors on
human disease,'' the agency wrote.

Feasibility studies suggested it would not be hard to find enough twins. The
analysis showed there might be as many as 17,000 pairs in the American
population in which one brother served in the war zone while his twin did not.

All told, it was found that there were 400,000 pairs of twins among the 25
million males born from 1939 to 1953 and that half the twins were veterans. In
26 percent of the veteran twins, neither brother had served in the war; in 37
percent, one twin served in the war and in 23 percent both did. The service
experience for the remaining 14 percent was not established.

Records Will Be Searched


A total of 8.7 million men served in the military services in the war years,
1964 to 1973, but only 3.4 million served in Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand
or the South China Sea.

State birth records, the records of states which gave bonuses to Vietnam
veterans and the computer files of the Defense Department and the Veterans
Administration will be used to find the twins.

The forms sent them will ask about health, injuries, psychological problems and
whether they had difficulty fathering children.

In addition to the 360 pairs with different experiences in the war who will be
studied exhaustively, 120 pairs of twins who both served in Vietnam and 120
pairs of twins neither of whom served in the war will be studied in detail to
provide comparisons.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1120 words


THE ARAB-ISRAELI WARS: War and Peace in the Middle East, by Chaim Herzog.
(Vintage, $8.95.) Chaim Herzog, now President of Israel, aims to tell the
country's ''whole bloody postindependence story'' in ''a volume that anyone who
wants to understand what Israel has endured will have to read or refer to,'' J.
Robert Moskin noted in his 1982 review. ''The Arab-Israeli Wars'' conveys strong
impressions of the dramatic strengthening of Israeli defense forces since 1947
and role of the Soviet Union in the Arab-Israeli conflict.

THE LONELY GUY, by Bruce Jay Friedman. (McGraw-Hill, $4.95.) Bruce Jay Friedman
tells the lonely they are not alone in ''a funny tract'' couched as a self- help
manual that has now spawned a movie. First published in 1978 as ''The Lonely
Guy's Book of Life,'' the book struck our reviewer, Herbert Gold, as winsome,
true and ''more universal than the title suggests. Some former wives might find,
with small translations and a few adjustments for child custody and slipcover
skills, that they are really lonely guys too.''

THE DEINDUSTRIALIZATION OF AMERICA: Plant Closings, Community Abandonment, and
the Dismantling of Basic Industry, by Barry Bluestone and Bennett Harrison.
(Basic Books, $8.95.) A study our reviewer, Alfred E. Kahn, commended ''to
anyone interested in where America is and where it is going'' documents the
human and social costs of deindustrialization. Although the book is in part ''an
ideological tract masquerading as objective research,'' it demonstrates ''that
the problem is real and enormous and that our prevailing institutions for
dealing with it are grossly insufficient.''

BONES ON BLACK SPRUCE MOUNTAIN, by David Budbill. (Bantam/Skylark, $1.95.) Two
13-year-old boys get up the courage to climb Black Spruce Mountain, where,
legend has it, the bones of a runaway child lie in a mountaintop cave, in David
Budbill's novel for readers 10 to 14. Paxton Davis called it ''a thoroughly
convincing wilderness yarn that effectively fuses the quest for mastery with the
quest for knowledge. . . . The real mystery, of course, is not the bones Black
Spruce holds, but the nature of wilderness itself.''

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF MARY WOLLSTONE

CRAFT, by Claire Tomalin. (NAL/Meridian, $7.95.) Mary Wollstonecraft, the wife
of the poet Percy Bysshe Shelley - whose ''Vindication of the Rights of Woman''
was published in 1792 - was ''a heroine in the history of the emancipation of
women'' who not only argued for women's rights but exemplified them, Arthur M.
Wilson said in his 1975 review. This biography by the London Sunday Times
literary editor is written ''with an expertness and sophistication that manage
to be at once empathetic and astringent.''

IF YOU CAN'T BE GOOD, by Ross Thomas. (Harper/ Perennial, $2.95.) A
''fast-paced, smoothly written and brightly observant'' 1973 murder mystery by
Ross Thomas (a. k. a. Oliver Bleeck), ''If You Can't Be Good'' features a
historian who goes to work for a columnist rather like Jack Anderson and tries
to find out why a Senator has resigned; it also depicts ''one of the bitchiest
young women in contemporary mystery fiction.'' Newgate Callendar called it a
standout.

THE

MONEY HARVEST , a 1975 Ross Thomas novel about conspiracy between criminals and
Government officials, is available too (Harper/Perennial, $3.50).

WATER AND POWER: The Conflict Over Los Angeles'

Water Supply in the Owens Valley, by William L. Kahrl. (University of California
Press, $10.95.) With ''rare and delightful'' realism and a willingness ''to
confront ultimate issues,'' William L. Kahrl shows how the water from the Owens
Valley wound up in swimming pools in Encino and what water means to the American
West. Our reviewer, Benjamin Stein, found this a ''fascinating story of water
and power in Los Angeles and California'' - ''not only the most detailed book on
the subject but the first one . . . to be balanced and fair.''

SO THE WIND WON'T BLOW IT ALL AWAY, by Richard Brautigan. (Delta/Seymour
Lawrence, $6.95.) The narrator of a caustic, elliptical novel by the author of
''Trout Fishing in America'' recalls life circa 1947, when he and his mother
wandered in the Pacific Northwest, encountering a variety of eccentrics. ''The
style is disconnected, chaotic, redolent of alienation,'' Eve Ottenberg's review
said, and the book's climax, ''a horrible event,'' retrospectively accounts for
''the flat shell- shocked meaninglessness that precedes it.''

POLITICAL PLUMLINES, by Felicia Lamport. (Doubleday, $5.95.) ''When supply-side
gits the bacon/ And demand-side's up the crick,/ It can start a heap uv achin'/
In the body politic.'' The lines, mimicking James Whitcomb Riley, open ''Leaves
of Crass,'' a group of parodies satirizing Presidential policies that appeared
first in The New York Times and can now be found in this collection of Felicia
Lamport's verse illustrated by Bill Sanders, a Milwaukee Journal cartoonist.

INCANDESCENCE, by Craig Nova. (Dell/Laurel, $3.95.) Craig Nova's third novel
proves ''that nothing gives off sparks like hard living struck against surfaces
even harder: the passing of time and our relentless struggle to make it stop,''
John Domini said in his 1979 review. Stargell, the protagonist of the novel,
''was once a whiz kid in a think tank, now finds himself unemployed and soon
sinks heavily in debt to a loan shark. His descent, which takes place mostly
over one terrible night, ''has made a special novel.''

ANGER: The Misunderstood Emotion, by Carol Tavris. (S&S/Touchstone, $6.95.)
Believing that the management of anger has powerful and potentially dangerous
implications for private lives and social policies, and that ''anger, like love,
has . . . a potent capacity for good and evil,'' Carol Tavris decided to examine
assumptions prevalent in ''the anger industry, psychotherapy.'' Her book draws
on studies from the biological and social sciences and on interviews. Although
our reviewer, Elsa First, took issue with it, other critics found this analysis
intelligent, witty and original.

WAR GAMES, by James Park Sloan. (Avon, $3.50.) James Park Sloan's first novel is
narrated by a 20-year- old Harvard dropout who wants the Army to send him to
Vietnam so he can write a great war novel, although he's not sure whether it
should be about how war makes men of timid souls or about how it humanizes tough
guys. What combat duty in Vietnam does to him, it turns out, is considerably
more bizarre. Mr. Sloan's antiwar story was first published in 1971.B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS February 12, 1984Fiction 1115

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1264 words


PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  2224

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?, created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  3324

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  4434

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  558

BERLIN GAME, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $15.95.) Espionage on both sides of the
Iron Curtain.  663

THE STORY OF HENRI TOD, by William F. Buckley Jr. (Doubleday, $14.95.) Superspy
Blackford Oakes carries out a mission in Berlin at the time The Wall goes up.  7
1

ALMOST PARADISE , by Susan Isaacs. (Harper & Row, $16.95.) Three generations of
show-biz people play out their destinies on two continents.  8723

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  9813

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Morrow, $16.95.) King Arthur, fulfilling a
prophecy made by Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  10 1

SMART WOMAN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  11913

MORETA: DRAGONLADY OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $14.95.) A
battle against ecological disaster on a faraway planet.  121313

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A detective from Earth
investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.  131011

THE NEVERENDING STORY, by Michael Ende. (Doubleday, $15.95.) A lonely boy meets
challenges and finds his true self in a magical land.  141121

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Three
generations of a German-Jewish family in New York.  151228

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The struggle for
money and power in Tinsel Town.



 Nonfiction 1157

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  2221


MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  366

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random, $25.) Man's search to know
himself and the world over the centuries.  4415

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a Protestant preacher.  5324

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  6522

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's Press, $19.95.) Selections from the
writings of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  776

APPROACHING HOOFBEATS: HORSEMEN OF THE APOCALYPSE, by Billy Graham. (Word Books,
$11.95.) The evangelist's interpretation of the Book of Revelation.  8812

WHILE REAGAN SLEPT, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $14.95.) Seven score wry
observations on the Washington scene by the syndicated columnist.

9136

LATE NIGHT THOUGHTS ON LISTENING TO MAHLER'S NINTH SYMPHONY, by Lewis Thomas.
(Viking, $12.95.) Essays on a wide range of subjects by the physician-medical
administrator.  101017

VIETNAM: A History, by Stanley Karnow. (Viking, $22.50.) Illustrated history of
the war.  11144

CORONER, by Thomas T. Noguchi with Joseph DiMona. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.)
The controversial Los Angeles County medical examiner discusses the deaths of
Marilyn Monroe, John Belushi and other celebrities.  11128

THE KINGDOM BY THE SEA, by Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) A
novelist's journey around Great Britain.  13 1

PEOPLE OF THE LIE, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) A
psychiatrist's prescription for ''healing human evil.'' 14 1

RUSSIA: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams, by David K. Shipler.  (Times Books,
$17.95.) A former New York Times Moscow correspondent probes Soviet society.
15914

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley. (Dodd, Mead, $15.95.) A psychologist's
analysis of the plight of men who have never grown up.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 1135

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  223

THE PRITIKIN PROMISE: 28 Days to a Longer, Healthier Life, by Nathan Pritikin.
(Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A regimen by the operator of two ''longevity
centers.'' 3361

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  455

WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY, SECOND COLLEGE EDITION.  (Simon & Schuster,
$14.95. Indexed, $15.95.) A standard reference work updated in 1982.  5 1

THE JAMES COCO DIET , by James Coco with Marion Paone. (Bantam, $13.95.) A
regimen based on nutritional education, menu planning and behavior modification.



The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE BEST OF MODERN HUMOR, edited by Mordecai Richler.

(Knopf, $17.95.) The most impressive roundup of American humor

since the Whites' 1941 ''Subtreasury of American Humor.''

CHARLES DE GAULLE, by Don Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A highly

readable biography by a veteran American journalist with 38

years' experience on Europe's political beat.

FLY AWAY HOME, by Marge Piercy. (Summit, $16.95.) The

author's satisfying eighth novel depicts the breakup of a marriage

against a backdrop of privileged New England suburban life and

confrontational politics.

THE HEYDAY OF AMERICAN COMMUNISM: The Depression

Decade, by Harvey Klehr. (Basic Books, $26.50.) A tightly written

narrative of the Communist Party, U.S.A., in the 1930's.

AN INTERRUPTED LIFE: The Diaries of Etty Hillesum, 1941-43.

(Pantheon, $12.95.) Written in Holland by a young Jewish woman

who ultimately chose to accompany a group of Jews bound for

Auschwitz and death, these diaries provide a unique story of

spiritual growth.

JED HARRIS: The Curse of Genius, by Martin Gottfried. (Little,

Brown, $19.95.) The first serious biography of the brilliant but self-

destructive Broadway producer-director.

LEAVING THE LAND, by Douglas Unger. (Harper & Row, $13.95.)

This fine first novel tells of a spirited South Dakota farm woman

fighting the rise of agribusiness.

THE TRUE ADVENTURES OF JOHN STEINBECK, WRITER, by

Jackson J. Benson. (Viking, $35.) This biography gives us the

totally American materials of Steinbeck's life and career.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Said to Shell China

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 25 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 12


China accused Vietnam today of shelling and firing at Chinese border villages
during their Lunar New Year celebrations, killing a farm worker.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A TOP PEKING AIDE TO GO TO MOSCOW

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 440 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 12


The Government said today that Deputy Prime Minister Wan Li would travel to
Moscow for the funeral of Yuri V. Andropov. He would be the highest-ranking
Chinese official to visit the Soviet Union in two decades.

A two-paragraph announcement by the official New China News Agency said Mr. Wan,
senior deputy to Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, would head a delegation of mourners
leaving Monday, the day before Mr. Andropov's funeral.

Other members of the delegation include Qian Qichen, Deputy Foreign Minister; Ma
Xusheng, director of the Foreign Ministry's Soviet and East European Department;
and Yang Shouzheng, Ambassador to the Soviet Union.

Zhou Enlai Visited in 1964

Mr. Wan is higher in rank than Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian, whom some diplomats
had speculated would lead the delegation. When Mr. Andropov's predecessor,
Leonid I. Brezhnev, died in November 1982, the head of the Chinese delegation at
his funeral was Huang Hua, then Foreign Minister.

Mr. Qian, who has led the Chinese side in periodic discussions aimed at
improving ties with the Soviet Union, is considered China's top expert on Soviet
affairs.

The choice of the delegation was seen by some diplomats here as a gesture by
China for further improving ties with the Soviet Union.  Mr. Wan would be the
highest-ranking Chinese official to travel to the Soviet Union since 1964, when
Prime Minister Zhou Enlai visited Moscow.

At that time relations were souring because of a border dispute and because of
ideological differences over who should lead the world Communist movement. In
1969 armed clashes broke out along the border.

China considers the Soviet Union a threat to its security because of the large
number of Soviet troops on the border, Moscow's military role in Afghanistan and
Kremlin support for Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia.

'Hegemonist Superpower'

The state-run press commonly refers to the Soviet Union as a ''hegemonist
superpower,'' meaning that China considers the Soviet Union to be aggressive and
expansionist.

China's message of sympathy to the Soviet Union on Saturday expressed ''deep
condolences'' over the death Thursday of Mr. Andropov and said he had helped
ease the strain between Moscow and Peking.

Despite persistent China-Soviet tensions, both nations have improved trade and
cultural relations over the last few years and have said they want to expand
ties further.

Mr. Andropov's death came one day before a Soviet trade delegation signed a pact
in Peking to increase trade by 60 percent in 1984. The volume of trade reached
$700 million in 1983, compared with $300 million in 1982.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

JACKSON ASKS UNIVERSITY STUDENTS TO HELP VOTER REGISTRATION DRIVE

BYLINE: By FAY S. JOYCE

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 623 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Feb. 12


The Rev. Jesse Jackson stressed peace and education today in a speech to 900
students whom he challenged to help make it easier for others to vote.

''The old schemes of denial were based on age or literacy tests or poll taxes,''
he said, referring to barriers that once kept blacks and people under the age of
21 from voting. ''The progressive movement is now being thwarted by new schemes
of denial. Now they use inaccessible registrars, second primaries and dual
registration.'' At a conference sponsored by college Public Interest Research
Groups, he urged the students, who gathered at Harvard University over the
weekend from 40 states, to launch a national voter registration drive and to
fight for registration by post card, for a uniform national registration code
and for requirements that registrars be more accessible. His speech received a
standing ovation.

Turnout Seen as Healthy


Mr. Jackson flew here from Des Moines late Saturday night and hurriedly left
again for the Middle West. He told the students that he had repeatedly turned
down their invitation to speak because of his tight schedule, then set the hour
for 8 A.M. today, in the hope that the students would not show up and that he
would not have to, either.

''But here you are,'' he said with a smile to the throng in Memorial Hall, where
closed-circuit television carried his speech to those who could not fit into the
hall. ''Something must be going on.''

Organizers of the three-day conference said it was the largest national student
gathering in 10 years and that they themselves were stunned by the turnout of
1,600 student activists. They had expected only 400.

''Students are back,'' said Daniel Malarkey, a University of Oregon student who
led the conference. ''They're fired up.''

Student Efforts Noted


He said students in California registered and turned out voters to help defeat a
ballot proposition in 1982 that would have cut income taxes in that state, which
he said would have hurt its public universities. In Massachusetts, he said,
college students figured strongly in voting in a new law to require returnable
bottles.

''Now they want to translate state and local expertise to national politics,''
he continued. ''Students are concerned about issues that directly affect them,
but it's not entirely selfish. They 're also concerned about the arms race and
the state of the economy and how that affects them.''

While the student leaders at the conference were eager to hear Mr. Jackson
because of his much publicized concern about voter registration, Mr. Malarkey
said individuals in attendance favored a variety of candidates, including
President Reagan, and would make no endorsements.

Apathetic as Voters

Beth DeGrasse, coordinator of the National Student Campaign on Voter
Registration, noted that 18- to 24-year- olds had the lowest voter turnout of
any age group. ''They're tired of being told they're apathetic, and they're
tired of being told, 'Sorry, you have no clout; your age group doesn't vote,'
when they lobby on Capitol Hill,'' she said.

With a $3 million budget, the students plan to register voters next fall in
neighborhoods dominated by the poor and members of minority groups as well as on
campuses. Representatives of black, Hispanic and women's organizations also
attended the conference, which was aimed in part at building coalitions like the
''rainbow coalition'' Mr. Jackson hopes to assemble.

Mr. Jackson couched his appeal in terms of the student protests of the civil
rights and Vietnam War eras. ''Your generation cannot become great just by
remembering what that generation did,'' he continued. ''You must serve your
present age.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of The Rev. Jesse Jackson

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

2 HOLIDAY MOVIES TURN INTO SURPRISE SUCCESSES

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Feb. 12


This year's biggest movie surprise so far is Paramount's ''Uncommon Valor,'' an
adventure film about a father who trains guerillas to rescue his son, a prisoner
of war in Laos, that had been lightly regarded by the film industry before it
was released over the big Christmas season.

''Uncommon Valor'' has no stars whose names automatically mean money at the box
office. Its plot is a variation of the plot of countless war movies, from ''The
Guns of Navarone'' to ''The Dirty Dozen.'' Yet ''Uncommon Valor,'' directed by
Ted Kotcheff and starring Gene Hackman, has earned $27 million and is still
earning nearly $2 million a week at roughly 800 theaters around the country.

''Uncommon Valor,'' which was one of 22 movies released last November and
December, is currently the fifth most successful of them, behind ''Terms of
Endearment'' ($69 million and climbing), ''Sudden Impact,'' ''Scarface'' and
''Yentl.'' It will soon be passed by ''Silkwood'' to end in sixth place. It is
not by any means a blockbuster, but, at a cost of slightly less than $11
million, it will make Paramount some money.



Film's Ending Is Credited

One of the surprising things about the success of ''Uncommon Valor'' is that it
had to compete with two highly visible, high-budget movies for males under 25,
who were its target audience. Young males were expected to choose ''Sudden
Impact,'' starring Clint Eastwood as Dirty Harry, and ''Scarface,'' a violent
crime movie starring Al Pacino as a drug kingpin. They did, but they also went
to ''Uncommon Valor.'' So, unexpectedly, did older men and young women.

'' 'Uncommon Valor' was successful because of the emotional impact of the
ending,'' said Gordon Weaver, Paramount's president of marketing. ''The
emotional ending really makes you feel terrific.''

When ''Uncommon Valor'' begins in 1972 at the end of the Vietnam War, Gene
Hackman's only son has been listed as missing in action. After an obsessive
search through Southeast Asia, Mr. Hackman, a retired Marine colonel, becomes
convinced that his son is still alive, and he recruits five of his son's buddies
to go to Laos and storm the prison camp.

''If we knew the secret of a film's success, we'd all be very wealthy,'' Mr.
Kotcheff, the director, said. ''But I think it's partly the strong emotional tug
of the father-son relationship.''

Yet another reason was offered by an ordinary moviegoer who said with
satisfaction of the bloody ending in which dozens of the enemy are mowed down by
the Americans, ''We get to win the Vietnam War.''



Not Based on Real Events

Mr. Kotcheff said ''Uncommon Valor'' was not based on a real-life attempt to
find out whether some of the 2,500 American soldiers listed as missing in action
in Southeast Asia are still alive and captive. Paramount delivered Joe Gayton's
script to Mr. Kotcheff late in January 1983. Early in February, newspapers
reported a secret expedition into Laos the previous November. James G. (Bo)
Gritz, a former lieutenant colonel in the Green Berets, had led three other
Americans and 15 Laotian guerillas armed only with submachine guns into Laos on
the night of Nov. 27, 1982. The mission ended after they were ambushed by
Laotian soldiers.

Mr. Gritz's expedition was partly financed by the actors Clint Eastwood and
William Shatner. Mr. Shatner, who plays Admiral Kirk in the ''Star Trek''
movies, said Paramount had bought him a year's option on the film rights to Mr.
Gritz's story for $10,000. The option lapsed last fall.

Although the script of ''Uncommon Valor'' was extensively revised between
February and the start of shooting on June 6, Mr. Kotcheff said: ''We
assiduously avoided anything in our story similar to Gritz. Our research
amazingly showed there were some 30 groups training for similar missions.''



Advertising Was Changed

Paramount had prepared an advertising campaign for ''Uncommon Valor'' that was
factual and rather somber and centered on the plight of prisoners of war. At the
last minute, the campaign was thrown out, and $200,000 was spent to create a new
campaign.

''After we saw the picture, we thought it was crazy not to capitalize on the
ending, '' said Mr. Weaver.

The new campaign showed a soldier slung over a friend's back and the copy line,
''C'mon, buddy, we're going home.'' Television commercials for the movie ended
with the same image. Additional copy read: ''They trained together, fought
together and survived together. Now, in the most important mission of their
lives, they're going back to get their buddies who were left behind.''

''We were looking to appeal to males on an emotional level,'' Mr. Weaver said.
''We were offering them an attainable fantasy. We'd all like to think that we
can be heroes, that we would leave our jobs and families to do something really
terrific for our friends.''



Nudity From Disney

The clearest view of the Christmas movies comes in February, when audience
satisfaction - not studio spending - is the key to whether a movie is still
around. ''Uncommon Valor'' was not the only November- December movie to satisy
audiences unexpectedly. When Walt Disney Production's ''Never Cry Wolf'' was
previewed last fall, Hollywood felt the saga of a scientist in the Arctic was a
nice movie with limited commercial possibilities. How do you sell a movie in
which the main character - and for much of the movie the only character - eats
mice sandwiches and runs nude among a herd of caribou?

''Our primary target audience was white-collar, young adult urban professionals
from 25 to 40,'' said Tom Wilhite, the former head of production at Disney, who
initiated ''Never Cry Wolf.'' ''For people with desk jobs, it was adult fantasy
- to drop everything and do what the character played by Charles Martin Smith
does.''

Disney's advertising campaign played on that fantasy. Huge newspaper ads showed
Charles Martin Smith as a solitary figure surrounded by ice. There were no
wolves lurking in the photograph.  ''Our concern was the Disney connection,''
Barry Lorie, vice president of marketing, said. ''We couldn't let it come off as
one of Disney's wildlife adventures. We couldn't let people think the film was a
documentary about wolves. When we opened in our first five cities, we didn't use
television ads for the same reason. In a 22- second TV spot, it would have
seemed a wildlife adventure.

As opposed to ''Uncommon Valor,'' which opened at 1,000 theaters Dec. 16, the
$13.2 million ''Never Cry Wolf'' was put in one theater each in five principal
cities in mid-November and then given two months in fewer than 40 theaters to
allow word-of- mouth and good reviews to build. Now playing in 500 theaters,
''Never Cry Wolf'' brought in more money per theater last weekend, $4,549, than
any other movie playing in a large chunk of theaters. Disney estimates that the
movie, which has already earned $16.6 million, will end up selling $25 million
to $30 million worth of tickets.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gene Hackman

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOK OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 996 words


FRAGMENTS. By Jack Fuller. 211 pages. William Morrow and Company. $12.95.
GARDENS OF STONE. By Nicholas Proffitt. 373 pages. Carroll & Graf. $14.95. FREE
FIRE ZONE. By Rob Riggan. 426 pages. W. W. Norton & Company. $15.95.

MORE than a decade has passed now since the last American troops left Vietnam,
and as that anomalous war - and memories of the endless facts we tried to absorb
every night on the evening news - recedes in time, writers have begun to be able
to deal with it in fictional terms. Critics, of course, have argued that the
moral and political ambiguities involved in that conflict rendered it impervious
to conventional, realistic treatments, that Vietnam called for some new kind of
narrative strategy. But as such admirable works as Philip Caputo's ''Rumor of
War'' and Robert Stone's ''Dog Soldiers'' have already demonstrated, this has
not always been the case.

While each of these three new Vietnam novels attempts to capture the surreal,
almost hallucinatory, feel of that war, their approach, too, remains essentially
naturalistic; their dominant theme - that of a young man's initiation into life
- is the theme that has animated so many war novels of the past.

In ''Fragments,'' Jack Fuller, a former combat correspondent for Stars and
Stripes, has written an ambitious, tightly controlled novel that makes the usual
semi-autobiographical account, filled with lots of closely observed details and
colorful characters, seem flimsy and discursive in comparison. On one level,
''Fragments'' is about the friendship that develops between the green, somewhat
hesistant young narrator and a ''fit and decisive'' sergeant named Neumann; but
it is also about the uses of memory - to transcend, not simply to recapture, the
past.

Having come to look up to Neumann for guidance and inspiration, Morgan is
devastated when his friend empties his M-16 into a hooch of villagers - which
includes his fiancee Tuyet - and he begins a long, slow search to understand
just what happened.

Neumann, it becomes clear, is, in many ways, a descendant of another naive
American, another ''new man'' - Christopher Newman in Henry James's
''American.'' There is something charming, even compelling, about Neumann's
optimism, and yet he is also arrogant in the way of one too ignorant to
recognize the limitations of his power and good will.

Indeed his belief that his unit can save as well as destroy lives - which
culminates in a plan to rebuild a village - not only crumbles in the face of
realities, but also has devastating consequences for himself and others.
Although Mr. Fuller never resorts to portentous symbolism, never compromises his
character's idiosyncratic style, he has succeeded, with Neumann, in creating a
figure of mythic dimensions - a figure whose vitality and easy confidence mirror
the virtues once possessed by his country.

The shapeliness and sense of larger design, so elegantly executed in
''Fragments,'' is sadly lacking in Nicholas Proffitt's ''Gardens of Stone'' and
Rob Riggan's ''Free Fire Zone.'' Both these novels are essentially
Bildungsromane that use a complicated series of flashbacks and flashforwards in
an attempt to heighten the discontinuity of the war experience and to underline
its role as a ''rite of passage.'' If a certain cinematic vigor is achieved,
however, it is at the expense of narrative coherence: Both ''Gardens'' and
''Zone'' seem, to this reader at least, unnecessarily busy and contrived.

Actually more of a military school novel than a war story, ''Gardens of Stone''
concerns the intersecting paths of two characters: Sgt. 1st Class Clell Hazard,
a veteran of World War II and Korea, who finds his pride in ''soldiering''
turning sour in the wake of Vietnam, and Jack Willow, a young enlisted man, who
dreams of translating his fantasies about fighting in Crimea and the Argonne to
Vietnam, and winning medals and glory.


Defined entirely in terms of his gung-ho military ambitions, Jack comes across
as a flat, cardboardy person; he has no personality beyond his naivete. With
Sergeant Hazard, Mr. Proffitt does considerably better. Proud, vulnerable and
conflicted, Hazard defies fictional stereotypes of the career Army officer, and
he insinuates himself so persuasively in the reader's imagination that we
actually come to care about his relationships with the pallid Jack and with his
equally pallid girlfriend - Samantha, a Washington Post reporter with antiwar
sentiments.

''Free Fire Zone,'' unfortunately, has no Sergeant Hazards, no forceful
characters who stand out against the familiar background activities of killing,
drinking, swearing, whoring and general carrying-on. The novel's principal
antagonists - Morrisey, a highly principled medic, and Smith, an ambitious
officer - are so ill-defined that their climactic showdown is almost totally
lacking in drama; and the narrator, too, remains a blurred bundle of emotions -
regret, alienation and damaged hope. Certainly, matters are not helped by his
penchant for describing his every mood in blunt, opaque prose. ''I'm lonely!''
he says at one point. ''And often, so empty. All things, past events, feelings,
knock around inside me and are without substance.''

Set in a Vietnam medical unit - a sort of M*A*S*H, without the humor - ''Free
Fire Zone'' deals, like so many other war novels, with the brutalizing effects
of combat, with the pettiness of military bureaucrats, with the difficulties of
going back to life in ''The World.'' What sets ''Free Fire Zone'' apart is that
while other fictional works have tended to emphasize the bonding that develops
between men who find themselves in a war, Mr. Riggan has focused on the
isolating effects of that experience. As the narrator's medical unit falls into
disarray, as its members become increasingly alienated from one another, we see
how war can numb people's capacity for feeling, and in doing so, can also
cripple their ability to connect with anyone or anything.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jack Fuller

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DIEN BIEN PHU: A FOOTNOTE TO ITS FALL

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 983 words


The United States Army drew up plans for a nuclear attack on the Vietnamese
forces besieging the French at Dien Bien Phu in 1954, according to an official
Army history.

When this idea was rejected, the study said, the Army prepared a plan for a
conventional drive against the Vietminh insurgents involving seven United States
divisions.

The plans were disclosed in the first volume of a 17-volume official history of
the Vietnam War by the Army's Historical Office. The book, ''Advice and Support:
The Early Years,'' was written by Dr. Ronald H. Spector, who served as a field
historian in Vietnam in 1968 and 1969.

Some of Dr. Spector's account is based on recently declassified Defense and
State Department reports.

The French war to defeat the Vietminh was going badly early in 1954. The
garrison at Dien Bien Phu was under persistent and heavy Vietnamese attack, and
the French Government, seeking American help, sent Gen. Paul Ely, the chief of
the armed forces, to Washington seeking help.

Sought Reduced Arms Spending

The Eisenhower Administration's defense policy sought to reduce overall military
spending by relying more on strategic nuclear air forces and less on large
ground and naval forces. A National Security Council directive decreed that in
the event of Soviet or Chinese aggression, ''the United States will consider
nuclear weapons to be as available for use as other munitions.''

On March 25, after General Ely's call for aid had been made to the President and
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Army's G-3 planning division concluded that
nuclear weapons could be used in a variety of ways to relieve the French in Dien
Bien Phu. These included bombing the Vietminh forces and their bases.

Another study of April 8, the book says, proposed the use of one to six 31-
kiloton bombs to be dropped by carrier- based aircraft. Each bomb had an
explosive power approximately three times the size of the bomb dropped on
Hiroshima.

The authors of the two studies concluded that the use of nuclear weapons was
''technically and militarily feasible,'' according to the book. They also
asserted that their use would reverse the military situation in France's favor,
''turning the entire course of events in Indochina to the advantage of the U.S.
and the free world.''

'Risk of All-Out War'

The plans, although approved by the head of the plans division of G-3,
immediately provoked bitter opposition led by Gen. Matthew B. Ridgeway, the Army
Chief of Staff.

Intelligence argued that the nature of the terrain around Dien Bien Phu and the
dispersal of the insurgents' artillery positions would limit the effectiveness
of nuclear bombing or of saturation attacks with conventional bombs. The Air
Force took the same view, adding the warning that the use of strategic weapons
''may involve the serious risk of initiating all-out war.''

General Ridgeway and Gen. James M. Gavin, the G-3 head, followed these lines and
the former ordered his staff to study the consequences of intervention.

This time the planners concluded that military action by the United States in
Vietnam by air and sea power would lead to the commitment of ground forces,
could prompt retaliation by the Chinese by air or ground forces and would still
not provide sufficient power to defeat the Vietminh.

Joint Chiefs' Head Assails Plan

Adm. Arthur W. Radford, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, argued
successfully that any gain from ''effective intervention in the Dien Bien Phu
operation was altogether disproportionate to the liability it would incur.''

Military sources acquainted with the Joint Chiefs' decision contend that this is
a salient example of the military's restraint in reacting to a crisis abroad.
Some compare it with the present Joint Chiefs' reluctance to continue the
deployment of United States marines on the ground in Lebanon.

But the intervention issue was still alive. During April 1954, the book says,
the Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs continued to study military
action in Vietnam either independently or in cooperation with the French forces
there.

One plan called for ''a coordinated attack on the northern area of Vietnam from
the Tonkin Delta with the primary objective of destroying the Vietminh forces in
the area.''

One airborne and four infantry divisions were to attack the communications
centers at Yen Bai, Tuyen Quang and Thai Nguyen, cutting Vietminh communications
and, possibly, trapping three divisions. In the second phase of the operation an
infantry division was to take and hold a Vietminh base in the Hoa Binh area
while another division was to mount an amphibious assault near Than Hoa.

Scant Attention to Failures

The plan, Dr. Spector says, paid scant attention to French failures. Cutting
lines of communication had little effect on the Vietminh's ability to move and
mount attacks. Army planners also were alarmed by the Navy's insistence that the
island of Hainan, part of China, would have to be attacked to neutralize Chinese
air bases there. This, they thought, would draw Peking into the war.

General Ridgeway continued his fight against intervention, saying American
intervention plans, ''aside from any local successes they might achieve,
constitute a dangerous strategic diversion of limited U.S. military capabilities
and would commit our armed forces in a nondecisive theatre to the attainment of
nondecisive local objectives.''

Vice President Nixon was one of the political leaders calling for intervention,
arguing publicly that the United States, ''as leader of the free world, cannot
afford further retreat in Asia.'' If the French withdrew, he said, the United
States might have to risk ''putting our boys in.''

The French position at Dien Bien Phu worsened daily. On May 8 the fortress
surrendered.


bite penultimate graf if bite is needed

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of French soldiers under fire

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Insurgents Burn Vietnam's Supplies

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 73 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 13


Communist-led Cambodian guerrillas have attacked Battambang, a western Cambodian
provincial capital, destroying an ammunition dump and burning four fuel dumps,
according to reports here today.

Vietnamese planes had to take to the air when the city's airstrip was attacked,
according to guerrilla sources.

The assault was conducted on Saturday night and Sunday morning and took the
Vietnamese defenders by surprise, the sources said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 15, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
MOOD MANAGEMENT;
Killing Language

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 240 words


The State Department won't use the word ''killing'' in human rights reports any
more; it's not sufficiently precise. The new usage is ''unlawful or arbitrary
deprivation of life.''

That's only the latest example of verbal squeamishness about death. A century
ago people spoke not of the dead but of the departed, those who had gone to meet
their Maker, the no- longer living. In Vietnam, when American intelligence
agents drowned a spy they called it ''termination with extreme prejudice.'' On
Friday, a Soviet announcer broadcasting to the West said, in superb sepulchral
English, that Yuri Andropov had ''passed away.''

The State Department concoction is particularly repellent. Human rights
deprivations encompass arrests, brutality, torture that often leads to death.
Why turn that into a bloodless abstraction called ''unlawful or arbitrary
deprivation of life''?  Charles Fairbanks, a State Department official, blames
''the lawyers.'' He says complaints were received from people with legal
training who consider ''killing'' too imprecise. But Mr. Fairbanks knows that
lawyers' first interest is contingencies, not clarity. And if it's complaints
he's responsive to, here's hoping he also hears from people with verbal, and
moral, training. To say ''pass away'' at least spares the feelings of the
bereaved. To say ''unlawful or arbitrary deprivation of life'' spares the
feelings of the killers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 15, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;

BYLINE: By William E. Farrell and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 680 words


The Kissinger Mark


Henry A. Kissinger, like others in government, is usually reluctant to concede
error or omission, and, when pressed, has done so with many qualifications. In
his latest appearance before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, he warned
of dire political and military consequences should the United States fail to
move determinedly in Central America. When Senator Christopher J. Dodd asked the
former Secretary of State why, in light of his testimony before the committee,
his 2,500-page memoirs covering 1969-74 contained no mention Central America at
all, Mr. Kissinger told the Connecticut Democrat:

''Senator Dodd, even if you should prove that I was not omniscient, which would
be an event that has not often occurred before this committee, what would it
prove?

''First of all, in the period that is covered by my two volumes, we had the
Vietnam War, we had a Middle East war, we had a series of crises with the Soviet
Union, we had the opening to China, we had negotiations on arms control, and any
Administration will always have to establish priorities among all the things
they could do. At that time, Central American was quiet.

''Ideally, you would have to say, one should deal with the regions of the world
before they erupt into chaos. There was no Cuban-Soviet security problem in
Central America at that time. In an ideal world where one can deal with all
issues simultaneously, or perhaps with different personalities, one might have
well addressed the problem of economic and social reform at that time.

''So if it does any good to say that maybe we should have done that at that
time, if we had enough time for it, I am willing to grant that. That does not
help us with our current problem. Maybe we should have done more or differently
at that time.''

Under Close Wraps?

The time to get your information

about Washington's supersecret intelligence buildings is before the ground floor
goes in. At the regional office of the General Services Administration, anyone
with a $100 deposit can obtain the plans for the new $200 million addition to
the Central Intelligence Agency in nearby Langley, Va. Those who decide not to
bid on the construction project, No. 19086, can get their $100 back. Others may
ask for No. 38261, plans for the new worldwide Navy communications headquarters
in Crystal City, Va., just across the Potomac.

On the United Way

Robert A. Beck has some good news for President Reagan this morning. Mr. Beck,
chairman of United Way of America, will report that the national fund-raising
drive produced a record of just under $2 billion last year, an increase in
giving that was three times the inflation rate. ''While the Federal Government
is doing less in some of our areas,'' Mr. Beck said, ''it's opening the way for
the private sector to do more.'' Just the kind of talk that the nation's Chief
Apostle of Volunteerism likes to hear.

Electoral Goal for Women

Today is the birthday of Susan B.

Anthony, who was arrested,

tried and fined a century ago for presuming to vote, and 65 women's
organizations have enlisted her namesake and grandniece to help kick off a
nonpartisan campaign to register for the 1984 elections 1.5 million women not
now on the rolls. Considering that there are some 30 million unregistered women,
the goal does not seem unrealistic.

The approach of the drive is keyed to ending male electoral domination and
recognizing women as a political force. The publicity letterhead for the Women's
Vote Project reads: ''It's a man's world - unless women vote!'' The head of the
sponsoring group, the Women's Roundtable, Joyce Miller, said: ''Because of our
numbers and because women vote differently than men, the women's vote can be
decisive in the November elections.''

The namesake, Dr. Susan B. Anthony, a writer and theologian in Florida, said:
''I can think of no present that would have pleased my great- aunt more than the
commitment of these women's organizations to increase the numbers of women
exercising their hard-won right to vote.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 15, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GLENN STEPS UP ATTACKS ON 2 RIVALS



BYLINE:
BY DAVID SHRIBMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: MOBILE, Ala., Feb. 14


With the first political test of 1984 less than a week away, Senator John Glenn
has traveled deep into the South and has raised the pitch of his criticism of
his two principal rivals, former Vice President Walter F. Mondale and President
Reagan.

In the last two days, in a campaign tour through Georgia and Alabama, Mr. Glenn
has charged Mr. Reagan with involving the nation in military actions in Lebanon
that are ''foolish, unwarranted and morally reprehensible'' and has questioned
whether Mr. Mondale will be able to resist the entreaties of the labor leaders
who have endorsed him.

Both themes have been major elements of the Glenn campaign strategy, but this
week's versions were expressed in unusually strong language. Aides said they
were designed to sharpen Mr. Glenn's differences with both Mr. Mondale and Mr.
Reagan at a critical juncture of the political season.

Today, for example, Mr. Glenn stood on the deck of the U.S.S. Alabama in this
port on the Gulf of Mexico and, amid cool breezes and military bands, suggested
some actual combat experience would have tempered Mr. Reagan's views on the use
of force in Lebanon.

Effect of Combat Experience


''Those of us who have spent time in the military are often looked at as 'super
hawks,' '' said Mr. Glenn, a decorated Marine flier in World War II and the
Korean War. ''Nothing could be further from the truth. I truly do wish the
President had seen a little actual combat himself personally. I think there
would be less commitment of forces.''

Then the Ohio Democrat, who has been critical of Mr. Reagan's refusal to
withdraw the American marines from Lebanon immediately, added: ''I think it's
time we have political leaders who understand both the uses and the limits of
force, and a President who levels with the American people.''

Mr. Glenn chose the settings for his new attacks carefully, using a ship that
earned nine battle stars for the backdrop of his criticism of President and
selecting the Statehouse of Georgia, a state that has opposed union shops, for
his criticism of Mr. Mondale's connections with organized labor.

''Shells like the one the U.S.S. Alabama once fired, are leveling villages and
killing innocent women and children,'' said Mr. Glenn, who stood beneath the
battleship's 16-inch guns. ''Indeed, we are using more fire power in Lebanon now
than we used at any time since the war in Vietnam.''

Mr. Glenn said the Reagan Administration was moving the United States from an
ill-defined mission to an undeclared war in Lebanon. ''Instead of bringing this
to a halt, they are expanding this,'' he said. ''Even if there was military
justification for this, there is no moral justification for it.''

His words were equally sharp when, at stops in Atlanta and Moultrie, Ga., and
Tuscaloosa, Ala., he said the assistance organized labor was providing to Mr.
Mondale was threatening to erode democratic traditions.

''I do not in any way question the right of A.F.L.-C.I.O. leaders to support the
candidate of their choice,'' he said. ''But I do say there is the right to ask
what this huge and unprecedented infusion of cash is doing to our democratic
process. What happens to the interests of ordinary Democrats when the
million-dollar deals come down?''

Mr. Glenn spoke angrily of what he described as the ''threats and coercions and
the bludgeons of big money'' and said the American Federation of Labor and
Congress of Industrial Organizations was devoting $20 million to insure that Mr.
Mondale received the Democratic nomination.

Labor Group's Influence

''What does Lane Kirkland think he's buying with his $20 million?'' Mr. Glenn
asked in a reference to the leader of the nation's largest labor federation. ''A
President will never disagree with the A.F.L.-C.I.O.? What do you think? What
happens when a campaign takes tens of millions of dollars or has it spent on its
behalf by a very strong and demanding and aggressive labor organization? Can it
still resist the pressures and remain objective on issues that affect not just
labor but all the people of this country?''

For the last two days Mr. Glenn, who knows that the 475 convention delegates
that are to be selected in seven Southern states in a four-day period in
mid-March are critical to his political future, has been telling audiences no
candidate can ''buy the nomination of the Democratic Party.'' In the Georgia
Statehouse, he urged Democrats to ''stand up to the ideologues and the bosses
and take back the soul of our party.''

Mr. Glenn first began to talk in these terms last autumn, after the labor
federation endorsed Mr. Mondale for the nomination. As his ratings in national
political polls have dropped steadily, Mr. Glenn has stepped up his attacks, and
they reached a crescendo this week.

''Let's be honest,'' Mr. Glenn said. ''If the Democratic Party nomination can be
bought for $20 million in the spring, it isn't going to be worth a plug nickel
in November. This nomination is not for sale.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John Glenn and wife Annie in Mobile, Ala.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 16, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
BEWARE OBSESSION

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis ;
William Safire's column now appears on Mondays and Fridays.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 797 words


There has been one unexpected casualty of the American policy disaster in
Lebanon. That is the reputation of George Shultz as a wise man who keeps his
cool - and his sense of reality - in difficult situations.

The Secretary of State has become the prime advocate, inside the Reagan
Administration, of the use of U.S. military force in Lebanon. He held out to the
end against withdrawing the Marines. Then he pressed for the naval shelling of
the Lebanese hills, against Defense Department objections to what turned out to
be a pointless show of destructive power.

He has continued to insist that President Amin Gemayel carry out the
Lebanese-Israeli agreement of last May 17, even as the political objections
became overwhelming. Altogether, while the Administration has moved slowly
toward greater realism - toward acceptance of the fact that its scenario for
Lebanon was not working - Mr. Shultz has stood out against that reality,
stubbornly and at times emotionally.

Why? The explanation may include elements of personal pride and of diplomatic
psychology.

Mr. Shultz was personally involved in the final negotiations on the May 17
agreement. He pushed Mr. Gemayel to accept the clauses establishing a form of
political relations between Lebanon and Israel as the price of the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the country. He assured Mr. Gemayel that the conditions set
by Israel in a side letter - simultaneous Syrian withdrawal - would be met.

Anyone who helps to write such a diplomatic document may understandably feel
some pride of authorship. But in the real world that feeling must yield to the
facts on the ground, and the truth is that the May 17 agreement was fatally
flawed. Some of Mr. Shultz's trusted Middle East specialists told him so at the
time, but he brushed them off.

The May 17 agreement was not a freely negotiated document, to put it mildly.
Israel occupied the southern third of the country at the time, and U.S. pressure
was on. Under those circumstances it was inevitable that Lebanese groups apart
from Mr. Gemayel's principal supporters, the Maronite Christian Phalange Party,
would object to the agreement, and they did.

President Gemayel was in fact well aware of the difficulty of implementing it.
He never took the formal step required under Lebanese law to ratify the
agreement, putting his signature to it. When he met the other Lebanese parties
for peace talks in Geneva last November, he said he was willing to ''freeze''
the agreement and talk to the United States about ways to get away from it. But
he did nothing, and the political roof fell in on him.  It is also obvious that
Mr. Shultz's assurances on Syrian withdrawal were baseless. How could anyone
expect Syria to acquiesce easily in an agreement that would move Lebanon toward
Israel's sphere of influence and away from its traditional place as an outpost
of the Arab hinterland?  As for the psychological point, Mr. Shultz has been
arguing that Lebanon is a test of U.S. credibility. If our Marines can be forced
out, that is, or if the U.S. is seen to allow the shelving of an agreement that
we sponsored, then no one in the Middle East will believe us in the future.  Of
course it is true that American prestige may be hurt by what is happening in
Lebanon. But the question for a sensible policy maker is whether it would be
hurt worse by sticking to a losing policy - one that turns out to have been
based on false assumptions - or by adjusting to reality. We chose the first
course in Vietnam, and it is hard to believe George Shultz wants to follow that
example of self-destruction.  Another psychological argument made by Mr. Shultz
in Reagan Administration councils is that the Syrians only understand force:
that you have to bloody them to soften them up for negotiation. Intelligence
analysts were told to study the recent record to see whether there was indeed a
relationship between hammering of Syrian areas in Lebanon and a softer Syrian
diplomatic position. They reported that they could find none. Mr. Shultz
rejected their findings.  The great historical example is to the contrary. Henry
Kissinger spent 34 days in the spring of 1974 negotiating with Hafez al-Assad:
words, not guns. The result of that arduous diplomatic effort was a
disengagement agreement that Syria has meticulously observed to this day.  As
American policy falls apart in Lebanon, it is the military that understands and
explains to others in the Reagan Administration the limits of force in
international politics. That may seem an irony, and it is, but it is worse than
that. A Secretary of State has lost his way, and his weight in government, when
he becomes obsessed by the notion that blind force can repair wounded pride and
credibility.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 16, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA, ACT TO END CAMBODIA OCCUPATION

BYLINE: By Dick Clark ;
Dick Clark, former Democratic Senator from Iowa, is senior fellow at the Aspen
Institute for Humanistic Studies, in Washington. In January, he visited Vietnam,
Cambodia, Laos and Thailand and spoke with their foreign ministers.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A military and diplomatic deadlock has existed in Indochina since 1979 following
the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia and the ouster of the internally murderous
and externally aggressive Pol Pot regime. Vietnam continues to occupy Cambodia
with some 160,000 troops, while its principal opponents in the standoff, China
and Thailand, demand a withdrawal and internationally supervised elections. It
is unlikely that the deadlock will be broken soon, given Vietnam's formidable
military grip on the country and the intransigence that it represents.

The United States is a secondary player at best in Indochinese events. Yet given
our own dark role in Indochina and particularly Cambodia, it behooves us all the
more to use what limited influence we have to work for a realistic compromise in
Cambodia. Such a settlement must include a withdrawal of Vietnamese forces,
exclude the genocidal Pol Pot and insure a government that is more
representative of the Cambodian people and not inimical to Vietnam's security
interests.

Certainly a large part of the difficulty in arriving at such a solution is that
Vietnam, through its Cambodian client regime headed by Heng Samrin, has achieved
an old goal: unquestioned domination of Indochina, as only the colonial French
had enjoyed in modern times.

Yet despite this situation, Vietnam continues to have real political and
economic incentives for an eventual compromise. An end to its long isolation
from the West - estimated to have cost as much as $3 billion in lost aid - is
doubtless in Hanoi's interest, as would be better relations with neighbors in
the region. Moreover, Vietnam recognizes its vulnerability to unforeseeable
external factors, such as Chinese pressure on its northern border and a cut in
Soviet aid. Vietnam, though fiercely independent by tradition, remains highly
concerned about the prospect of any Chinese-Soviet rapprochement and the
strategically vulnerable position in which it would leave them.

At present, however, Vietnam appears to prefer the heavy costs of a
nonthreatening and compliant Cambodia, particularly with domestic unemployment
high, the typical Viet

namese soldier's pay and rations meager and the Soviet Union still willing to
pick up some of the tab.  China and Thailand, for their part, remain determined
to reverse the Cambodian situation. While they continue to succor Pol Pot to
prevent his demise as a resistance force, they know that he is unlikely to
become a serious threat to the Vietnamese occupation; the most that they expect
from him is to make the occupation as costly as possible for Vietnam.  Despite
their public stance against Vietnam, it is clear that China and Thailand have
gained certain political and strategic advantages from the stalemate. China no
doubt prefers to have the Vietnamese Army deployed on the Cambodian-Thai border
instead of its own. Thailand's cooperation with China has served to undercut the
Thai Communist Party, giving Thailand its greatest internal security in three
decades. And as the frontline state facing Vietnamese forces, Thailand has
gained increased regional support and United States military aid.  Most hopes
for a break in the deadlock depend upon on a coalition of opposition leaders
that has emerged with the encouragement of Asean - the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations. Forces in this coalition include the current Khmer Rouge
political leader Khieu Samphan; the former Cambodian Prime Minister Son Sann;
and the indefatigable Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who was recently elected leader
of the coalition government-in-exile of Democratic Kampuchea. The Asean
countries (Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines) look to
such a coalition government as a basis upon which an eventual compromise can be
reached and Vietnamese troops withdrawn from Cambodia.  Pol Pot, whom the
Chinese still insist be included in a coalition, remains a major stumbling block
to the process. That the time may not yet be ripe for a solution should be no
reason to sit back and join the waiting game; nonetheless, it appears that
America, like China, is satisfied to bleed Vietnam into eventual submission by
supporting a coalition that includes Pol Pot.  Washington must bring its
influence to bear on the Indochinese deadlock and work actively with our Asean
friends and others for a comprehensive negotiated settlement. Such an effort
would be in keeping with our interests in the region and our humanitarian
concern for the Cambodian people - surely among the most beleaguered on this
earth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 16, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. VOLUNTEERS HELP NICARAGUA WITH THE HARVEST

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words


Eager to judge for himself what daily life is like under the Sandinista
Government, David Case took two weeks off from his job as a New York City cab
driver and volunteered to help harvest rice in Nicaragua.

''I was deeply moved by the commitment of the Nicaraguan people,'' the
38-year-old Mr. Case recalled after returning from his trip in January. ''I
learned very quickly that the Nicaraguans love their North American neighbors,
but with good reason they despise the American Government.''

Mr. Case's comments are typical of those of 650 or so Americans who have taken
part in a voluntary three-month harvest program sponsored by the National
Network in Solidarity with the Nicaraguan People, a Washington- based group
whose goal is to build opposition to the Reagan Administration's policy toward
Nicaragua. The United States supports two main rebel groups that seek the
overthrow of the Sandinista Government.

About 150 Americans are currently helping to harvest cotton under the program.

'Turnaround in Attitudes'

''We find people are often surprised,'' said Diane Passmore, the group's
national coordinator. ''When they have a chance to see the country for
themselves there is really a turnaround in attitudes.''

Like Mr. Case, many of those in the Volunteer Work Brigade Program are
suspicious of Administration reports of conditions under the Sandanistas. And
according to officials at the Network, many Americans are for the first time
taking an interest in that part of the world.

''There have been waves of interest in Nicaragua,'' said Miss Passmore. ''Right
now we are on an upswing.'' She says the surge in interest is a result of the
increasing United States military and economic commitment in Central America.
The National Bipartisan Commission on Central America, headed by Henry A.
Kissinger, recommended in January that the United States develop an $8 billion,
five-year economic aid plan for the region.

The National Network, formed in 1979 to help build American support for the
overthrow of Anastasio Somoza Debayle, the Nicaraguan dictator who was
assassinated in September 1980, now communicates with about 60 organizations
nationwide, many of them religious or civic groups, and coordinates their
lobbying efforts. The Network's budget last year was about $80,000, provided
mainly by donations from foundations and individuals, Network officials said.

Volunteers Work on Farms

The Network began organizing the work brigades last year in response to a
request from the Nicaraguan Committee for Solidarity, which is based in Managua,
Nicaragua's capital. Coffee, Nicaragua's main crop, accounts for about a third
of the country's exports. Volunteers from the United States also work on
state-owned farms that grow rice, tobacco, cotton and sugar cane as well as on
some construction projects.

''The program satisfies the desires of many North Americans who are frustrated
with our Government's policy,'' said Miss Passmore. ''They want to learn about
Nicaragua, but they want to contribute something while they are there.''
Although the majority of the participants are strongly committed to the
Nicaraguan Government before they go on the trip, about 40 percent merely want
to learn for themselves what conditions are like, she said.

Participants who have returned to the United States said that they had been
encouraged to talk to anyone they chose and that interpreters were provided. The
Americans mingled with Nicaraguan workers in the fields and during meals, they
said.

U.S. Policy Held Faulty

Kenneth Ray, a 29-year-old stockbroker from Lancaster, Pa., said he had had no
fixed opinions about Nicaragua before he went to work in January on a
construction project in southern Nicaragua.

Mr. Ray, a registered Republican, said his experience had convinced him that the
United States was ''trying to retain its influence in the region at the expense
of the Nicaraguan people.'' He added, ''And that's not consistent with my
concepts of freedom and democracy.''

''It raises the question,'' he said, ''of whether the United States really
recognizes the sovereignty of other nations.''

Although the Network's program amounts to a form of tourism in Nicaragua, the
brigade's central thrust is what each volunteer does when he or she returns to
the United States.

Participants Must Pay Fare

''It's true that the 650 people we're sending are contributing in economic areas
by working on the harvest,'' said Miss Passmore. ''At the same time, the major
goal is to have them return and tell others about the country and their
experiences.''

Participants in work brigades must be over the age of 18 and are required to pay
for transportation to and from Miami and round-trip air fare on Aeronica, the
Nicaraguan state airline, from there to Managua, which amounts to about $280.
There is also a $50 registration fee.

Food and lodging are provided by the Nicaraguan Government, but participants
must bring with them a minimum of $60. An ability to speak Spanish is
recommended but not required.

In Managua the America volunteers are given an orientation session that includes
discussions with labor and professional organizations and religious and
government leaders.

Varied Tasks Assigned

Participants are then taken to the farms where they are expected to work six- to
eight-hour days. They are given meals of rice, beans and tortillas. Some of the
jobs have included picking coffee beans and cotton, loading rice onto barges,
working in the kitchens, building a bomb shelter and picking and threshing rice.

Elaine Gorenstein, a 29-year-old from Dallas, left her job as a secretary to
pick coffee beans from 7 A.M. to 2 P.M. each day during the Christmas and New
Year holidays.

Other participants have included lawyers, professors, students, a farmer from
Minnesota and a Vietnam veteran who works as a community organizer. They came
from virtually all areas of the country.

''What that says to us,'' said Debbie Reuben, coordinator of the brigades, ''is
the opposition to the Reagan Administration policy is more widespread than we
expected. These are mainstream people.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of people painting new school

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 16, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

POLICY ON BEIRUT: CONTRADICTIONS ABOUND

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1134 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 15


In the last several days, the volatile situation in Lebanon has led the Reagan
Administration to give new and sometimes differing definitions of its policies,
its relationship with the Government of President Amin Gemayel and the role of
the United States marines in Beirut.  In addition, there have been contradictory
reports from Administration officials about the seriousness of the military and
political crisis in Lebanon. There have also been contradictory statements about
the timetable for the withdrawal of American marines from the Beirut airport,
and about the purpose of the shelling of Syrian positions by American warships.

One result of these statements is that there has been an unusual amount of
uncertainty surrounding the Administration's approach to the Middle East at a
time of heightened concern about the future of the Gemayel Government.

The overall seriousness of the situation has been one focus of the varying
statements. Mr. Reagan has repeatedly voiced optimism about the political and
military strength of President Gemayel and the Lebanese Armed Forces, whereas
other officials say they are much more pessimistic.

'Well-Trained' Force

Despite a series of military defeats in recent days, the President told
reporters today that the Army was ''well- trained and a better fighting force
than the recent engagements and the ones of the last 24 hours and so forth
indicate.'' A senior Administration official, briefing reporters last Friday,
said the chances of Mr. Gemayel's political survival were ''good.''

Other Administration officials who are familiar with the military situation in
Lebanon say the Lebanese Army, and perhaps even the government, is close to
disintegration because of the sectarian factionalism within Lebanon.

There has also been unusual confusion about the timetable for the withdrawal of
United States marines from Lebanon. After Mr. Reagan announced on Feb. 7 that
the marines would be redeployed to ships off Beirut, some White House officials
said the redeployment would begin within days and be completed within 30 days.

Subsequently, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger said that only the first
500 out of 1,400 marines would be withdrawn within 30 days, and that the
Pentagon would then decide when additional marines could be withdrawn.

In recent days, Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, has said the
Administration's ''goal'' was a 30-day timetable.

Misunderstanding Among Aides

One reason for the confusion has been that senior officials have been willing to
discuss the timetable with reporters only on the condition that they not be
identified. This is a frequent practice in the Reagan Administration, but one
that in this case has led to reports of anonymous officials contradicting each
other.

A senior presidential adviser, also asking not to be identified, said in an
interview today that the confusion arose from a genuine misunderstanding within
the President's inner circle about what had been decided with the marines last
week. He said that some officials came away from the meetings thinking one thing
and that others came away thinking something else.

A similar set of contradictions has grown from the rationale for the shelling by
American warships of Druse and Shiite positions in the mountains outside Beirut.
The nine hours of shelling last Wednesday by the battleship New Jersey was the
heaviest American shore bombardment since the Vietnam War.

Last week, again speaking anonymously, several high-level Administration
officials said the increased firepower was aimed at shoring up the faltering
government of President Gemayel.

Broadening of Commitment

These officials said further that the firepower represented a definite
broadening of the American commitment in Lebanon, and that this was part of a
''package deal'' in which Mr. Gemayel also had to accept the withdrawal of the
marines.

As the New Jersey fired its guns, however, Congressional leaders charged that
the Administration was violating the limited mandate given by Congress under a
War Powers Resolution last October. Administration officials responded by
asserting that the naval shelling was being undertaken strictly to protect the
lives of Americans in Beirut.

The Administration has continued to say that this was the purpose of the
shelling, even while United States naval vessels fired shells on Tuesday to
protect the Lebanese Army in their battle with Druse militiamen.

The contradiction flared in the open on Tuesday when the Secretary of the Navy,
John F. Lehman Jr., said, ''There very definitely has been a shift in emphasis
to make it clear that we will be providing supporting fire to the Lebanese Armed
Forces.''

Mr. Lehman was then disputed by Mr. Speakes, who said that ''whatever we do is
in support of the marines.''

Varying Statements on Shelling

A White House official said that, unlike the matter of the timetable on the
withdrawal, the dispute here was not a case of internal confusion. Rather, he
said, it was a case of the Administration trying to state its policy in a
''constructive'' fashion so as not to run afoul of congressional objections
under the War Powers Act.

Responding to Congressial demands in a report today, Mr. Reagan in effect cited
both rationales for the shelling.

The report said the naval gunfire and air support were aimed at ''any units in
Syrian-controlled parts of Lebanon firing into the greater Beirut area, as well
as against any units directly attacking M.N.F. or U.S. personnel and
facilities.'' The M.N.F. refers to the multinational force of French, British,
Italian and American troops.

The report refers in one paragraph to the role of the marines as ''part of a
broadly based international peacekeeping effort to help keep the peace,'' which
seems to imply a kind of neutral force to prevent the factions from fighting.

In another paragraph, the report says the force is aimed at assisting the
Lebanese Army in its efforts to ''expand the control of the Lebanese Government
over the territory of Lebanon.'' Military experts have maintained that the same
force cannot serve as a participant in a conflict and also as a ''peacekeeper.''

Mr. Reagan's comments in a breakfast interview with reporters today seemed to
come down on the side of the marines as a neutral force. Asked how the marines
would be able to ''protect the Lebanese Government'' once they are offshore, Mr.
Reagan said this was not their role.

'Stabilizing' the Government

''It wasn't a case of protecting the Lebanese Government on shore,'' he said.
''It was a case of, they were there to offer that stabilizing thing while the
Government organized itself, and its military was trained.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Christians surrendering to Shiite militiamen

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 16, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 823 words


TIN WIFE. By Joe Flaherty. 336 pages. Simon & Schuster. $14.95.

''TIN WIFE'' is a posthumously published novel by Joe Flaherty, a well-known
journalist who died of cancer last fall at the age of 47. A reviewer therefore
finds himself between the rock and the hard place. If he damns Mr. Flaherty's
book, his bad taste will have been to speak ill of the dead; if he praises ''Tin
Wife,'' he runs the risk of appearing to commit a mere empty piety.

Under the circumstances, I can only hope that I will seem credible when I say
that ''Tin Wife'' is on the whole an extremely successful novel - a funny,
wisecracking, cynical, street-smart story about the 44-year- old widow of an
Irish New York City cop who exacts her revenge on the city and its Police
Department for what Mr. Flaherty believed they almost invariably do to policemen
and their families, particularly their wives.

The first bit of good news is that Mr. Flaherty has rectified the mistakes he
made in his first and only other novel ''Fogarty & Co.,'' which he published in
1973. (Earlier, he had brought out ''Managing Mailer,'' an exuberant account of
his experiences as campaign manager for Norman Mailer's 1969 mayoralty race, and
later he published ''Chez Joey,'' a collection of pieces he wrote for The
Village Voice.) In ''Fogarty & Co.,'' there was a fatal dissonance between the
feelings and the behavior of the protagonist, Shamus Fogarty, which made his
extravagant romanticism seem merely silly.


In ''Tin Wife,'' the narrative rarely strays far from the perceptions of Theresa
(Sissy) Sullivan, so that the novel is entirely congruent with her way of seeing
the world. And what an extraordinary woman she is, this romantic mythologizer
from the Flatbush section of Brooklyn who ends up making the world pay through
the nose for shattering her illusions. What a vehicle she is for the author's
passionate, funny views on everything from ethnic rivalry to the women's
liberation movement as seen by working-class housewives to why the Brooklyn
Dodgers fled Ebbetts Field for California.

The immediate action of ''Tin Wife'' occurs on the morning and early afternoon
of the day that Sissy's fallen husband is to be honored posthumously by the
Mayor. But as the clan gathers at Sissy's Flatbush apartment and makes its way
by hired limousine to City Hall, gnawing all the while at unearthed old bones of
contention, Sissy remembers her life with Eddie Sullivan and her dawning
discovery that ''the world wasn't round but composed of angles.''

She recalls their 1950's courtship, how calculatedly she hooked and played him
by being the girl back home when he was a Marine in Korea. She recalls how
passionately they aspired to Manhattan and how, if having to stay in Brooklyn
made their relationship ''moribund,'' Eddie's decision to join the police served
to entomb it. She remembers the birth of their children and Eddie's gradual
slide into corruption and infidelity. She remembers her son's death in Vietnam,
her own resulting crackup and Eddie's plunge into alcoholism.

She evokes her renewed attempts to break out of the old neighborhood and her
discovery, through a Brooklyn Heights friend, of the Manhattan women's
liberation show. ''The men were a traveling repertory company - husbands and
escorts, artists, writers, and book critics sympathetic to the cause, young male
politicians from swank Manhattan districts who had made the ERA, ecology, and
gay rights their career stepping-stones. They were so earnest, Sissy found them
ludicrous. When women talked to them, they bent forward with the intensity of
the hard of hearing. Their heads bobbed up and down continuously, like those
plastic goonybirds she used to see sitting on local back bars, repeatedly
dipping their beaks into a glass of water.''


Eventually, the clan arrives at City Hall, Sissy's father-in-law badly in need
of a drink, her mother and mother-in-law squabbling over their granddaughter's
plans to go to college. We come at last to Eddie Sullivan's death and the ugly
truth behind it that Sissy discovered when she learned to use the Police
Department's cynicism for her own purposes.

It is a virtuoso performance on Mr. Flaherty's part. I have some minor
complaints about the book's occasionally unstable point of view; it bothered me
that in a story that so overwhelmingly belongs to Sissy Sullivan, the narrator
can unpredictably shoot into other characters' minds and reveal that they are
thinking almost the opposite of what they're saying. As amusing as the trick is,
it's also disconcerting.

But the portrait of this Irish-American woman and her milieu is a powerfully
authentic one. It's as if knowing that his time was short, Joe Flaherty
desperately molded a form and poured into it everything he had ever learned
about being a person, male or female. It's only too bad he can't be around to
enjoy the reaction ''Tin Wife'' deserves and undoubtedly will get.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Joe Flaherty

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MCGOVERN AIMS DRIVE AT UNDECIDED IOWANS

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: TAMA, Iowa, Feb. 15


George McGovern, buoyed by assessments of his showing in last Saturday's debate,
is pressing to win over the large number of uncommitted Democratic voters in
Iowa.

''This nomination hasn't been decided,'' he said today at a livestock auction.
''The eyes of the whole country are going to be upon Iowa next Monday. Most
Americans still don't know who they are going to support in 1984 and they are
going to be watching to see what Iowa does.''

He returned to this state Tuesday for a final effort before the caucuses next
Monday that will begin the delegate-selecting process for the Democratic
National Convention in San Francisco in July. It was his 40th visit to Iowa
since he announced his candidacy for the Democratic Presidential nomination in
September, after all his rivals but the Rev. Jesse Jackson had announced.

When Mr. McGovern appeared in Des Moines in a debate with the seven other major
Democratic candidates, his aides said, he made an ''impressive'' showing as he
urged Iowans who agreed with him politically, but thought he could not win, to
vote their consciences. That remark produced the loudest and longest applause of
the debate.

He also warned his rivals they were hurting the party's chances of regaining the
Presidency by attacking one another rather than President Reagan, a peacemaking
note he has continued to sound.

''The Democrats simply cannot beat the incumbent if the nominee is cannibalized
in advance by his own party,'' he said. ''Each one of us, myself included, wants
to be the nominee of the Democratic Party as I was 12 years ago. But the
nomination will be greatly diminished if the nominee has been riddled by pot
shots and slashes from his fellow Democratic contenders.''



Iowa Visits Held Critical

Mr. McGovern traveled to such cities as Tama, Marengo and Waterloo, getting out
the vote. These visits are considered critical since the campaign staff does not
expect to spend much money for radio or television advertising.

His campaigning has produced reminders of his 1972 candidacy and the assessments
that among the Presidential hopefuls he is stating the clearest positions on
important issues.

As he left a plane in Richmond, Minn., for a motorcade to Decorah, Iowa, a
passenger, Tom Purcell, remarked: ''I saw Nixon last week and it made me sick.
Seeing you today makes me feel real good. I mean that.''

On the other hand, at Luther College, a school in northeastern Iowa with an
enrollment of about 2,100 students, Mr. McGovern encountered 75-year-old George
Kjome, who said, ''If I would have seen you in 1972, I would have kicked your
butt.'' He was referring to Mr. McGovern's opposition to the Vietnam War. Mr.
Kjome said his son was taken prisoner in the war.

Mr. McGovern seeks a coalition of farmers, peace advocates, liberals and
students for the caucuses Monday that could place him in the top half of the
field of eight.  The former Senator from South Dakota stresses his rural
background and his 18 years on the Agriculture Committee.

But some voters appear concerned that by voting for Mr. McGovern they could be
taking votes away from candidates with similar positions. Senators Gary Hart of
Colorado and Alan Cranston of California are frequently mentioned.

Nancy Heerens Knudson said to him in Decorah: ''You were the first candidate I
voted for. Why did you have to take so long to announce?''

Mr. McGovern's response is that none of the other candidates then in the field
were raising the issues that he has since he announced.  ''I urged that we
should get out of Lebanon right now, that we should put a nuclear freeze in
effect right now and that the military budget should be reduced from 20 to 25
percent right now,'' he said. ''Those were bombshells. I mean I saw those guys
and they thought I was crazy. Then they began to watch the audience reaction and
pretty soon the whole debate began to turn around.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George McGovern greeting Iowa Democrats

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'LE CRABE TAMBOUR,' ADVENTURE

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1174 words


TO come to the point immediately, ''Le Crabe Tambour,'' Pierre Schoendoerffer's
1977 French film based on his own French novel, is one of the grandest, most
beautiful adventure movies in years. It may be somewhat old-fashioned in its
emphasis on courage, honor and the glory of war, no matter what the cause.
However, it's also wonderfully old-fashioned in its convoluted, romantic
narrative, which moves from Vietnam, during the collapse of France's control of
Indochina in the 1950's, to East Africa, Algeria, Brittany, Newfoundland and the
stormy fishing grounds on the Grand Banks.

The only recent film to which it can be compared is John Huston's adaptation of
Rudyard Kipling's ''Man Who Would Be King,'' though it more consciously calls to
mind the tales of Joseph Conrad through specific references to ''Heart of
Darkness'' and ''The Nigger of the Narcissus.''

''Le Crabe Tambour'' opens at the Public Theater today for a one-week
engagement, which, I trust, will be extended, or the film will be moved to
another house. The film has taken too long to get here to disappear too quickly.


''Le Crabe Tambour'' (''Drummer Crab'') is the nickname for the mysterious
central character, Willsdorff (Jacques Perrin), an Alsatian, whose doomed,
out-of-date career is recalled through the tales of three naval officers
currently serving aboard a French supply ship in the North Atlantic.

Willsdorff, whose story is based on that of a still-living Frenchman named
Pierre Guillaume, is a 20th- century Lord Jim, whose story begins shortly before
the fall of Dien Bien Phu. When first seen on his Mekong River boat, hugging a
large black cat with yellow eyes, Willsdorff looks too good to be true. He's
incredibly self- assured and perhaps just a little bit crazy. He's also very
young, very handsome and very blond, a white god among what used to be called
the heathen.

Willsdorff clearly loves war, though what motivates that love remains ambiguous
right up to the end, but his obsession touches everyone he meets, including the
members of his Vietnamese crew and the other French officers whose paths cross
his. Even when covered with filth or humiliated in defeat, Willsdorff appears to
be immaculate, cool and impersonally cheerful, in the way of a man who possesses
some formidable, unshared secret.


Sailing toward a French fishing fleet off Newfoundland, the three officers on
the supply ship tell their stories in interlocking flashbacks. We learn, among
other things, that Willsdorff spent three years in a Vietnamese prison after
Dien Bien Phu, that he attempted to sail back to France on a Chinese junk, that
he was captured on the Red Sea by African ''rebels'' and later ransomed by the
French Navy.

Still later, he turns up in Algeria during the war of independence and joins a
military plot designed to foil President De Gaulle's negotiations to end that
war. Once again he lands in prison.

It's this last adventure that forms the curious moral center of the story. It
turns out that the supply-ship's captain (Jean Rochefort), once Willsdorff's
co-conspirator, had turned against his comrade at a key moment in the failed
''putsch.'' The other narrators are the supply ship's doctor (Claude Rich) and
the ship's philosophical chief engineer, played with great humor by Jacques
Dufilho.

The film's references to recent French political history are, I'm told, easily
understood by French audiences though local audiences, to get the full impoprt,
will have to read the ''footnotes'' prepared by Elliott Stein for the Public
Theater engagement. However, I also suspect that the film would work as well
without the notes, if only because the politics is what Alfred Hitchcock used to
call ''the MacGuffin,'' the excuse for the story that is eventually less
important than the story itself.

I haven't read Mr. Schoendoerffer's novel, which was published in this country
in 1978 in an English translation that's now out of print. The New York Times
review was not appreciative. However, this big, richly detailed film works
wonderfully as its own excuse.

Mr. Schoendoerffer, a successful journalist, as well as novelist and film maker,
adapted his book with Jean-Francois Chauvel. Willsdorff's brother, who is an
important off- screen character in ''Le Crabe Tambour,'' is one of the heroes of
Mr. Schoendoerffer's first novel, ''The 317th Section,'' published in France in
1963 and, a year later, made into a film by him that hasn't been released in New
York as far as I can learn.

That ''Le Crabe Tambour'' successfully maintains its epic sweep from start to
finish is a credit to the novelist-director and to the fine performances by Mr.
Perrin, Mr. Rochefort, Mr. Rich and Mr. Dufilho, and, especially, to the
extraordinary photography by Raoul Coutard. Mr. Coutard, who photographed most
of the early ''new wave'' classics by Jean-Luc Godard and Francois Truffaut -
each one stylistically different - outdoes himself.

''Le Crabe Tambour'' is a visual tour de force, by which I don't mean that it's
just beautiful, which it often is, but that the camerawork perfectly reflects
the concerns of the narrative, which was filmed in Thailand, Africa, France and
on the North Atlantic. These wintry seascapes are among the most stunning
sequences I've ever seen in a conventional movie.


''Le Crabe Tambour'' is always, however, a movie. There are things missing from
it that might have been made clear in a novel. The character of Willsdorff
remains a dreamlike figure, one always seen through the eyes of others. He has
no unguarded moments. In this day and age, one can't help wondering about his
sex life, if any. There's something almost prepubertal about the film's
exclusive interest in the Willsdorff legend, but then ''Le Crabe Tambour'' is a
series of tales told in a ship's wardroom, on its bridge, in its engine room
and, in one moving sequence, in a lonely little Newfoundland bar call the Joyful
Cod.

The questions that linger at the end of the film do not diminish it but possibly
fix ''Le Crabe Tambour'' more firmly in the memory. The film, which is myth
making of a most exhilarating sort, longs for a kind of heroic literature not
easily accommodated in our liberated age.

Warrior Adrift

LE CRABE TAMBOUR, a film by Pierre Schoendoerffer; screenplay (French with
English subtitles) by Jean-Francois Chauvel and Mr.  Schoendoerfer, based on Mr.
Schoendoerffer's novel; photographed by Raoul Coutard; edited by Nguyen Long;
music by Philippe Sarde; produced by Georges de Beauregard; a co-production of
A.M.L.F.-Lira Films-Bela Production-T.F.1; distributed by Interama. At the
Public, 425 Lafayette Street. Running time: 120 minutes. This film has no
rating. CaptainJean Rochefort DoctorClaude Rich Chief EngineerJacques Dufilho
WillsdorffJacques Perrin Bar HostessOdile Versois FrancineAurore Clement
LieutenantMorgan-Jones Officer of Fishing FleetHubert Laurent Bongo-BaJoseph
Momo BabourgPierre Rousseau Bar Owner-GendarmeFred Personne BochauFrancois
Landoit RectorBernard Lajarrige


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jacques Perrin

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 18, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BEIRUT'S CHRISTIANS ASK IF THE U.S. HAS A POLICY

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 963 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Feb. 17


Christians in East Beirut have expressed anger and uncertainty over United
States policy toward Lebanon.

Their comments, in interviews this week, came as many Lebanese Christians
pondered their future in light of the increasing disarray of the Lebanese Army
and the growing power of Syrian-backed Moslem forces.

Some expressed particular puzzlement over what they saw as the limited
involvement of American warships in Wednesday's fighting between the Lebanese
Army and the Syrian-backed militia forces.

''We would have expected more,'' said Fadi Hayek, the chief spokesman for the
Lebanese Forces, the Christian Phalangist militia. ''Is there an American policy
or not?''

'Why So Little?'

A man walking down a major shopping street in a Christian area near the
embattled green line expressed his confusion in broken English: ''Why no Navy?
Why so little? Why, why, why?''

Pierre Gemayel, the founder of the Phalangist Party and the father of President
Amin Gemayel, was more diplomatic during a Thursday interview in which he spoke
of what he said was the shared commitment of Lebanon and the United States to
''freedom and democracy.'' But he, too, expressed doubts about American policy.

''Let me speak frankly: The attitude of America astonishes me, that it has
brought us to this point,'' he said as shells exploded near his headquarters.
''I don't want to be ungrateful. America has helped us a lot. We understand that
it doesn't want to make war. But it has brought us to this point: it is now a
question of life or death.''

L'Orient-Le Jour, a French-language daily with close ties to President Gemayel,
reported Thursday that the Government ''was no longer hiding'' its unhappiness
over the ''mediocre intervention of the Sixth Fleet during Tuesday's battles.''

'Almost a Spectator'

The American fleet, the paper went on, ''was almost a spectator'' during the
mountain fighting in which the Army fell before an anti-Government
''blitzkrieg.''

''The effectiveness of the American umbrella should be called on the carpet,''
the paper said.

Jana Tamer, a Lebanese writer, referred to a political cartoon that appeared in
The Beirut Press recently to summarize the view of many Christians with whom she
had spoken.

''It was of a fishing boat that went out to the battleship New Jersey and went
around it,'' she said, ''and when the fisherman got to the other side, he
discovered it was nothing but a cardboard cutout sitting in the water.''

The last few days have been bitter for many Christians, who feel threatened with
the possibility of being nearly surrounded.

In parts of Ashrafiye, the major Christian neighborhood in Beirut, some store
owners re-enforced the already formidable sandbag and concrete block formations
in front of their businesses.  The Israeli state radio reported late Wednesday
night that 12,000 Christians had crossed into Israeli-controlled territory in
Lebanon since the army's defeat in the mountains became clear.

Sympathy for Israel

Lebanese Christians, especially the dominant Maronite group, have a recurring
nightmare that as the only Christian group in the Middle East with a major role
in Government, they will one day find themselves overwhelmed by the Moslem world
and forgotten.

Pierre Gemayel used such terms to explain the sympathy many Lebanese Christians
feel for Israel.

''The Jew feels a stranger in the world,'' Mr. Gemayel said. ''The Christian
senses himself a stranger in the Arab world.''

In most Arab countries, he went on, Islam is the state religion, which means
that Christians are second-class citizens.

Mrs. Tamer said she believed that the anger many Christians expressed toward the
United States was largely a reflection of their own sense of helplessness.

''People feel that the United States support was the last card that Lebanon
could play,'' she said. ''And the fear of many Christians is that they will be
made to pay not only for their own mistakes, but also for the errors of the
United States.''

Shifts in U.S. Policy

Charles Rizk, the former head of Lebanese state television, said not all
Lebanese were surprised by shifts in American policy toward their country.

''I wish Lebanon were constantly your No. 1 priority, but I'm not sure that's
realistic,'' he said. ''America is a great country and has a great many
interests and priorities that are constantly shifting.'' One Arab authority on
Middle Eastern affairs here said: ''There was the illusion that finally a big
power came in and that would save them. They put all their eggs in the American
basket, even though the Americans asked them not to. And so now they blame the
U.S. for the whole problem, which is not fair.''

Some Christians repeatedly invoked the fate of America's allies in Vietnam as
their own. A prominent Phalangist militia member quoted the Druse leader, Walid
Jumblat, to make his point.



'Same Fate as Saigon Regime'

''He said we will have the same fate as the Saigon regime, as all of America's
friends,'' he said. ''Are you proud to hear this? Are you proud to hear that it
is a historical error to rely on the U.S.?''

Even Lebanese Christians less militant than the Phalangists said they were
worried about what they saw as the lack of clear direction in America's policy
toward Lebanon.

Rafik Khoury, writing in the newspaper Al Anwar Wednesday, said America had
given mixed signals as to whether or not it thought President Gemayel should
maintain the May 17 peace accord with Israel. ''America is for keeping the
agreement,'' he wrote, ''or for amending it or for canceling it.''

At another point, Mr. Khoury said, ''President Reagan wants to keep the marines
in Lebanon and pull them out at the same time.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Reserves Top One Million

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 80, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 110 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 18


The nation's first-line military reserve forces topped one million in 1983 for
the first time in 22 years, according to the Pentagon. Officials said they
considered this a landmark in the rebuilding of the Selected Reserve, which went
into a long decline after the Vietnam War until it reached 787,800 in 1978.
According to the Pentagon report, the reserve strength reached 1,004,500 Sept.
30, an increase of 40,800 over the preceding 12-month period. The Army National
Guard reached 417,200 men and women; the Army Reserve 266,200; the Naval Reserve
109,100; the Air National Guard 102,200; the Air Force Reserve 67,200 and the
Marine Reserve 42,700.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOZENS OF ARRESTS ARE MADE IN A CALIFORNIA FRAUD INQUIRY

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 79, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 324 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 18


Three dozen people, including doctors, druggists and medical aides, have been
arrested in California on charges of defrauding the Medi-Cal benefit system.

Attorney General John Van de Kamp said state agents assisted by 150 local
officers also served 34 search warrants for medical and pharmaceutical records
in communities throughout the state.

Medi-Cal is California's medical assistance program for the poor.

Mr. Van de Kamp said the frauds, reputedly perpetrated by Indochinese refugees,
might have cost the state millions of dollars. He said many drugs were
purchased, then sent to Vietnam for resale on the black market at prices four to
eight times higher than retail.

The suspects, arrested in Orange, Los Angeles, Santa Clara and San Diego
counties, were given arraignment dates on Wednesday and all have been released
on bail.

Each charge is punishable by a state prison term of 16 months to three years.

The frauds documented by undercover agents in court papers totaled about
$18,000, Mr. Van de Kamp said.

But, he said, ''We are exploring additional information on other frauds which
may show billing of $7 million in the past year.''

Widespread Abuse Reported


Mr. Van de Kamp said Federal, state and local investigators ''uncovered a
widespread pattern of abuse of the Medi-Cal system.''

Investigators identified several illegal practices, including excessive billing
of patients, overprescribing of drugs and extortion to obtain Medi-Cal stickers.

The stickers are issued to Medi-Cal recipients each month, and doctors and
druggists have to affix them to reimbursement claims they submit to the state.

Eight of those arrested are to be arraigned Feb. 29 in Santa Clara County.

In Los Angeles County a variety of arraignment dates have been set for 13.

In Orange County, 24 people are to be arraigned in March and April, and San
Diego County set arraignment on one case there for next month.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

R.O.T.C.,15 YEARS SFTER IT LEFT, IS ONCE MORE AN ISSUE AT HARVARD

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 78, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 547 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Feb. 18


Fifteen years ago students were occupying the administration building at Harvard
University, boycotting classes and rallying against American involvement in the
Vietnam War. One demand was that Harvard abolish its Reserve Officers Training
Corps program, through which students could receive academic credit and
scholarships.

The faculty agreed and discontinued Harvard's R.O.T.C. program, the oldest in
the nation. Since 1976, however, Harvard students who want to take R.O.T.C.
courses have been permitted to enroll in them at the neighboring Massachusetts
Institute of Technology under a special arrangement that does not grant academic
credit. Who should pay for that arrangement is now in question, and the old
issues are being raised along with some new ones.

The focus of the latest discussion was a vote Tuesday by the faculty of
Harvard's School of Arts and Sciences to reimburse $60,129 that M.I.T. had
requested to cover its administrative costs in enrolling Harvard students in the
military courses. The Undergraduate Council had asked the faculty to postpone a
decision.

According to its chairman, Greg Lyss, one new issue that motivated the student
group was discrimination by the military. The Undergraduate Council's
constitution ''states that it cannot discriminate against gay and disabled
persons, and R.O.T.C. does both,'' Mr. Lyss said, adding, ''The program which
the money is going to support is a program that discriminates.''

Request by Homosexuals

Prof. William Bossert, who recommended the payment to M.I.T., said the students'
arguments were not germane. ''We're not reimbursing the Department of Defense,
we're reimbursing M.I.T.,'' he said, ''and they do not discriminate on the basis
of sexual preference, gender, or handicap.''

The Undergraduate Council had sought the delay in response to a request by the
Gay Students' Association. Though the faculty did not postpone its vote, the
homosexual students did win a concession when the faculty voted to adopt an
amending statement saying, ''By this action, the faculty does not wish to imply
support of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.''

Under the terms of the plan to reimburse M.I.T., the dean of Harvard's faculty
of arts and sciences has the right to review the expenditure each year,
according to Professor Bossert, to assure that the funds will ''pay just for
M.I.T.'s overhead, not the courses at all, which I would not support.''

But Prof. John Womack, chairman of the history department, argued that even
paying for overhead would go beyond the proper role of the university.

''As the faculty has decided and assumed since April 1969, R.O.T.C. is an
extracurricular activity,'' he said. ''The university does not provide anything
more than bare rooms for student clubs. I don't see why we should pay for armed
services if we don't pay for part of the political or religious extracurricular
groups' activities.''

Harvard Savings Cited


Supporters of the payment to M.I.T.  say Harvard still saves money. Professor
Bossert, noting that most students in military courses receive scholarships,
said, ''We're saving hundreds of thousands of dollars in scholarship aid we
would have to pay by having these students in the program.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HART SAYS DEFICITS ROB FROM FUTURE

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 35, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: DES MOINES, Feb. 18


Arguing that huge deficits are ''this Administration's economic Vietnam,''
Senator Gary Hart today proposed a five- year budget plan that would cut
military expenditures by a total of $139 billion over five years and reduce the
deficit to a projected $78.5 billion in 1989.

''The Reagan Administration deficit strikes at the heart of our notion of the
public good and the American idea, which says America is a place where every
generation passes on a better legacy to its children, not a place where one
generation steals the future from the next,'' the Colorado Democrat said.

The Presidential contender described his proposals in an unusual setting, a soup
kitchen in a deteriorating neighborhood here. The setting, Mr. Hart said, was
symbolic of the Administration's cuts in social welfare programs.

It also pointed up Mr. Hart's strategy in the final weekend before Monday's Iowa
caucuses. It will be the first test of strength of eight Democratic Presidential
hopefuls and, a contest within a contest: the effort of Senators Hart and Alan
Cranston of California, particularly, to emerge as the chief challengers of
Walter F. Mondale.

2 Different Approaches


While Mr. Cranston is making only one public appearance here in the final days
and is relying heavily on his campaign organization to bring out supporters to
the neighborhood caucuses, Mr. Hart is banking on grueling campaigning and media
appearances to make up for a less organized campaign.

The Hart budget proposals essentially amounted to putting a dollar figure on
earlier suggestions.

Mr. Hart proposed steps to reduce the Federal budget deficit. He called for cuts
in the military budget, such as eliminating the MX missile and the B-1 bomber,
as well as increased revenue in the form of deferring the use of an index to
keep inflation from pushing taxpayers into higher brackets, a surtax on wealthy
Americans and corporations and capping the Reagan Administration's third-year
income tax reduction.

This revenue would also compensate for a $20 billion annual increase in social
welfare programs, including job training and public works projects.

Mr. Hart contended his budget also made ''a modest'' beginning in trimming
Medicare and Medicaid costs by emphasizing preventive medicine.

The net effect of those spending and trimming proposals, according to Mr. Hart,
would be a Federal deficit starting at $175 billion next year and gradually
dropping to $78.5 billion in the 1989 calendar year. In contrast, Mr. Hart
contends, the Reagan Administration's projected deficits would range from $201
billion next year to $285 billion in 1989. Mr. Hart said that many of his
projections came from the Congressional Budget Office.

Mr. Hart's budget proposal was the latest effort by the Presidential candidates
to attempt to dilineate differences with their Democratic opponents. Mr.
Cranston, for example, released a detailed job program last week in New
Hampshire, where the second Democratic Presidential test will take place at a
Feb. 28 primary.



Plan for 25 Campaign Stops

Mr. Hart, hoping to make 25 campaign stops in this state by Monday, began making
the stops on Thursday but was slowed somewhat Friday by poor weather, which
prevented flying.

The 47-year-old Senator generally chose captive audiences, from colleges to
taverns, to deliver his message that he represents a ''new generation'' in
politics.

He repeatedly attacked, mostly by implication, Mr. Mondale and the Democratic
and labor establishments that support the former Vice President.

''There are those in this race,'' he told some 100 students at Drake University
here, ''who have given away so much of their own independence in order to appear
to be front-runner that I am concerned that they will not have the independence
of judgment and independence of decision to point this country in the direction
it needs to go in the 80's and 90's.''

Mr. Hart even implied that Democrats who had failed to protest the stationing of
United States marines in Lebanon were partly responsible for the deaths of 264
marines in that embattled country.

''If every leading Democrat in this race and in our party had joined in the fall
of 1982 and had called for the removal of those marines, there might be 300
young Americans alive today,'' he told 150 students at the University of
Northern Iowa in Cedar Falls.

But today at his budget news conference here, he denied he was blaming his
fellow Democrats for the marines' deaths.

''If the leaders of this party had united as early as the fall of 1982 in urging
the Administration to withdraw the marines, there would have been a much greater
chance we could have saved those lives,'' he said. But, he added that President
Reagan was responsible for the stationing the marines in Lebanon.

Asked in an interview if he might be antagonizing party and labor leaders to a
point where they might be cool to his candidacy, even if he were the nominee - a
critical factor in George McGovern's Presidential campaign in 1972, which Mr.
Hart managed - the Senator said there was a difference.

''They were against him on ideological grounds,'' Mr. Hart said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JACKSON TACKLES FOREIGN AND NUCLEAR ISSUES

BYLINE: By FAY S. JOYCE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 17


Campaigning in New Hampshire this week, the Rev. Jesse Jackson supplemented his
evangelistic oratory with new stands on foreign policy, nuclear energy and the
use of nuclear weapons.

In addresses across the Southern tier of this state, the candidate for the
Democratic Presidential nomination called on the United States to recognize
Fidel Castro's Government in Cuba, to renounce the first use of nuclear weapons
and to cut the military budget by 20 percent, or roughly $50 billion.

''We should never be the first to destroy God's world,'' he said.

At some stops Mr. Jackson was asked questions about Israel and the Palestinians,
who he believes should have an independent state. When one high school student
asked Mr. Jackson if he was anti-Semitic, he said no. In response to another
question, he did not say where such a state should be established.

Push for Strong Showing


Mr. Jackson is making a vigorous bid for votes in New Hampshire, which on Feb.
28 holds the nation's first Presidential primary. A poll by The Boston Globe in
late January showed Mr. Jackson within striking distance of second place here,
and such a strong finish could give a big lift to his long-shot candidacy. The
Jackson camp has also made targets of Georgia, Alabama, Florida, Rhode Island
and Vermont.

On a four-day swing here, Mr. Jackson appealed to environmentalists, peace
activists, women and students to marshal themselves behind him in the ''rainbow
coalition'' of causes he has been advocating.

In an address on foreign and military policy to peace activists at Keene, Mr.
Jackson said the United States should withdraw Pershing and cruise missiles from
Europe and cancel the MX missile. He also called for a voluntary six- month
suspension of nuclear testing that would be extended if the Soviet Union
reciprocated.

''We are so strong militarily that we can afford to take measures such as these
in the pursuit of peace,'' he said. ''This would reduce the threat of nuclear
war and would test whether the Soviets really want to talk about ending the arms
race. We must fight for peace and give peace a chance. Peace is worth the
risk.''

Arnoldo Ramos, a representative of the Democratic Revolutionary Front of El
Salvador, and the Rev. William Sloan Coffin Jr. of Riverside Church in New York,
who was one of the organizers of protests against the Vietnam War, joined Mr.
Jackson at the rally. Mr. Coffin endorsed Mr. Jackson, and Mr. Ramos implored
Americans to help bring peace to El Salvador.

Policies in Central America

In another address, at Franklin Pierce College, Mr. Jackson emphasized Central
America.

''Successful revolutions in Central America need not threaten U.S. national
security,'' he said.

He again called on the United States to end attempts to overthrow the Nicaraguan
Government. Mr. Jackson said the United States should also stop sending arms to
Guatemala, which he called ''a consistent and gross violator of human rights,''
and extend aid to Mexico to help it cope with Guatemalan refugees and to Costa
Rica to help restructure its economy.

In an uncharacteristically detailed and dry lecture on nuclear power at Exeter
Academy, the Baptist minister called for a nationwide gradual closing of nuclear
power plants, cancellation of the Seabrook nuclear facility and development of
energy based on the sun, wind, wood and water.

Some Walk Out


As he spoke, some members of the audience of 1,000 students and townspeople at
the academy left. That is a rare sight at a Jackson speech. But when Mr. Jackson
turned to his usual cadenced style and his broader themes of feeding the hungry
and bringing American troops out of Lebanon and Central America, those remaining
replied with warm applause.

''I know this is New Hampshire, but why don't you act like you got some soul up
here?'' he joked as he led his listeners in his familiar chant. The audience
laughed and replied by shouting after him, ''I am somebody.''

Afterward, Mr. Jackson said, ''It's good to give people the facts of the matter,
but it's important to make them feel good about themselves.''

Providing a Spark


David Eastman of the Audubon Society said Mr. Jackson had provided a needed
spark to white activists who, like some Southern blacks, had felt forgotten.

''Nobody's waked me up like Jesse Jackson,'' Mr. Eastman said.

''He makes you feel it's all right to care about the environment,'' he
continued. ''If someone like Jesse Jackson didn't come along to get you excited
about these things, you'd have Ronald Reagan for four more years.''

Not all who listen are so impressed, and not all who jam into his rallies say
they will vote for him.

Greg Scerbinski, a history teacher at Contoocook High School, backs former Vice
President Walter F. Mondale in the campaign, because, he said, Mr. Mondale would
have the best chance to defeat President Reagan.

''Mondale's very bland,'' he said. ''Jesse Jackson is a man of the people.
Unfortunately for Mondale, Reagan is too.''

Then he added what paid political analysts have also suggested: ''Mondale's
going to need Jackson after the Democratic convention.''

Nicaragua Trip Ruled Out


PROVIDENCE, R.I., Feb. 18 - Mr. Jackson has ruled out a trip to Nicaragua next
week, he said today.

He said he needed to spend the time on his Presidential campaign but hoped to go
later.

He made the announcement after meeting this morning with the Nicaraguan
Ambassador to the United States, Antonio Jarquin, who had invited Mr. Jackson to
attend celebrations by the leftist Sandinista Government on Tuesday.

Mr. Jackson's campaign manager, Arnold Pinckney, had argued that the trip would
distract from the campaign and might tax the candidate's health.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of the Rev. Jesse Jackson

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE HAS 'SCENT OF VICTORY' IN IOWA CAUCUSES

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 772 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, N.H., Feb. 18


Walter F. Mondale said today that he had ''a scent of victory'' in the Iowa
caucuses on Monday but voiced concern that the attacks on him by his rivals for
the Democratic Presidential nomination would leave ''cracks in the party.''

In an interview in his motel room in Lebanon, N.H., this morning, Mr. Mondale
said he was ''a little nervous but quite content'' that voters in Iowa, New
Hampshire, Maine and across the South would soon start voting in primaries and
caucuses.

''I am doing well,'' said the 56-year- old former Vice President. ''I have a
superb campaign staff. I'm gaining support. I believe I'm in a position to unify
this party if I am nominated.''

In a personal vein, Mr. Mondale said he would not ''fall apart'' if he did not
win the nomination and the Presidency.

'I Can Handle Reagan'


''I can handle Reagan - I believe I'm in the best position,'' said Mr. Mondale,
who sat shoeless wearing a ski sweater and casual trousers. ''I believe I could
make a very good President, perhaps a great President. But I'm not a desperate
person. Home does not hold horrors for me. Life doesn't end.

''A very important part of public leadership is perspective. Once you've done
your best, it's in the hands of the public. If they don't want you, that's the
way it is. I've several years of backlog in fishing and skiing trips.''

Mr. Mondale said he was especially ''disturbed'' about accusations against him
by Senator John Glenn of Ohio. ''I just think Glenn is desperate,'' Mr. Mondale
said.

''These charges can leave a residue that would make it more difficult to beat
Reagan,'' he said. ''If this keeps up it could leave cracks.''

Mr. Glenn accused Mr. Mondale on Thursday of making ''untrue'' statements in
denying lobbying for a measure that would have let the cost of building an
Alaskan natural gas pipeline be billed to consumers before the line opened. Mr.
Mondale said the accusations were ''false'' and ''inaccurate'' and ''beyond the
permissible and acceptable.''

Trust Essential, He Says


''I've been around the party when we've been unable to win because the party's
been divided so deeply that you can't put it together,'' Mr. Mondale said in the
interview. ''I'm not asking to be protected from boisterous debate on issues.
But when you go beyond the fringe, other things can happen.

''My integrity is very important to me. I don't mean that in a pious way. Public
trust is the essential precondition of leadership. If you're not trusted, you
can't lead.''

Usually restrained in predictions about his candidacy, Mr. Mondale said, ''I
have a scent of victory in Iowa. We've worked hard. My message resonates there.
I feel good about it, but I'm not predicting anything.''

Mr. Mondale said that, if nominated, he would hope to lead the first relatively
unified Democratic Party in nearly two decades. In the 1960's and 1970's the
Democrats were ideologically divided over the Vietnam War and other issues. In
1980, when President Carter and Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts
fought each other, ''it was terrible,'' Mr. Mondale said. ''We couldn't get
together at all.''

Unifying Fractured Party


''The party's been in disarray, just falling apart,'' he said. ''A very
important part of my theory and strategy is to unify it.''

Mr. Mondale said he had read several books about Mr. Reagan. ''He's a master at
image making,'' said Mr. Mondale. ''Part of it is his movie training. But I
think he's a disaster on policy. He's basically ideological. He's not thinking
through the issues. He has these preconceived notions on Nicaragua and the
economy and arms control and vulnerable Americans and nothing seems to change
his mind.''

Mr. Mondale said of the President: ''He announces good news himself and
disappears when it's bad. When things are going to hell in Lebanon he hides out
in his Santa Barbara ranch. But I believe those chickens are coming home to
roost.''

Mr. Mondale said he was ''very angry about what Reagan is doing to this
country.''

''It is a more dangerous world since he took over,'' Mr. Mondale went on. ''We
have these outrageous deficits. There is this terrible unfairness in the
treatment of ordinary Americans. I pick up the newspaper and find him trashing
the Civil Rights Commission and I'm furious and I want to change it. And that's
worthy of a lifetime effort.''

Of the campaign, Mr. Mondale said: ''A lot of this is tough and hard and
enervating, but I enjoy it, I genuinely do - I gain strength from it. And I'm
glad, very glad, that the decision by the voters will finally take place.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter F. Mondale signing autographs

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TO MAKE SERIOUS THEATER, 'SERIOUS' ISSUES AREN'T ENOUGH

BYLINE: By Frank Rich;
By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2894 words


O f all the ills that plague the American theater right now, none is more
disturbing than the widespread perception that American plays simply do not
matter anymore.  There was a time when writers like O'Neill and Williams and
Miller were at the center of this country's intellectual life - when a major
play on Broadway was as fit a subject for universal comment and debate, pro or
con, as the latest major novel or museum show or ballet. These days, theater is
a special interest, occupying a ghetto on the cultural landscape. While the
fluffiest Broadway entertainments are consumed by the masses (or at least the
wealthiest masses), serious American theater is followed by a far smaller
coterie - and is often either ignored or viewed with contempt by the general
public and the arts-minded elite alike.

A theater critic discovers this when he encounters old friends, who are sure to
boast that they haven't been to a play (the current hit musical or English
import excepted) since ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?'' But one doesn't need
such statistically skewed polling methods to discern what's going on. In most
general-interest or literary periodicals, theater is written about, if it's
written about at all, by theater critics only, in the parochial theater columns.
One could scour the pages of some learned journals for months to find a
reference to a living American playwright (the auteurs of movies fare far
better); in collections of literary essays - such as John Updike's recent
''Hugging the Shore'' - the names of American playwrights never surface in
discussions of American novelists who often share the same concerns as those
playwrights. If Mr. Updike doesn't see or read American plays these days, it
would be unfair to fault him for this oversight. Public evidence suggests that
many American writers of his stature - playwrights excepted - are no different.
Even essayists who once examined new American plays (or wrote them) - writers
like Susan Sontag, Elizabeth Hardwick, Gore Vidal or Mary McCarthy - have long
since stopped caring. Perhaps the most extreme expression of this animus comes
from the director and author Jonathan Miller, himself once a Broadway performer
(in ''Beyond the Fringe''), in a recently published interview. Asked ''What
importance does Broadway have to theater?,'' he replies: ''I don't think
Broadway matters at all. It's just a sewer. People don't go to Broadway to have
serious theatrical experiences.''

If the American theater no longer plays a central part in our cultural ferment,
the reasons can only be damning. It must be assumed that we no longer have
playwrights who write about issues that matter - or who connect with the rest of
our literature, past and present - or who swim with the modernist and
post-modernist currents of international art. But, as the theater's dwindling
but hearty enthusiasts know well, this isn't the case at all.

Nonetheless, the perception persists, and, to a great extent, it has been
created by the plays that have been over-praised, over-attended and over-awarded
- especially in the commercial theater and especially (though not exclusively)
on Broadway. Much of what is most loudly acclaimed as serious theater in New
York - and is then disseminated nationwide through regional and touring
productions - isn't really serious at all.



In recent years, for instance, some of the most popular plays by American
authors on Broadway have been works like ''The Shadow Box,'' ''Children of a
Lesser God'' and ''The Elephant Man.'' Entertaining, well- acted, theatrical and
(in the case of ''Elephant Man'') well-written as these plays can be, they are,
in the end, plays that tell theatergoers little that they didn't know upon
arriving at the theater. ''The Shadow Box'' - a Tony Award winner for best play,
no less - was a drama that took an uncompromising stand in favor of the humanity
of the terminally ill. ''Children of a Lesser God'' and ''The Elephant Man'' -
also Tony Award winners - did the same for the deaf and the physiologically
deformed. (The English equivalent of this play, also a Broadway hit, was ''Whose
Life Is It, Anyway?'' - which pleaded for the dignity of the paralyzed.) Who
could disagree with the point of view of any of these dramas? Far from raising
any kind of debate - or touching an audience at any level deeper than the
sentimental - these plays mainly succeeded in congratulating audiences on their
own self-righteous piety.

Another popular kind of play that has passed for serious over the past decade is
the one that celebrates antisocial behavior as a form of primal passion. The
genesis of this kind of escapist play can be found in fashionable 60's pop
culture (Ken Kesey, R. D. Laing), and its continued appeal is as retrograde as
it is baffling. The Broadway prototype is an English hit - ''Equus,'' in which a
boy who blinds horses is held up as a paragon of spirituality in a world full of
unfeeling rationalists. ''Agnes of God,'' which ran a season on Broadway and has
since spawned two national road companies, made the same case for a nun who gave
birth to and then murdered a baby, and ''Extremities,'' last year's commercial
Off Broadway hit, came perilously close to making a similar claim for a rapist.
The reductio ad absurdum of these dramas - and unaccountably a fast Broadway
failure - was last season's ''Total Abandon,'' which asked us to cry for a
father who fatally, if soulfully, bashed his young son against a wall.

It's not hard to see why most of these plays are produced or why they are
popular. The commercial theater is in business to produce what sells, and what
sells is what's most pleasing (and familiar) to the largest common denominator.
That common denominator is now defined by television drama - and television
drama can even be produced at the non-commercial, supposedly serious regional
theaters that are supposed to be alternatives to Broadway. ''Extremities'' and
''Agnes of God'' originated at Louisville's Actors' Theater; ''Children of a
Lesser God'' and ''The Shadow Box'' at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles.

By television drama, I refer specifically to those socially conscious
made-for-TV movies that now frequently dominate the Nielsen ratings. Plays like
''The Shadow Box'' and ''Agnes of God'' are serious in the same way that TV
movies like ''Something About Amelia'' and ''The Day After'' are serious. They
take big, headline issues (incest, nuclear war) and reduce them to simple,
unassailable, uncontroversial messages. ''The Day After'' says that nuclear war
is bad; ''The Shadow Box'' says that cancer is bad. Often this message is
defined by a social worker, psychiatrist or lawyer - and, indeed, these
professions are prominently featured in most of these works, much as
homily-spouting clergymen dominated middlebrow drama of other eras.



Aside from their open-and-shut intellectual simplicity, the great fallacy that
underlies these dramas is the notion that the mere mention of a social issue
gives a work of art a claim to importance. And this fallacy is not only shared
by the producers who mount these plays, but sometimes by playwrights who know
better. Lanford Wilson, one of the best American dramatists around - and one who
might well be talked about by literary critics in the same breath as Anne Tyler
or Ann Beattie - made nuclear poisoning an issue in two recent plays (''A Tale
Told,'' ''Angels Fall''). Yet in both instances that concern, however pressing
and passionately held, surfaced as a gratuitous plot device that was forcefed
into the real tales Mr. Wilson wanted to tell. (By contrast, Mr. Wilson's
masterwork about the Vietnam era, ''Fifth of July,'' made the war an organic
aspect of the characters' shared lives.) Even an accomplished entertainer like
Neil Simon has felt compelled to inject cancer, the World War II holocaust and
the Depression into such recent plays as ''Chapter Two'' and ''Brighton Beach
Memoirs.'' Neither of those works seems as spontaneous or heartfelt as ''The Odd
Couple,'' a flat-out comedy about poker and divorce.



The truly serious plays in the American theater now - many of which have minor
runs on Broadway, if they make it to Broadway at all - may well deal with social
issues, but the issues bubble to the surface instead of being plastered on top
like posters. The best plays, as always, arise not from the agenda of journalism
or politics, but from the private agenda of the writer's sensibility. If that
writer's feelings are connected to the ideas and social currents of the world
around him, his plays may ultimately tell us more about a society - and the
anxiety-making public issues that riddle that society - than those plays that
wear cancer or nuclear radiation on their sleeves. And, as often as not, these
serious plays are funny. Rising out of the old, unpretentious Jewish family
jokes in Wendy Wasserstein's ''Isn't It Romantic'' is an agonized dissection of
the difficult choices made by two generations of American women (both Jewish and
WASP); in Jules Feiffer's ''Grown Ups,'' the same jokes explode into a scathing
assault on the American success ethic.

Tom Stoppard makes the case for such writers at the beginning of Act II of ''The
Real Thing,'' when his playwright-hero, Henry, argues against polemical plays.
Instead of writing plays that specifically address such matters as ''politics''
and ''justice,'' Henry argues that writers should write personal plays that
''perhaps alter people's perceptions so that they behave a little differently at
that axis of behavior where we locate politics or justice.'' (It's unfortunate
that Mr. Stoppard then undercuts his own argument by launching a stacked
polemical attack against a polemical playwright who figures as a minor character
in ''The Real Thing.'') Mr. Stoppard's point is also made by Sam Shepard in his
few published essays. Noting that he was affected strongly by the social
currents of the Vietnam years, Mr. Shepard then adds that none of the specific
detritus of that era now remains a part of his creative life except ''the idea
of consciousness.'' And it's that consciousness that is the wellspring of his
work: ''Ideas emerge from plays,'' he explains, ''not the other way around.''

It has never been any different, even in the plays of Brecht or Shaw. To believe
otherwise is to think that Ibsen wrote ''Ghosts'' because he wanted to address
the question of syphilis, or that Williams wrote ''The Glass Menagerie'' because
he wanted to speak about poverty during the 1930's, or that Beckett's
''Endgame'' was motivated by rising anxiety about the H-bomb in Europe during
the late 1950's. The best writers write what they are burning to write, not what
they're told to write or what they think they should write. It's television
writers, whether writing for the networks or the theater, who begin with the
concrete ''idea'' (or, in Hollywood lingo, ''concept'') - whether that idea be
''nuclear holocaust'' or ''Love Boat'' - and then work from the outside in.



Serious American playwrights who let their ideas emerge from their plays are
rarely celebrated at the Tony Awards or in the long- run record books. Marsha
Norman's '' 'Night, Mother,'' which closes next weekend after a decent but
unspectacular Broadway life, might have been a major hit if the author had
turned it into a TV-style problem play. If only the heroine, Jessie, were a
paraplegic or had been raped or wanted to be a martyr to a political cause,
audiences would

 have immediately understood her intention to commit suicide.

In this sense, Jessie's mother represents the television audience's sensibility:
she thinks she can talk Jessie out of suicide by solving all of the daughter's
personal ''problems'' and by getting rid of the television and newspapers that
trumpet the outside world's crises. But Miss Norman - through Jessie - gives
neither the audience nor the mother the easy way out. The daughter tells Mama:
''It doesn't much matter what else happens in the world or in this house, even''
- and persists in her intention to kill herself. At that point, theatergoers are
either lost - or are forced to look at larger questions about both existence and
American life that are not directly articulated by the playwright. Those who do
stick with Jessie and Miss Norman find themselves at the center of a conundrum
no different from that found in the similarly compact stories of Bobbie Ann
Mason or Raymond Carver.

Like Miss Norman, David Mamet, Charles Fuller (''A Soldier's Play) and
Christopher Durang (among others) march to their own beat rather than address
''problems'' per se. Mr. Durang's ''Sister Mary Ignatius'' is written as a
personal vendetta against an authoritarian nun teaching at a Catholic school and
mentions such ''issues'' as cancer, rape and homosexuality along its way. But
these issues are just pebbles carried by the wave of the author's consciousness
- which is most of all grappling with a fundamental question that underlies all
those issues, the existence (or non-existence) of God. That question is not
resolved at the final curtain.

Needless to say, Mr. Durang, Mr. Feiffer and Mr. Mamet have never had a hit on
Broadway (though Mr. Mamet's ''American Buffalo'' made it in revival, when it
was warped into a star vehicle for Al Pacino.) If these writers weren't
American, it would help: Non- American writers of their caliber, such as Mr.
Stoppard, David Hare or Athol Fugard, have fared somewhat better in the
commercial theater, even if for the wrong reasons. What's more outrageous,
however, is that Sam Shepard has never even been produced on Broadway at all.

One can see why: he's frightening. There are absolutely no easily legible,
television-drama signposts for an audience at a play like ''True West.'' Two
brothers, one an aspiring Hollywood screenwriter and the other a petty criminal,
fight each other to a standoff for two raucous acts. Though no explicit social
issue is grafted onto their battle - as the Depression is grafted onto the
relationship of the two brothers in ''Brighton Beach Memoirs'' - the play
concerns almost everything that plagues Americans: money, power, a search for
identity in a world made of plastic, a search for self in the midst of spiritual
chaos.

Mr. Shepard, as much as any contemporary American playwright, gives our theater
its claim to seriousness and its connection to other art. ''True West'' - in
which events don't necessarily symbolize anything and characters don't
necessarily have logical motives or represent clearcut points-of-view - is as
modernist a work as anyone could wish. Mr. Shepard's writing is fragmented and
at times beyond exegesis: who can precisely explain why the brothers' mother
arrives late in the play, insistent in her conviction that Picasso (though dead)
is visiting Los Angeles? The author is so resistant to the notion of attaching
easily explicable editorial labels on his people that he pointedly notes in his
stage directions that ''the costumes should be exactly representative of who the
characters are and not added onto for the sake of making a point to the
audience.'' (This language is echoed by Miss Norman, whose published text of ''
'night, Mother'' instructs, ''Under no circumstances should the set and its
dressing make a judgment about the intelligence or taste of Jessie and Mama.'')



''True West'' is also a decidedly American work - the brothers could almost be
Tom and Huck, torn between freedom (the true West) and civilization as they
straddle an eroding frontier. Even Mr. Shepard's language and structure fulfill
William Dean Howells's admiring appraisal of Twain. ''He was not enslaved to the
consecutiveness in writing which the rest of us try to keep chained to,'' wrote
Howells of his friend. ''That is, he wrote as he thought, and as all men think,
without sequence, without an eye to what went before or should come after.''

It's quite possible that Mr. Shepard will never be produced on Broadway - and
one had begun to fear that he might never come to the attention of audiences who
had given up on Broadway and, with it, given up on the American theater. But the
cause isn't lost yet. Mr. Shepard, again like Twain, has another career in
addition to writing - as a performer. And, thanks to his emergence as a movie
star, a wider audience is being lured to his plays. ''The Right Stuff,'' by
indirection, may be the best thing to happen to the American theater in a while:
it has no doubt lengthened the runs of ''True West'' and ''Fool for Love'' Off
Broadway, just as it has made Mr. Shepard's published work fly off the shelves
of bookstores.

The irony of this phenomenon, given Mr. Shepard's own withering attitude toward
American stardom in his plays, is wicked. So be it. If it's Mr. Shepard's
celebrity as much as his talent that starts to introduce a larger audience to
the serious American theater - and leads that audience to discover Mr. Shepard's
many gifted peers - let's not complain; such is often the bizarre way of our
culture. Maybe there's already some cause for hope. Even as television dramas
crowd serious plays out of the front lines of our theater, it's worth noting
that ''True West,'' a play too serious for Broadway, reached its widest audience
yet this month - on television.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of scenes from Broadway plays

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. 'MAD MAN'S WAR' FOUGHT ON RUSSIAN SOIL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 358 words


To the Editor:


In his State of the Union Message on Jan. 25, President Reagan, referring to the
United States and Russia, said that ''our sons and daughters have never fought
each other in war.''

The President appears to have forgotten, or perhaps has never heard of, the
Archangel and Vladivostok expeditions of 1918-19, even though Nikita Khrushchev,
during his U.S. visit in 1959, reminded Americans of these invasions of Russian
soil by United States troops.

In 1919, more than 5,000 Americans were sent to Archangel to fight in an
undeclared war against Russia. Ten years later, Senator Vandenberg of Michigan
persuaded the Senate to pass a bill authorizing $200,000 (several million
dollars in today's money) to bring home the bodies of the dead (most were from
the 339th Infantry Regiment, made up largely of young men from Michigan and
Wisconsin).

After two months' digging, 86 bodies were exhumed (it was reported that some
were British, dug up by mistake) and brought back for burial in Detroit. By
1934, 58 more skeletons had been shipped back to the U.S. Numerous casualties
were suffered through frostbite, malnutrition and the great influenza epidemic
that the troopships carried from Britain to Archangel.  As in the later
undeclared war in Vietnam, the survivors of the Archangel expedition received no
hero's welcome. When they returned home, no campaign awards or medals were
bestowed on them. Truly the men of the 339th Regiment were ''forgotten men.''
One of those who fought in that war was John Cudahy, later President Roosevelt's
Minister to Ireland and Ambassador to Poland and Belgium. In his book
''Archangel: America's War Against Russia'' (1924), Cudahy gave a vivid account
of what he called ''this mad man's war.'' Perhaps the immediate lesson we should
learn from that disaster is not to get involved, to quote Cudahy again, in
another ''shameful illegitimate little war'' - this time in Central America -
not even in the guise of a crusade against ''an empire of evil.''

GIOVANNI COSTIGAN Professor Emeritus of History University of Washington
Seattle, Feb. 7, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FLIGHT SCHOOL FOR FOREIGNERS IS GETTING OFF THE GROUND

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO


In a venture that breaks new ground for free enterprise, entrepreneurs here are
offering to teach foreign jet fighter pilots how to shoot down an enemy plane at
40,000 feet. Tuition for the class in advanced dogfighting is $50,000. For
another $50,000 there's a course in advanced air-to-ground bombardment.

The training is offered by Air Superiority Associates, a one-year-old company
established by a group of former American military pilots. Company spokesmen
said the signing of the first contract with a foreign country is imminent. For a
fee, Air Superiority instructors will teach pilots from that country - and from
other nations considered ''friendly'' in the eyes of the Departments of State
and Defense - the skills they learned while serving in the United States Navy or
in the Air Force.

More than 20 pilots have signed on as instructors. The majority flew combat
missions in Vietnam. None are on active duty, but most spend weekends flying the
nation's newest jet fighters in military reserve units.

For decades, Air Force and Navy personnel have helped train military pilots from
allies that purchase American-built planes, especially third world nations and
smaller members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The governments of
France and Great Britain, which also export military aircraft, have done much
the same. Private companies rarely entered the picture.

Some American pilots on active duty object to their entering now, arguing that
people with access to this country's latest combat tactics and advanced aircraft
have no business passing on their know-how and trade secrets to foreigners, no
matter how friendly, especially for profit. But the State and Defense
Departments have consented to the operation - a reflection, perhaps, of the
Reagan Administration philosophy that private enterprise should go where once
only government trod.

The founders of Air Superiority Associates certainly believe they are helping
their country by performing a function otherwise delegated to pilots on active
duty. Dan A. Swenson, who retired from the Navy a lieutenant commander in 1979
and became company president, explained that the Navy and Air Force must often
strip their operational units of the best young pilots for overseas training
assignments.

''We're not mercenaries,'' said Richard Redditt, veteran of 150 missions in a
Navy F-8U Crusader over Vietnam and a company vice president. ''It's not like
we're setting up a taco stand that says 'Tactics Spoken Here.' We see ourselves
as an asset that needs to be used, and we want to make some money by selling
this expertise in a fashion that is controlled by the State Department.''

It is a variation on an ex-fighter pilot's dream: a way to continue flying jets
after leaving the service, and be well paid for it. Until recently, the airline
industry answered that need. And if cruising in a Boeing 727 wasn't as much fun
as flying a fighter plane at almost twice the speed of sound, the prospect of a
$100,000-a-year salary eased the transition. In the wake of industry
deregulation, however, salaries are sinking at some airlines, jobs are less
secure at others and new openings anywhere are few and far between. The market
for corporate pilots is not particularly strong either.

No wonder many of Air Superiority's would-be instructors currently work in the
airline industry. Most are in their middle or late 30's. Several left the
military, reluctantly, when they had been passed over for promotion as demand
for fighter pilots subsided following the Vietnam War. The military may consider
pilots such as these - all of them approaching 40 - to be senior citizens, Mr.
Swenson said, but not his company, where graybeards are thought to be at the
peak of their skills and fully capable of showing younger fighter pilots a thing
or two.  To date, the State Department has issued export licenses for marketing
the courses to three unnamed countries. The pilot-entrepreneurs said contracts
have been discussed with Taiwan, Malaysia, Singapore, Norway, Belgium and
Switzerland, and with several unspecified countries in Latin American and in the
Middle East.  The licenses apparently took months to approve and include
restrictions: Nothing can be taught, for example, about nuclear weapons or
certain air-to-air and air-to-ground missiles. Thus, the training program is
geared to preparing foreign instructor-pilots and to upgrading the skills of
foreign pilots flying American-made planes. The charge for a four-week course
for six students is $300,000; the customer furnishes the aircraft for the
lessons.  ''We're teaching a basic approach to tactics,'' Mr. Redditt explained.
''Suppose, for example, you are in a dogfight and you see a missile coming
toward you. You don't know if it's a radar- or a heat-seeking missile.  Each
requires a different kind of response. But with a missile streaking toward you
at Mach 2.4 you can't sit there and wait to find out. You need a generic defense
to deal with either one of them and get out of the way.  That's what we'll
teach.''

Mr. Swenson describes the courses as ''the fundamentals.'' Most aerial combat,
he said, involves two men and two planes shooting machine guns at each other at
close proximity. ''It's been that way since World War I,'' he said, adding that
his company will teach what it takes to survive such encounters.

''We've got more guys who want to sign up with us than we can shake a stick
at,'' Mr. Swenson said. ''I guess it's the adventure. This is, after all, a
little more fun than flying around in an airliner.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Swenson and former military pilots

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARGENTINA'S GOAL NOW IS TO PUNISH THE UNDERLINGS

BYLINE: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES


A soul-searching legal issue that troubled the Allies after World War II, the
French after the Algerian War, and the Americans after the My Lai massacre in
Vietnam is now deeply dividing Argentines. To what extent are military men
responsible for atrocities committed while following orders?

The issue here applies to the thousands of assassinations and cases of torture
carried out by the Argentine military in a 1970's antisubversion campaign.

President Raul Alfonsin, whose elected Government succeeded the military in
power two months ago, fulfilled a bold campaign pledge last week when he signed
a bill that holds responsible the military leaders who ordered the abuses and
those who went beyond orders in meting out cruelty. But as he also pledged, the
bill protects most servicemen who followed orders, a provision protested by
human rights groups and opposition political parties.

''Armed men from the intelligence services knocked on the door of a pregnant
woman in my neighborhood, and when she answered they shot and killed her in cold
blood,'' Hebe de Bonafini, president of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, a
group of relatives of the disappeared that is particularly militant, said. ''The
man who pulled the trigger is guilty, too, isn't he?''

Mr. Alfonsin has begun courts-martial against nine former junta members and a
police chief, and private suits have been filed against dozens of other officers
for atrocities in specific cases. But many of the defendants, while denying any
crimes, already are pleading that they acted as soldiers under orders. Retired
Gen. Ramon Camps, widely accused of being a particularly bloody police chief in
Buenos Aires, used this argument recently before a federal judge.

A law long on the books held that the commander who ordered a crime is the only
one responsible. A subordinate could be held equally culpable only if he
committed excesses. Judges have interpreted the law in widely varying ways. The
bill just signed as an amendment to the old law is designed, according to its
authors, to insure they interpret it punitively. Before it was amended, the law
took into account the necessity for military discipline, which made it difficult
for a subordinate to question an order. The changes would now hold the
subordinate liable if he clearly knew the order was illegitimate, as in the case
of repeated torture or execution. Members of the juntas who set policy would
have no excuse at all.

The law as modified follows international precedent, Mr. Nino said. The first
Nuremberg trial of Nazi German leaders resulted in only 19 convictions, of which
12 were death sentences. Later trials of Nazi and Japanese leaders resulted in
more convictions, but almost all the rulings followed the criterion of whether a
subordinate knowingly committed a crime, Telford Taylor, an American chief
counsel at Nuremberg, has written. As in trials in West Germany today of former
Nazis, sentences also have been generally lighter for subordinates afraid to
disobey an order.

American courts judging atrocities in Vietnam have been among the most lenient.
In the case of the more than 100 Vietnamese massacred in 1968 in My Lai, 25
American officers and enlisted men were charged with related offenses, but only
one, Lt. William J. Calley Jr., was convicted. He was paroled after serving just
three years.

Argentine officials privately acknowledge that their prosecution plan is partly
political. Widespread trials could set off a confrontation with the powerful
military, which until now has accepted punishing former leaders to cleanse the
military's image. Moreover, the officials said, a deep purge could badly weaken
the armed forces. Demonstrating an evenhanded approach, the Government asked
Brazil last week to arrest and extradite the leader of the guerrilla Montonero
movement in the 1970's, Mario Eduardo Firmenich

Some defenders of the military may also have struck a chord of guilt among
ordinary Argentines about national complicity. In the 1970's the public and
political leaders overwhelmingly demanded that the military take forceful means
to fight an unconventional enemy that had murdered and kidnapped hundreds of
Argentines. The country, in near chaos, lacked special laws or policemen while
judges were cowed by the terrorists.

Today, Argentines often say that because of censorship they were unaware of the
extent of the atrocities. The explanation seems partly ingenuous. The deaths,
disappearances and torture were pervasive. Repeated revelations and
condemnations from abroad were often reported here. Some Argentines admit that
because of fear they chose not to know what was happening. There was little
debate then, nor is there much now, about how to fight subversion legally.

In a rare mea culpa, retired Rear Adm. Horacio Zaratiegui said in a published
interview that, given the tenor of those times, it is senior officers like
himself who should be punished for letting the military's counter-terror get out
of hand. ''We should have foreseen the consequences should conduct become
deformed,'' he said. ''However, none of us thought of it then. We were convinced
there was no other way.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of children gathered near grave

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN IOWA, THEY REALLY DO STAND UP TO BE COUNTED

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words


COON RAPIDS, IOWA

 T HE first votes in the 1984 Democratic Presidential race will be cast tomorrow
night in Iowa, a state that has produced something of a hybrid political system
that combines the preference voting of a primary with the town-meeting process
known as a caucus.

John Crystal, a local banker and farmer, has considered the eight Democratic
Presidential candidates competing in Iowa's precinct caucuses and finds them to
be, in his words, ''a weak litter.'' Nevertheless, Mr. Crystal, who keeps a
life-size picture of Lenin in his bank to remind local farmers of their
dependency on Soviet grain purchases, will be at the town library on Monday
night to support the candidacy of Senator Alan Cranston of California as a way
of expressing his concern about the nuclear arms race. In an exercise that will
be repeated in some 2,500 precincts across Iowa, he will join perhaps as many as
25 of their friends and neighbors from the Union Township precinct to take up an
agenda that, on its face, hardly seems to justify the television networks'
flying in their news anchors to report the results from studios constructed in
Des Moines hotels.

The caucus-goers will spend from two to three hours discussing resolutions on
issues they would like to see in the party's national platform. They will elect
representatives to the county's Democratic central committee and select
delegates to the party's county conventions. By the close of tomorrow evening,
however, the winnowing-out process will have begun in the Democratic
Presidential race; the results will be weighed against the expectations that had
been set by the press and by campaign officials for each candidate. Momentum, or
''Big Mo,'' as Vice President George Bush called it when he was running for
President in 1980, is the real prize in these caucuses, which are only the first
step in the selection of the state's 58 delegates to the Democratic national
convention.

How does such routine political business at the precinct level become the first
major political test of Presidential candidates?

This is what happens: At each caucus, the selection of delegates is combined
with a Presidential preference vote. People supporting a candidate are asked to
stand in an assigned corner of the room. If any candidate fails to get 15
percent of the total vote, his supporters must either regroup behind another
candidate or go uncommitted. When heads are counted, the Iowa caucuses, where
gall bladders and farm problems are discussed along with politics, have become
the functional equivalent of a Presidential primary. An estimated 100,000
Democrats turned out in 1980, almost as many as voted in the New Hampshire
primary. Democratic leaders, citing a lack of interest in the 1984 Presidential
contest, are predicting that this year's turnout will be smaller.

The state's Republican leaders decided not to allow their caucus-goers to
express a Presidential preference this year, and for a while there was concern
that the turnout could be embarrassingly low. To spark some interest, they
successfully appealed to President Reagan, whose 1980 campaign was jolted by a
loss in Iowa's caucuses, to visit the state on caucus day.  Although little
national attention is paid to caucuses in states other than Iowa, which holds
the nation's first, there has been a revival of the process in recent years as
some states have switched from primaries to caucuses. In 1976, for example, 24
percent of the delegates to the Democratic national convention were elected in
caucuses. This year, 34 percent of the 3,933 delegates going to San Francisco
will have won their seats in the caucus process.  Grassroots in TableauAlthough
a caucus is more complicated than a primary, in many ways it is more appealing.
It is grassroots democracy in tableau, with friends and neighbors rising in
church basements, school cafeterias, libraries and farmhouses to discuss their
differences and preferences.  Unlike the primary voter, who has to stop at a
polling place only long enough to cast a secret ballot, caucus- goers must be
willing to devote most of an evening to public debate and voting in the open.
That requires them to be well enough informed on the issues and the candidates
to stand their ground. Sometimes it requires quire courage, as when a union
member stands in the presence of his shop steward for a candidate other than the
one the union endorsed.

Iowa's caucus system has not always been as open as it is today. For decades the
caucuses were dominated by party leaders who controlled the selection of
delegates. In 1968 large numbers of young voters concerned about the war in
Vietnam packed the caucuses to support Senator Eugene McCarthy's candidacy for
the Democratic nomination. They won at the precinct level, but were
outmaneuvered at the county conventions by party regulars.

In 1972, in an effort to heal the wounds, party leaders adopted changes to open
up the process, a step that marked Iowa's place on the quadrennial political
calendar as a major new battleground. Four years later, Jimmy Carter, a
relatively unknown former governor from Georgia, was launched as a serious
Presidential candidate by his showing in the Iowa causues.

Still, some Iowans, including John Crystal, the Coon Rapids banker, would like
to see the state give up its early caucus status. ''I don't like having the
first caucus,'' he said. ''It is making us decide too early in the year which
candidate we're for. A lot can change between February and June.'' Mr. Crystal
could get his wish. Iowa Democrats are holding this year's caucus a week earlier
than national party rules permit, and there is growing talk in national
committee circles of stripping the state of its first-caucus status in 1988 as
punishment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Senator Gary Hart at Drake University in Des Moines

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The U.N. Versus The U.S.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 94, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 192 words


In the article ''The U.N. Versus the U.S.'' (Jan. 22), Richard Bernstein seemed
indignant that the United States could no longer get whatever it wanted in the
United Nations, as it used to when there were only a third as many members and
the United States could easily control the majority by means of its foreign aid.

I would argue that the main reason the United States has so little respect and
influence among the independent nations which are now the majority is because it
has arrogantly intervened, militarily or through the C.I.A., in the affairs of
weaker nations in Latin America, in the Caribbean, in Iran (in 1953), in
Vietnam, always to improve reactionary governments lacking popular support; and
it has backed racist regimes in Rhodesia and South Africa. (The Soviet Union has
similarly lost leadership, of course, by imposing unwelcome governments.)

I believe that the primary purpose of our participation in the United Nations
should not be to play power politics or to search obsessively for opportunities
to condemn the U.S.S.R. but to advance peace and justice through genuine
negotiations.
BENJAMIN SPOCK, M.D., Rogers, Ark.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1510 words


WOMAN AND THE DEMON: The Life of a Victorian Myth, by Nina Auerbach. (Harvard
University Press, $6.95.)

In a ''daring and important,'' beautifully written book of cultural criticism,
Nina Auerbach uses poems, paintings, popular and serious fiction, biographies,
essays and psychological studies to reconstruct a dominant but inexplicit
Victorian myth - the myth of woman as demonic, polymorphous, vital, dangerous
and transcendent. Our critic, George Levine, found her argument ''outrageous,
provocative and convincing.''

A DRY WHITE SEASON, by Andre Brink. (Penguin, $6.95.) The author of ''A Chain of
Voices'' centered his 1979 novel on Ben Du Toit, a respected white family man
who teaches school in suburban Johannesburg and becomes an isolated pariah after
he tries to help find a black school janitor's missing son. ''Through Ben's
harrowing experience as an ordinary, essentially moral Afrikaaner . . . the
brutal inflexibility of the system is exposed and indelibly imprinted on the
reader,'' Mel Watkins said in his review. Mr. Brink's 1978 novel,

RUMORS OF RAIN, is available too (Penguin, $6.95).

PHILOSOPHY IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY, by A. J. Ayer. (Vintage, $7.95.) A. J.
Ayer, Wykeham Professor of Logic at Oxford from 1959 to 1978, conceived this
book as a sequel to Bertrand Russell's ''History of Philosophy.'' In prose ''at
once plain and elegant,'' he focuses on several continuing philosophical
debates, presenting careful, extended accounts of the two schools whose
achievements he values most - American pragmatism and the analytic movement -
and of ''philosophies very much at odds with his own,'' as Alasdair MacIntyre
noted in his review.

BEAST IN VIEW, by Margaret Millar. (International Polygonics/Academy Chicago,
$5.) Winner of a 1956 Edgar, ''Beast in View'' is both ''a pure
terror-suspense-mystery story, complete with murder, detective and a surprise
twist,'' our reviewer, Anthony Boucher, said, and ''a study in abnormal
psychology, so admirably written with such complete realization of every
character that the most bitter antagonist of mystery fiction may be forced to
acknowledge it as a work of art.'' The protagonist is a rich, reclusive young
woman.

INSIDE: Seeing Beneath the Surface, by Jan Adkins. (Walker, $4.95.) A pencil, an
apple pie, a tree, an airplane, a city street and a sandwich are among things
Jan Adkins examines the insides of in his 1975 work for readers 7 to 11. In her
review Louise Armstrong said that ''this is one very fine book. It teaches, not
preaches, seeing with the inner eye and - by extension - imagination and
empathy.'' Paperback editions of Mr. Adkins's

TOOLCHEST, a primer of woodcraft, and

SYM

BOLS: A Silent Language are also available from Walker, at $4.95 each.

WAR GAMES, by James Park Sloan. (Avon, $3.50.) James Park Sloan's first novel is
narrated by a 20-year- old Harvard dropout who wants the Army to send him to
Vietnam so he can write a great war novel, although he's not sure whether it
should be about how war makes men of timid souls or about how it humanizes tough
guys. What combat duty in Vietnam does to him, it turns out, is considerably
more bizarre. Mr. Sloan's antiwar story was first published in 1971.

ON THE BLACK HILL, by Bruce Chatwin. (Penguin, $5.95.) Like Bruce Chatwin's
highly praised travel book, ''In Patagonia,'' this novel ''chronicles the lives
of odd folk living in relative isolation'' and paints a landscape ''at least as
animate and moody as its inhabitants.'' But ''in its imaginative reach, (it) is
very much a work of fiction.'' Our critic, Robert Towers, saw it as part of a
valued tradition ''of writing about homely, country things with an enraptured
attention that causes them to glow with an almost visionary light.''

DIVINE HORSEMEN: The Living Gods of Haiti, by Maya Deren. (McPherson &
Company/Documentext, New Paltz, N.Y., $10.) Maya Deren went to Haiti to
photograph vodun dancing, remained to participate and eventually produced this
extensive, intimate illustrated account of Haitian rites. In his 1953 review,
Seldon Rodman observed that ''Divine Horsemen'' is ''visually accurate in its
reporting'' and that ''sharp insights abound.'' A hard-cover edition is
available for $20.

THE FRANCOEUR NOVELS: The Family, The Woods,

The Country, by David Plante. (Dutton/Obelisk, $10.95.) The protagonist of these
novels, set mainly in the French-Canadian working-class milieu of Rhode Island,
is David Francoeur. ''The Woods'' explores ''the boundary between (his)
ruthlessly insignificant everyday existence and the vast landscape of his inner
apathy,'' Edith Milton said in a review that called it brilliantly original.
''The Family'' and ''The Country'' examine the sociology of Daniel's world and
the psychology of the people he shares it with.

AMONG FRIENDS, by M. F. K. Fisher. (North Point, $10.) In a memoir first
published in 1971, M. F. K. Fisher recalls growing up in a California town full
of Quakers, where ''I was often teased, indirectly for being a non-Quaker and
directly for being of foreign descent, by the peers who walked amiably every
morning to school with me . . . and then often turned vicious on the way home.''
Primarily a family story, ''Among Friends'' depicts parents, other relatives,
friends and neighbors as it recreates life in an ''inner 'ghetto.' ''

RITUAL MURDER, by S. T. Haymon. (Pinnacle, $2.50.) When the mutilated body of a
choirboy is found in their cathedral, the people of Angleby are reminded of a
12th-century murder that was blamed on the Jews, the town is suddenly fraught
with tension, and the British Detective-Inspector, Benjamin Jurnet, has another
case to solve. Newgate Callendar called S. T. Haymon ''a lovely writer with
something of the poet in her'' and characterized ''Ritual Murder'' as a
sensitive account with an ending that's ''a real shocker.''

THE ONLY LIVING WITNESS, by Stephen G. Michaud and Hugh Aynesworth. (NAL/Signet,
$3.95.) Stephen G. Michaud, then with Business Week, and Hugh Aynesworth, then
with ABC-TV's ''20/20,'' decided to write about the mass murderer Ted Bundy in
1978 and found, during long interviews, that he would offer ''educated guesses''
about the kind of person who might have committed the crimes he'd been convicted
of - so long as he was not asked to admit or imply that he had committed them.
Our reviewer, Tom Chaffin, commended the authors for refusing to romanticize the
much-publicized Mr. Bundy.B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of woman

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ONE THEME LINKS 2 SCHOLARSHIP FUNDS

BYLINE: By Braden Phillips

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 19, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 922 words

DATELINE: S UBURBAN Waldwick in Bergen County and inner


-city Paterson may have little in common on the surface, but they are both home
to uncommon academic successes.

Son Van Pham, a senior at Waldwick High School, came to this country from
Vietnam three years ago with a knowledge of English limited to ''hello.'' He was
among 300 semifinalists recently chosen from among 14,000 American high school
seniors in the Westinghouse Science Talent Search.

Samuel Franklin was ready to quit Paterson Catholic Regional High School after
his junior year to help his family make ends meet. At the school, part of his
tuition was financed by the Tri-County Scholarship Fund. On appeal, the fund
increased the scholarship and Mr. Franklin works long hours in a local
restaurant to pay the rest.

''My parents always managed to come up with the money each year,'' he said,
''but I always expected to go back to public school the next. Since they
couldn't do it this year, I decided to do it myself. School means more to me
now.''

Both students have conquered adversity with the help of teachers, schools and
private industry. The Westinghouse Corporation has been awarding scholarships to
the winners of its mathematics and science contests for more than 40 years.

Waldwick High leads New Jersey in the Westinghouse competition with 11
mathematics semifinalists in the last eight years, two of whom were selected as
winners. Mr. Pham and a fellow senior, Gilbert Kim, were part of the first group
of 300 this year, but were not among the finalists.

Students and faculty alike attribute much of Waldwick's distinction in
mathematics to Daniel Flegler, the department chairman. In 1977, he was named by
Princeton University as the outstanding secondary school teacher in the state.

''After our first Westinghouse winner,'' Mr. Flegler said, ''the kids realized
it could be done. It's hard to be motivated without a contest.

''This is the only organized national contest for math and science students. It
gives them a chance to work with a purpose.

''In class, students answer questions laid out for them. In science research,
you have to formulate good questions before answering them, and that's much
harder.

''Personally, I have become possessed with the desire to encourage students to
compete. Now, we've got a tradition to uphold.''

With their projects, both students broke new ground in theoretical mathematics.
For Mr. Pham, however, it required enough tenacity to hurdle the language
barrier as well.

His project involved a variation on the Fibonacci Sequence, a series of numbers
in which any number in the sequence is the sum of the two preceding numbers,
such as 1,1,2,3,5,8,13.

The sequence is named for the 12th- century Italian mathematician Leonardo
Fibonacci. Mr. Pham found that the mathematical sequence also worked with
fractions.

The Tri-County Scholarship Fund offers inner-city students of Morris, Passaic
and Sussex Counties the same opportunity for achievement that the Westinghouse
competition provides students at Waldwick High.

Now in its third year, the fund was founded by Edward L. Hennessy Jr., chairman
of the Morristown-based Allied Corporation. It now pools contributions from 60
individuals and corporations in New Jersey to subsidize the education of
students attending any of the 81 schools operated by the Paterson Diocese.

The awarding of fund scholarships is based on the applicant's financial need. As
Mr. Hennessy put it:

''I recognized the need in this area of New Jersey, which has some of the
poorest cities in America, that an alternative must be made available.

''You find that some of these people are third-generation welfare recipients. I
have always believed that education is the only way to break the cycle. The
diocesan schools are very good, and parents make great sacrifices to send their
children there.''

In 1981, the fund awarded 412 scholarships totaling $100,000. Last year, more
than $230,000 was distributed to 1,182 students. Mr. Hennessy's goal is to
arrive at $500,000 and stay there.

The average grant at the elementary-school level is 50 percent of the $550
yearly tuition. For the high schools, grants cover 60 percent of $1,650 in
tuition costs. Overall, about one-fourth of the enrollment in the diocesan
schools is non-Catholic.

Students on scholarships at Paterson Catholic High contribute toward their
tuition through an after-school work/study program. Some, like Migdalia Vazquez,
a senior, work for the school or teachers.

''In the long run,'' she said, ''I feel like I'm working for my parents. It
gives me a sense of responsibility, and I feel appreciated.'' Others, as in the
case of Mr. Franklin, must work outside school to earn more. Many also volunteer
time to local social-service organizations.

According to Sister Germaine Fritz, principal of Paterson Catholic High, the
school unintentionally achieved an ethnic mix of black, white and Hispanic
students that it plans to maintain.

''The school reflects changes in the community,'' she said.

Although students attend classes in religion, a diversity of faiths is taken
into account by teachers.

''You get to learn about a new religion,'' said Mr. Franklin, who is a Baptist.
''By understanding it, you get a deeper sense of your own faith.''

Whether they are winners of the Westinghouse science awards or Tri- County Fund
scholarships, all the students will no doubt agree with Mr. Pham.

''You get a great feeling when you work something out, especially when you've
worked hard to get there,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEROIC AIRMAN REMEMBERED

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 21, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


FAIRVIEW

 O N DEC. 12, 1967, two days before Vito Muti was to board a Navy reconnaissance
plane as a radio operator, he telephoned his father, Luigi, in Fairview.

''Daddy, this is my last flight,'' Mr. Muti's father recalled his son having
said, ''and when my tour is over in about six months, I'm coming straight
home.''

The 23-year-old Cliffside Park High School graduate said that his mission would
be routine.

The aircraft, a twin-engine, propeller-driven SP-2A, took off from Whidby Island
Naval Air Station in Alaska on Dec. 14, 1957 on what was to be a regularly
scheduled antisubmarine-patrol flight.

After a brief layover in Kodiak, Alaska, it headed for Juneau. It never got
there.

The aircraft, with 14 men on board - four of them crew members - vanished in a
thunderstorm.

''I was stringing Christmas lights outside the house when I heard the news,''
recalled the elder Mr. Muti, now 82. ''I didn't know how to tell my wife. How
could I tell her that our son was gone?''

Search parties looked for the aircraft for four days before bad weather forced
them to abandon the effort.

Mr. Muti; his wife, Anna, and two married daughters - Mary Caso of East
Rutherford and Tina Balaskovits of Fairview - gradually resigned themselves to
the fact that Vito had died. Still, his loss was felt, especially around holiday
time, and on the 14th of each month Luigi and Anna Muti have attended a mass for
their son at the Our Lady of Grace Roman Catholic Church in Fairview.

Then, two weeks shy of the 16th anniversary of the plane's disappearance, the
Navy reported finding it and the remains of its crew and passengers. It was,
Navy officials said, an incredibly unlikely discovery.

In late 1982, a civilian geological research team, testing ice depth at the foot
of Mount Fairweather in British Colombia, discovered what appeared to be a
section of aircraft fuselage. Upon further examination and excavation, the
fragmented metal revealed the Navy markings.

Military officials were immediately told of the findings.

In the next few months, Navy investigating units unearthed additional wreckage
and the partial remains of those on board. Military officials determined that
the wreckage was that of the missing reconnaissance aircraft of Patrol Squadron
42.

They said that the plane probably been blown nearly 100 miles off course because
of the storm. Poor visiblity and a possible failure of on- board radar equipment
may have caused it to slam into the mountain, they reasoned.

''More than a year ago, I had a dream,'' said Mr. Muti, clasping the hand of his
81-year-old wife. ''In the dream, I see a big mountain all white with snow, and
on top of this mountain I see a big cross.'' Mr. Muti said he felt that the
mountain and the cross were beckoning him.

Later, he and his wife learned that the dream - and the time of year the dream
occurred - coincided with the initial discovery of the missing airplane.

''There were other things, too, that made us believe that some day we would have
an answer to what happened to Vito,'' said Mrs. Caso, 43.

She explained that her brother, before being assigned to duty in Alaska, had
given her oldest daughter, April, a gold cross as a baptism present.

''Through high school and college,'' Mrs. Caso said, ''April managed to lose
that cross five times, and each time she found it again. It was as if Vito was
trying to tell us that 'what's lost will be found,' and that all it takes is
time.''

She has never been able to shed a feeling of irony concerning her brother's
disappearance, Mrs. Caso said, adding:

''He served six months in Vietnam as a radio operator on a Navy reconnaissance
flight, and he came through that without a scratch. His 'last flight' turned out
to be just that.

''If that geology team had dug a hole 20 feet further over in the ice, we never
would have known anything.''

''In my heart, I always knew that we would find out where Vito was,'' Mrs. Muti
said. ''In 16 years, I have no more tears left to cry, but now I have the tears
and they are tears of joy because we are at peace, and so is he.''

According to the casualty branch of the Naval Military Personnel Command in
Washington, the remains of those on board the ill-fated aircraft probably will
be buried in Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia this spring. The Navy has
promised to provide transportation and lodging for the family when the burial
services take place.

''We are old now,'' Mrs. Muti said, ''but at least now, if we want to visit our
son's grave, we have a place to go and a stone with his name to see.''

She then paused for a moment in retrospect.

''All these years he is missing, and it is a terrible thing not to know. He is
no more missing.''

Mrs. Muti uttered a soft phrase in Italian, and Mrs. Caso translated:

''I have my son again.''




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Luigi and Anna Muti

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Men Lost in Vietnam Subject of New Mission

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 84 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 19


The highest-level United States Government delegation to visit Vietnam since the
end of the war in that country left Bangkok for Hanoi today to discuss the issue
of 2,500 Americans missing in action, a United States Embassy spokesman said.

The team, which is scheduled to return to Bangkok on Wednesday, is headed by
Richard L. Armitage, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International
Security Affairs. It was not known whether Hanoi planned to turn over any
American dead to the delegation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PRESS CORPS AND GOVERNMENT, AT LATER PERSPECTIVE



BYLINE:
By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 969 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


''The Government always wants the reporters on the team,'' says James Deakin.
''But if the journalists are on the team, who will report the game?''

Before his retirement from daily journalism in 1981 to teach and write books,
Mr. Deakin was White House correspondent for The St. Louis Post- Dispatch and
for 25 years he did daily battle with what he calls ''the great White House
publicity machine.'' Mr. Deakin, who describes himself as an iconoclast, has now
written a book about the endless conflicts between Government and the news
media, ''Straight Stuff: The Reporters, the White House and the Truth,'' which
has been published by William Morrow and Company.

It explores the mysteries of pool reports, national security classifications and
''leaks.'' The differences between briefings, backgrounders and ''deep
backgrounders,'' which, Mr. Deakin maintains, ''often cloak an official who is
furnishing information of staggering ordinariness.''

There are glimpses of the White House press on the road; a look at the
Eisenhower White House and accounts of President Johnson's news conferences held
while he loped about the White House grounds with a panting press corps in
pursuit.

Mostly About Serious Business


But for the most part, Mr. Deakin's book is about much more serious business.
And he sat down recently to discuss the role of the press as a permanent
resident critic of Government.

''What is called the adversarial relationship is a deliberate renaming of a fine
old democratic institution called the critical relationship,'' he asserted.
''There are those who want to discredit the press, who want to have people
believe the press is out to get the President, to damage the President.

''The press is out to do no such thing. The press is there to serve as a conduit
for a political and social dialogue, to express to the Administration and
everyone else the pluralism of opinion, the pluralism of points of view, the
plurism which is called democracy. And those who don't like that have chosen to
call that critical relationship an adversarial relationship. They say it makes
it impossible for a President to govern. The trouble with that theory is that
the press has been doing this since the founding of the Republic and the
Republic has survived and been well served.''

He Says Truth Is Relative


For those critics who charge the media with bias, with distorting the news and
not reporting ''the truth,'' Mr. Deakin had this to say: ''Whose truth? Truth is
a relative concept. Since the news media can't deal in the absolute truth
because there is no such thing, they substitute three standards: accuracy,
completeness and fairness. They certainly don't too well on any one of those
three but those are what they try to achieve.''

Some first-time observers at White House press briefings are aghast at what they
perceive as the irreverence of the White House press corps. But, Mr. Deakin
maintained: ''There can't be any freedom of inquiry without irreverence. All
Presidents seek to capture the press and the two defenses against that are
professionalism and independence.''

The explosive growth in both size and numbers of the White House's press and
publicity operations, he said, has been striking. ''Under Hagerty there was one
press secretary, one assistant and a few stenographers and that remained
virtually unchanged through the Kennedy Administration,'' Mr. Deakin said.
''Today it is estimated that the White House press staff numbers in the
hundreds. And what used to be a low- budget set for 'The Front Page' is now a
full-blown press center.''

He Sees 'Imperial Presidency'


Part of the growth, he said, is attributable to the growth of the press corps
and the introduction of television, but he mainly ascribed it to what he called
''the imperial Presidency.''

''The press operation is very large, very powerful,'' he said, ''it commands the
talents and energies of a great many people who are constantly working towards
burnishing the President's image, making him look in command of the situation,
making him look infallible. Reporters know subconsciously what would happen if
they treated that great machine reverently. They know what the consequences
would be. And the country shouldn't treat it reverently either, in that way lies
trouble.''

But does not the press also seek to shape and mold the message? What about those
who see the power of the press as equally threatening?  The press is powerful
and persuasive, he conceded, and often determines whether an issue is heard and
becomes a preoccupation or whether it will have to struggle for attention.

'President Sets Agenda'


''But the power of the media is easy to overstate,'' he said. ''The media don't
set the national agenda. The President sets the national agenda.

''Media don't declare war. Media don't send troops to Vietnam and they don't
send troops to Central America and Lebanon. They just don't do any of the things
by which we conventionally measure power.''

The secret to understanding Washington, Mr. Deakin said, is being able to hold
contradictory things in mind at the same time.

''For instance,'' he said, ''the Kennedy Administration was remarkably
accessible, remarkably open to the press. It was an Administration of ideas and
men who liked to discuss those ideas with reporters and yet when it came to a
crunch, as it did in the Bay of Pigs and the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy tried
to close down the Administration. The two things was operating simultanously, an
open Administration and a closed Administation all at the same time.

''Presidents are manipulative, they have to be. They are jugglers of motives,
they can't operate with just one motive, they have to keep all the balls in the
air.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James Deakin

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FORGOTTEN ARIZONA TOWN GIRDS TO RESIST TOURISM

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 805 words

DATELINE: BISBEE, Ariz.


Along the road from Tombstone that sweeps into the high desert country of
southeast Arizona and the mile-high town of Bisbee, it is easy to see why local
folk call the cut through the Mule Mountains ''the time tunnel.'' Bisbee still
looks much as it did when Teddy Roosevelt staged raids into the surrounding
hills in a futile search for Pancho Villa and when Lily Langtry stayed in the
Copper Queen Hotel while she played at the theater down the street.

Once the biggest copper town in the world, home of the Copper Queen and later
the Phelps-Dodge Mine, Bisbee clings to the sides of hills so steep the postman
won't deliver to half the houses in town. It is a picture postcard lost for
eight decades in the mail.

Now that copper is gone and all but 6,000 of the 25,000 people it once had,
Bisbee's one industry is Bisbee itself, a town that time forgot, and a group of
developers want some paying customers to remember.

An Alpine Village

Garth Collier, a San Francisco architect-developer, became interested in Bisbee
about four years ago when he was looking at a project farther north and someone
showed him pictures of the town.

''I asked where in Europe it was,'' he recalled. ''I thought it was an Alpine
village. When I was told it was in southern Arizona, I was amazed.''

Within weeks Mr. Collier and a partner, Grieg Craft, the other half of
Collier-Craft Development Company, had laid plans to turn Bisbee into a resort,
retirement and tourist town.

Collier-Craft and its investors have bought five of the town's fine, once-
quaint but now decaying buildings, planning to turn them into apartments renting
for $350 to $600 a month.

Newer Residents Object


That idea does not sit well with many of Bisbee's newer residents, a handful of
artists and writers sprinkled among what one part-time resident describes as a
ragtag collection of ''terminal 60's hippies, new-ageists, experimental
environmentalists, burned-out Vietnam vets, overdone drug cases'' and others.

Many of the new residents were attracted by the climate, cheap housing and the
proximity to the Mexican border just seven miles to the south.

Great numbers of the newcomers object strenously to what is termed ''the
Aspenizing of Bisbee'' and the effects of a tourist boom on a dirt- cheap
economy that one city councilman estimates is 75 percent dependent on food
stamps.

That, Mr. Collier maintains, is illogical, since there is no economy to speak
of, and while the investment of $2 million in a community of 6,000 residents
might raise prices a bit, ''this town has to have income from somewhere.''

Houses for $15,000


Liisa Phillips, a young artist whose whimsical canvases of Rubensesque women in
sunglasses and bathing suits are attracting increasing attention, first visited
Bisbee five years ago and within five minutes decided to stay. She bought a
house that clings to the side of a steep hill for $15,000.

''I think it was that it was not horizontal,'' she said with a trace of
Scandinavian accent.

The young painter at first feared that while her art blossomed, romance was
unlikely to flower in Bisbee. ''I knew I'd have to go, oh, to New York to meet
the right man,'' said Liisa with a shake of her head. ''Then I met Paul.''

Paul Brinkley-Rogers, after a long stint as a correspondent for Newsweek
magazine in Vietnam, Cambodia and Hong Kong, saw Bisbee and, like Liisa,
immediately succumbed. His house also cost $15,000. They married and have a
2-year-old son, Noah.

Miracle Valley Shootout


Mr. Brinkley-Rogers later signed on as a regional reporter for The Arizona Daily
Star.

Covering a confrontation between sheriff's deputies and members of an all-black
fundamentalist church in nearby Miracle Valley in October 1982, he found himself
witness to the fatal shooting of two church members by a deputy. A grand jury
looking into the matter subpoenaed 12 pages of Mr. Brinkley-Rogers's notes.

But what might have been a sticky matter, since journalists do not give up their
notes without a fight, was averted by the intervention of Noah.  ''What did you
do, Noah?'' Liisa asked the toddler busily engaged with a pile of colored
pencils on the floor.

Noah, refusing to testify, rolled a pencil and stood mute.

''He ate them,'' his mother explained. ''He found the notes and he ate them.''

While Liisa Phillips believes that Bisbee's fundamental character will prevail,
her husband said, ''There are a lot of Abbey disciples in Bisbee.''

Edward Abbey, a writer who lives in Tucson, is the author of a 1975 novel, ''The
Monkey Wrench Gang,'' about a group of ''eco-raiders'' whose approach to what
they considered excessive development was a kind of terrorism, chopping down
billboards and disabling bulldozers.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of painter Lisa Phillips; photo of town of Bisbee, Ariz.; map of
Arizona highlighting Bisbee

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MICHENER'S 'SPACE' TO BE MINI-SERIES

BYLINE: By STEPHEN FARBER

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 19


Exactly one year from now, if all goes according to a lot of well-laid plans,
some 100 million American televison sets will be tuned to one main event: the
adaptation of James Michener's novel, ''Space.'' At this point not a single foot
of film has been shot, but a small army is being assembled, ready to spring into
action on April 15 to consummate one of the most ambitious and expensive
undertakings in the history of television.

The producers, directors, designers and crew members are preparing the elaborate
sets and costumes, scouting locations in the Washington area, sending out offers
to actors and haggling over the precise budget for this $30 million mini-series.
The guiding force behind all this activity, the man who has been involved in the
project longer than any other individual, is the executive producer, Dick Berg,
whose Stonehenge Productions acquired the rights to the novel shortly before its
publication in October 1982.

Mr. Berg has deliberately kept a low profile and may be one of the least-known
producers working in television, but he's had a notable career for almost 30
years. He began as a writer for such series as ''Playhouse 90'' and ''Studio
One,'' produced ''Bob Hope's Chrysler Theater'' - the only dramatic anthology
series of the 1960's - and since then has supervised dozens of television movies
and mini-series. It was Mr. Michener's high regard for Mr. Berg's 1979
mini-series, ''A Rumor of War'' - a stark, uncomprising version of Philip
Caputo's Vietnam expose - that helped to persuade the author to sell the rights
to ''Space'' to Mr. Berg at a time when many other production companies were
bidding for the novel.



New Trend in Entertainment

The book was sold for one of the highest sums ever paid for a novel adapted for
television. Mr. Michener will eventually receive between $750,000 and $1
million, depending on the number of installments of the mini-series. (Right now
it is scheduled to run 12 hours but could grow by an hour or two.)

This sale confirms a relatively new development in the entertainment business:
Best-selling novels are now more likely to be purchased by television companies
than by feature-film studios. The reason is that in the last decade several
big-screen adaptations of popular novels - for example, Peter Benchley's
''Island'' and Sidney Sheldon's ''Bloodline'' - have failed to attract an
audience, and the studios have decided that the price tag generally attached to
best-selling novels is simply too high. Television networks are more willing to
pay the price, and authors have realized that a mini-series of 8 or 10 hours
will permit a far more faithful transcription of their book than a two-hour
feature film.

Mr. Berg had a longstanding relationship with CBS, so they agreed to back
''Space.'' He needed another partner and signed a co-financing deal with
Paramount Pictures, the studio which has been involved in several ambitious
mini-series, including ''Shogun'' and ''The Winds of War.''

Mr. Michener's novel is a fictional rendering of the development of the space
program from World War II to the present; the television version goes only up to
1972, leaving a big chunk of the novel for a possible sequel or even a weekly
series. Stirling Silliphant, who had worked for Mr. Berg 20 years ago and later
won an Academy Award for his script of ''In the Heat of the Night,'' was hired
to write the mini-series, though Mr. Berg wrote the last of the five teleplays
himself. According to Mr. Michener's agent, Owen Lassiter, the author was sent a
lengthy synopsis of the teleplays early on and approved of the approach. ''But
Jim doesn't take a very active role in the adaptation of his books,'' Mr.
Lassiter said.



NASA Official Is a Consultant

To insure accuracy in filming ''Space,'' Byron Morgan, a NASA official, took a
sabbatical for a year to join Mr. Berg as consultant to the production. In
recent weeks Mr. Berg hired the two directors who will shepherd ''Space'' to
completion - Joseph Sargent and Lee Phillips. The cast has not yet been
confirmed, though some of the actors Mr. Berg is seeking include James Garner,
Susan Sarandon, Blythe Danner, Bruce Dern and J"urgen Prochnow (the German star
of ''Das Boot'').

''Space'' covers roughly the same time period as Tom Wolfe's history of the
space program, ''The Right Stuff.'' Its characters are the fictional
counterparts of such real-life astronauts as Alan B. Shepard Jr. and John Glenn,
scientists such as Wernher von Braun and NASA officials such as Chris Craft.

Mr. Berg admits that there is an overlap between the two projects, but he does
not see them as competing. ''I loved Phil Kaufman's film of the 'Right Stuff,'
'' he said. ''But I think ours is very different in concept. Tom Wolfe is a much
more idiosyncratic writer. Michener is more mainstream. We look at a lot of
things that 'The Right Stuff' didn't really examine, like the transplanting of
German scientists to Huntsville, Ala., after World War II. 'Space' is more
interested than 'The Right Stuff' in the politics of space and also the politics
of sex. I think ours is a much more sexual piece. 'The Right Stuff' was romantic
in a classic Western sense but essentially asexual.''



Sexual Sub-Themes Underscored

The sexual sub-themes of Mr. Michener's novel were especially intriguing to Mr.
Berg, and he said those aspects of the book have been underscored in the
television adaptation. ''Our story deals with the growth of women over the last
40 years,'' he said. ''The main female character in the piece starts out as a
cheerleader and ends as a counselor to a major Senate committee. We also deal
with the issue of homosexuality. One of our characters, a scientist, is a very
macho guy who has to confront his son's homosexuality. We also deal with the
whole issue of racism, the fact that few blacks were admitted into the space
program until very recently. All of those questions interested me.''

If Mr. Berg has enjoyed low visibility in the industry up to now, the already
burgeoning media interest in 'Space' will probably change all that.

While he oversees the preparation for ''Space,'' Mr. Berg is also developing
other unconventional television projects. Under his aegis, Gerald Green is
writing a television movie based on the Raoul Wallenberg story, and Mr. Berg
also hopes to present an adaptation of Joyce Carol Oates's novel,
''Bellefleur,'' a pet project that has yet to win the green light from one of
the networks. ''The business has always been a battle,'' Mr. Berg said, ''and
for material that's at all provocative, I suppose it always will be.''

Still,'' he added, ''there continue to be enough random breakthroughs over the
years to encourage me to keep punching.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James Michener

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'Across Pond' Is Staged At 18th Street Theater

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 114 words


To observe Black History Month, the four-year-old O'LAC Repertory Ensemble is
producing ''Across the Pond,'' a drama by George Joshua that focuses on several
black soldiers stationed in the Philippines during the Vietnam War. Mr. Joshua
is himself a United States Air Force veteran.

''Across the Pond,'' directed by Randy Frazier, is being staged Thursday through
Sunday, through Feb. 26, at the 18th Street Playhouse, at 145 West 18th Street,
between the Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue. In the cast are Joe
David, Kelle LeMar, Jack Rose, L. Anthony Williams and Rhobye Wyatt.
Performances begin at 7:30 nightly and at 4 P.M. on Sunday. For information:
call 638-0365.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 22, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN WEIGHING EMERGENCY ARMS FOR EL SALVADOR

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 21


Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that the Reagan Administration is
considering giving El Salvador emergency military aid, without waiting for
Congress to act, so its army can maintain pressure on the insurgents in the
coming election period.

In testimony before the Senate Budget Committee dominated by questions about
Central American policy, Mr. Shultz often raised his voice against senators who
sought to discredit the Administration's actions in El Salvador. He denied
assertions that the Salvadoran Government had ''lost the hearts and minds of its
people'' and said news articles suggesting gross corruption in the use of
American aid in Central America were ''highly exaggerated.''

''In any spending program, even in the United States, not everything is
perfect,'' he told Senator Pete V. Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, the
chairman, in response to a question raised by articles in The New York Times and
elsewhere about reports of mismanagement in the use of American aid in Central
America. ''On the whole, the money is spent well, administered carefully.''



Aid Constantly Reviewed

''We constantly review it,'' he said. ''Most of the things that have gotten some
publicity have resulted from our own internal audits and our efforts to
strengthen the administration of funds and that is reported, of course. I'm not
complaining about that, but these are problems we have discovered and are doing
something about.''

Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, questioned Mr. Shultz closely
about reports that the Administration was thinking of sending millions of
dollars worth of military equipment to El Salvador even before Congress has had
a chance to vote on the Administration's request for $178.7 million in
supplemental aid for this 1984 fiscal year and an additional $132.5 million for
1985.

Mr. Shultz acknowledged that the Administration was considering sending military
equipment to El Salvador under parts of the law that allow military goods to be
paid for as much as 120 days after they are received and that allow the
President in an emergency to send equipment from American units directly to
another army.



Decision Not Yet Made

''We're concerned that the Salvadoran armed services will run out of key
materiel in the next few months during which they are likely to face increased
guerrilla efforts to disrupt the March 25 presidential elections and the
runoff,'' Mr. Shultz said.

''There hasn't been a decision made,'' he told the Senator. ''I'm not saying
yes, I'm not saying no.''

Mr. Shultz pointed out that the Administration's request for $86.3 million in
military aid for El Salvador for this fiscal year had been cut by Congress to
$64.8 million, of which only $45 million is available until the trial of those
accused of killing four American churchwomen is concluded, something not
expected until May.  In the meantime, he said, ''we're telling the Salvadoran
military that there is going to be an election and you're going to have to do
things extraordinarily and allow the elections to take place.''

''In the election period, they have special responsibilities,'' he said of the
army. He said the army had to step up offensive actions to keep the insurgents
from disrupting the voting.

'We Are Losing the War'

To justify the arms shipment, which he seemed to indicate would take place, Mr.
Shultz said, ''If you won't give them any resources, and the other side is
pouring resources in, what do you expect?''

If there was not a steady supply, he said, the Salvadoran Army would ''husband
its resources'' and be afraid to move vigorously to protect the elections.

One of Mr. Shultz's sharpest exchanges was with Senator J. Bennett Johnston,
Democrat of Louisiana.

''It seems to me the situation is deteriorating and we are losing the war,'' Mr.
Johnston said, ''and I would suggest that the best explanation I can come up
with for why we're losing the war is because we're losing the war for the hearts
and minds of people, which is very regrettable. And why that is, is perhaps
because of the death squads and the lack of human rights in El Salvador.''

Mr. Shultz, who had earlier been involved in an exchange of shouts with Senator
Donald W. Riegle Jr., Democrat of Michigan, over Mr. Riegle's charges that the
Administration was leading the country into a Vietnam-like situation in Central
America, said to Mr. Johnston:

''If I may make a comment, I would have to just flatly disagree with most
everything you've said.''

He added ''I hate to do that'' because he had high regard for Mr. Johnston ''and
I know you have spoken what you think, but you're wrong.''

'There Are Ups and Downs'

''On the military side, there are ups and downs,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''Right now,
from all I can read, the El Salvadoran military are on some sort of 'up.' ''

''From the standpoint of the hearts and minds of the people of El Salvador, I
don't know how you can come to such a judgment,'' he said. He noted that the
insurgents had blown up bridges and power stations and caused considerable
damage. ''I don't know how you have won the hearts and minds of people by doing
that.''

Mr. Johnston replied that ''I'd like to think that I was wrong.''

''I have supported the Salvadoran policy up to now,'' he said, but added that
little that had happened recently had reassured him.

After Mr. Riegle had attacked the Reagan policies in Lebanon and Central America
as strongly reminiscent to him of Vietnam, Mr. Shultz said that ''American
foreign policy, taken around the world, is going extremely well.''

He said there was a ''major problem'' in Lebanon, but elsewhere developments
were heartening.

Vital to U.S. Security

On Central America, Mr. Shultz said the area was close to the United States and
vital to American security. He said there was no plan to engage American
military personnel in the fighting in the region.

Other senators, such as James R. Sasser, Democrat of Tennessee, had complained
that the military exercises and construction in Honduras left them with the
impression that the Administration was contemplating a more permanent presence
in the region.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 22, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


;
DON'T BLAME REAGAN POLICIES FOR THE DEFICIT

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 457 words


To the Editor:


This letter is in response to your Feb. 7 editorial ''Mr. Reagan's Vietnam
Budget,'' where you compared the policies and budgets of President Reagan to
those of President Lyndon Johnson - comparisons that are forced at best and
wrong in several important respects.

The Johnson defense buildup was dictated by a rapid escalation in combat
operations and did not necessarily result in an increase in our defensive
capability. At the exact same time, President Johnson began the many Great
Society programs (which prompted the ''guns or butter'' debate of those days).
The resulting program growth became known as the great middle-income transfer of
wealth without any regard as to how this nation was going to pay for it.

President Reagan is not primarily funding combat

operations

 but combat

readiness

, and defense spending is still far below 1960's levels as a share of G.N.P. and
of total spending. Also, the President has taken the most fiscally responsible
approach possible to Great Society programs that had grown 9 to 10 times in real
terms since the Johnson years: they will not grow at all during the 1980's.  Mr.
Reagan has shown an openness to revenue increases - in this year's budget
request with loophole-closing measures to raise $41 billion over the next three
years, in past support for the 1982 tax bill (which will raise revenues over
$150 billion through 1986) and on the Social Security compromise. All this was
done without destroying the incentives badly needed to rebuild our economy.

The President's fiscal 1985 budget proposes continued domestic spending
restraint, and you failed to acknowledge that he has asked repeatedly for
domestic cuts of almost twice what he has received from Congress. This year he
is seeking bipartisan agreement on further deficit reductions through
negotiation with Congress, which is proving to be a very difficult task. If
blame is to be assigned for the deficit problem being more severe than
anticipated, the refusal of Congress to accept over $200 billion in proposed
budget savings in the 1982-86 period is an important reason.  The deficit cannot
fairly be blamed on defense spending and tax decreases. Total Federal revenues
as a share of G.N.P. are still close to their postwar peaks, despite the net tax
reduction achieved by the Reagan Administration, and defense spending is still
far below its G.N.P. share of the Johnson years.  But most important, the
out-of- control spending on domestic programs is being tamed, defense readiness
has been increased and our tax incentives are in place for future growth.

JOSEPH R. WRIGHT JR.  Deputy Director Office of Management and Budget
Washington, Feb. 10, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Said to Pledge Aid On Missing Americans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 107 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 22


Vietnam has given a ''clear commitment'' to move more rapidly in determining the
status of the nearly 2,500 Americans still listed as missing in the Vietnam war,
a member of a United States delegation to Hanoi said today.

The Vietnamese Government no longer links the missing Americans with other
issues between the two countries, said Ann Mills Griffiths, executive director
of the National League of Missing In Action-Prisoners of War Families.

Mrs. Griffiths spoke at a news conference here after traveling to Hanoi with
four American officials. The delegation was led by Richard L. Armitage, a Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 23, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WRITE IN REAGAN, DEMOCRATS ARE URGED

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 22


Amid signs that several Democratic candidates are worried about their ability to
stay in the Presidential race, a leading conservative political action committee
disclosed plans today to encourage a write-in vote for President Reagan on the
Democratic ballot.

These developments came on the eve of a debate among the eight Democratic
contenders Thursday night, their last meeting before the New Hampshire primary
Tuesday.

The effort to write in President Reagan on the Democratic ballot is being
sponsored by the Fund for a Conservative Majority, the nation's third largest
political action committee. Mr. Reagan is already running as a Republican, but a
large write-in vote for him as a Democrat could damage several Democratic
candidates.

Paul Shone, the campaign director in New Hampshire for Senator John Glenn of
Ohio,, suggested that any write-ins for the President could take away votes from
Mr. Glenn, Senator Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina or Reubin Askew, the
former Governor of Florida. They are the three Democrats who have tried to
appeal to the state's moderate to conservative voters.

'Attempt to Embarrass' Party

Jeanne Shaheen, New Hampshire campaign manager for Senator Gary Hart of
Colorado, described the write- in campaign as ''an attempt to embarrass the
Democrats'' and ''pretty typically Republican.'' But she said, ''I don't think
it will influence what happens here dramatically.''

Among the indications that several Democrats are in trouble were these:


- Senator Glenn disclosed that because of a lack of funds he was closing his
campaign organization in Maine, where Democratic party caucuses are to be held
March 4 Senator Glenn's campaign was hurt by a fifth place finish in the Iowa
caucuses Monday.


- Senator Hollings said today that ''the rest of us are gone'' if former Vice
President Walter F. Mondale wins decisively again in New Hampshire, as he did in
Iowa. Speaking to the New Hampshire Association of Realtors, Mr. Hollings also
predicted, as he has before, that if Mr. Mondale was nominated by the Democrats,
President Reagan would win in November.


- Mr. Askew hinted he might drop out of the race if he did not finish among the
top four in the New Hampshire primary. ''There's no question if I don't do as
well as I think I should do in New Hampshire, it becomes another period of
assessment,'' he said on television station WNDS in Derry. A public opinion poll
by The Boston Globe last week placed Mr. Askew last among the eight candidates,
winning only 3 percent of the vote.

Audience to Be Restricted


Thursday's debate, sponsored by the League of Women Voters, will be held at St.
Anselm's College near Manchester, the state's largest city. Although the hall
holds 600 people, only reporters and officials of the league are being allowed
to attend, and only the moderator, Barbara Walters of ABC News, will be
permitted to question the candidates.

The debate will be shown live in New Hampshire at 8 P.M. by Channel 11 in Dover
and Channel 2 in Boston, the region's public television stations.

As an indication of the seriousness with which the candidates viewed the debate,
Mr. Mondale and Senator Hart, the two top vote-getters in Iowa, took the day off
from campaigning to prepare.

To spur interest in writing in President Reagan as a Democrat, the Fund for a
Conservative Majority said it would spend $50,000 before Tuesday on 250 radio
commercials, advertisements in six newspapers and the mailing of 80,000 letters
to registered Democrats. Writing in a name is probably easier in New Hampshire
than it would be in many places because 70 percent of the balloting will be on
paper, not by machine, the conservative group said.

He Denies It is Mischief


At a news conference here this afternoon, Robert C. Heckman, the group's
chairman, denied the purpose was to cause confusion among Democrats. Instead, he
insisted, the write-in plan ''is in response to the growing disenchantment many
Democrats feel over the choice they have with the present Democratic primary
cnadidates.''

Mr. Heckman said that given the difficulties of a write-in campaign, if
President Reagan drew several thousand votes, or got more than some of the
Democrats, ''it would be a victory.''

One key to the success of the plan may be the degree to which it is supported by
The Manchester Union Leader, the state's largest circulation newspaper and long
a backer of right-wing causes. This morning the paper displayed news about the
write-in plan in a banner headline across its front page.  The conservative
group also announced the formation of a committee that it said was composed of
New Hampshire Democrats who backed the write-in for Mr. Reagan. The chairman,
Bob Philbrick, said he was ''sickened when I see all of the leading Democratic
Presidential candidates in favor of a weak America and in favor of abortion.''

He Was Once a Democrat


Mr. Philbrick, who is a public relations officer for Raytheon, a leading
electronics company across the border in Massachusetts, is a former member of
the New Hampshire Democratic Committee.

New Hampshire has an unusual history of write-in candidacies. In 1964 Henry
Cabot Lodge, then Ambassador in South Vietnam, won the New Hampshire primary as
a write-in candidate over Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona without ever
setting foot in the state. In 1968 Richard M. Nixon got 2,532 write-in votes as
a Democrat, or 4.6 percent of the total, while running successfully as a
Republican.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Reubin Askew

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

G.I.'S WILL TRAIN IN HONDURAS AGAIN

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 626 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 23


Senior Reagan Administration officials said today that United States military
forces, which have just completed a major training exercise in Honduras, would
be sent to that country to train each year for the foreseeable future, perhaps
for as long as 20 years.

The officials said plans were firm for this year and the next two years but were
somewhat vague beyond that.

Meantime, the chief of the United States Southern Command, Gen. Paul F. Gorman,
told a Senate committee that the exercises this summer ould be expanded to
include Guatemalan, Salvadoran and possibly Panamanian troops along with those
from Honduras and the United States.

General Gorman, whose headquarters in Panama controls United States forces in
Central America, also said American advisers trained 3,300 Honduran soldiers in
1983 and planned to train 25,000 to 29,000 this year.

Access to Bases Sought

The White House officials said the Administration had been seeking long-term
access for American forces to an extensive network of Honduran military bases,
most of which are being improved and expanded with American aid.

In defending the Administration's policy as critical to the security of Central
America, the officials insisted that the Administration was not seeking
permanent bases in Honduras. Rather, they said access to bases made possible the
deployment of American combat forces in a contingency.

That policy brought fresh criticism from Congress today. Representative Bill
Alexander, Democrat of Arkansas, said the Reagan Administration had practiced
"evasion, misinformation and subterfuge" in explaining its policy toward
Honduras.

He contended that the Administration's action was similar to that of the Johnson
Administration in the mid-1960's, when he said that Administration sought to
conceal the gradual American involvement in the war in Vietnam.

'So Quickly Forgotten'

Mr. Alexander, in a speech in the House, said, "Has the Reagan Administration so
quickly forgotten the lessons of our recent past that our nation is doomed to a
future of repeating those errors?"

Mr. Alexander, a deputy Democratic whip and middle-ranking member of the
Appropriations Committee, has asked the General Accounting Office, an
investigative arm of Congress, to undertake a comprehensive inquiry of the
United States involvement in Central America.

Since the new session of Congress convened in January, most members have focused
their attention on Lebanon. At the same time, however, many members have
peppered senior Administration officials with questions about United States
military activity in Honduras.

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, in testimony on the 1985 military
budget, has sought to disarm the critics by discounting the continued presence
of several hundred American troops in Honduras and by saying the installations
being improved there were temporary.

Pentagon and C.I.A. Criticized

The remarks by Mr. Alexander today, however, seemed more pointed than those
heard earlier. He accused the Defense Department and the Central Intelligence
Agency of "dilatory, manipulative, and obstructionist tactics" in failing to
keep Congress informed.

According to a memo by Mr. Alexander's staff, an interim General Accounting
Office report says that "the Administration is engaging in a systematic effort
to withhold from Congress relevant data on American involvement" in Honduras and
Nicaragua.

On Honduras, a recent report by the staff of the House Subcommittee on Military
Construction, of which Mr. Alexander is a member, said 12 sites had been found
there either under construction or proposed for expansion with American aid.

They included four airfields, two radar sites, two ports, two training centers
and two camps.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BRAZIL IS STUDYING USE OF HERBICIDES

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, Feb. 23


Brazilian officials have begun investigating whether the use of herbicides to
clear a strip of jungle for a power transmission line may have played a role in
the deaths of 40 settlers in the Amazon region two years ago.

Farmers in Tailandia and other communities close to the power line in the state
of Para were reportedly affected by some epidemic or poisoning between December
1981 and June 1982, but the extent of their problems has only recently become
known.

The high-voltage transmission line was laid in the late 1970's and early 80's
from the Sobradinho dam on the Sao Francisco River to Belem in an effort to
reduce the condumption of costly petroleum products in Para state.

Tailandia settlers said in newspaper interviews that, after bathing in nearby
streams, members of their family fell ill, with some slipping into a coma and
dying days later. Some women reported spontaneous abortions, headaches, stomach
pains and swollen joints.

Ailments Linked to Herbicides

Press reports suggested that the use of the herbicides Tordon 101 and 155,
manufactured by Dow Chemical, was to blame for the deaths and ailments.

But the company's Brazilian subsidiary said in a statement last week that the
accusations were "not only unfounded but, from a toxicological standpoint,
implausible." It also said that the herbicides had been approved for use in
Brazil and were not harmful.

Brazilian newspapers suggested that Agent Orange, a defoliant used in the
Vietnam War, was sprayed illegally in early 1982 in the Tailandia area, which is
130 miles south of Belem and some 60 miles northeast of the Tucurui
hydro-electric dam on the Tocantins River.

Dow Chemical, which was one of nine companies to supply Agent Orange during the
Vietnam War, denied that it had sold the product in Brazil.

Brazil's Secretary of the Environment, Paulo Nogueira Neto, said in a telephone
interview:

"We cannot explain the violence of the poison. The indications are that
something much more serious happened than could be explained by the use of the
herbicides."

Brazilian Company to Be Fined

He said his department planned to fine Agromax, a company that had been hired by
Eletronorte, the northern power utility, to apply the chemical.

"We know at least that the product caused illness, polluted rivers and affected
small agriculture," he said. "The effects can still be seen in the vegetation
two years later."

In Belem, the state capital, officials have begun their own study, interviewing
settlers near the power lines.

"We are not investigating Tordon directly, but rather trying to find out what
happened in that area at that time," said Dr. Eliza Diana Sa of the Para
Department of Public Health. "The indications are that there was an ecological
disaster with human victims, but we don't know the extent. We know that some
problem affected flora, fauna and human beings."

Environmentalists have long been worried about the side-effects of herbicides
and other chemicals used in the Amazon rain forest.

Plan to Clear Reservoir Area

Last year, Mr. Nogueira protested plans to use defoliants to clear a
834-square-mile area that is to be flooded by the Tucurui reservoir. He said he
was assured that the defoliants would not be used.

Mr. Nogueira, who visited the Tailandia area last month, said the problems came
to light only recently because "the settlers are generally scared of the
Government."

"Eventually," he said, "two or three of them brought the problem to light."

So far, according to Para officials, the evidence suggests that the settlers
were not warned that herbicides would be used. Investigators said cans of Tordon
had been found in the communities, some abandoned without having been opened,
others used by the peasants as containers for water.

In its statement last week, the Dow Chemical subsidiary said the press reports
that Tordon was to blame were based on "speculation, not evidence."

Symptomatic of Malaria

Speaking of ailments described by the Para settlers, the company said: "Reports
of high fever, yellowing of the eyes and blood in the urine prior to death are
symptomatic of malaria and hepatitis."

Dow Chemical also dismissed speculation that Agent Orange had been used. It said
that this compound is composed of the chemicals 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T, and 2,4-D is
also an ingredient of Tordon 101 and 2,4,5-T of Tordon 155. It said that, in the
Tordon products, the substances had different molecular formations, and using
them together would not yield Agent Orange.

Complaints by Vietnam veterans of the long-term side effects of exposure to
Agent Orange led the United States Environmental Protection Agency to call
hearings last year on the cancellation of herbicides that include 2,4,5-T.

In October, Dow Chemical withdrew from the hearings and canceled United States
registrations of products containing 2,4,5-T. It said this was done for
commercial reasons and it reiterated that 3,4,5-T was not harmful.

A Dow spokesman in Sao Paulo said imports of Tordon 155 and 2,4,5-T ended in
late 1978 for commercial reasons, and Brazil was now being supplied with Tordon
101. He said tests carried out in Brazil had confirmed that the herbicide was
harmless.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
Heavy Combat Reported Near Cambodian Camp

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 133 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Feb. 23


Vietnamese troops and Cambodian rebels battled today near a major camp of the
non-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front, Thai military sources
reported.

They said the battle, which began Wednesday, was taking place about three miles
east of the camp. About 40,000 people live in the camp opposite the Thai village
of Sangae north of this border town.

Vietnamese forces fired more than 120 artillery, mortar and rocket shells to
support their advancing troops and moved 22 tanks and armored personnel carriers
into a village nine miles east of the camp, apparently preparing to capture the
base, the sources said.

Leaders of the front told reporters at the border that 500 Vietnamese soldiers
had captured their base at Prey Padao, seven miles north of the main camp, two
days ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
Campaign Diplomacy

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 799 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 23


Both the President and his opponents have worked out the ground rules for this
year's campaign diplomacy. Although each side will huffily deny collusion, these
eight precepts have been agreed to:

1. Get right with peace. For Mr. Reagan, this means implanting the adjective
"conciliatory" in every story about his previously confrontational foreign
policy; instead of heaving rotten tomatoes at the Evil Empire, he now
characterizes as "very fruitful" he funereal Chernenko-Bush meeting. For the
Democrats, getting right on the peace issue means dissociation from the
freezenik extreme while subtly pressing the theme of a need for "a safer world."

2.Submerge your national security adviser. In the Kissinger-Brzezinski Era, all
candidates adopted a proud apparatchiks-up-front posture; today, these advisers
are again banished to basements for fear their intellectual baggage will weigh
down the campaign. A Mondale Presidency would probably bring back David Aaron,
bete noire of the hawks in the Carter years, which is why he is nowhere to be
seen; Mr. Reagan's adviser is the dour, tight-lipped Robert McFarlane, whom the
President referred to in his winter press conference as "bubmafullln."

3.Set sail for summits. Democrats say that the funeral was an opportunity
missed, and promise a quick personal bridge to foreign leaders, with Mr. Mondale
assuring us he knows exactly where the hot line is. In April in Peking, Mr.
Reagan will observe profoundly "that really is a Great Wall"; in June, he will
attend a London economic summit meeting at which the word "disarray" will be
banned, and at September's U.N. gathering in New York, the Ron-Kon show will
open.

4.Stay very much in touch. Democrats will strain to show how deeply immersed
they are in the intricacies of foreign affairs, in contrast to what they will
portray as an uninterested, casually informed, don't-bother-me-at-naptime
President. In response, Mr. Reagan's spokesman will let it be know that he is
awakened every morning at 3:30 A.M., where he can be found still at his desk in
the Ova Office, for briefings on such matters as suspicious dolphin leaping in
the Strait of Hormuz, barroom brawls between Cap and George, etc. (How did
Bechtel ever make a profit?)

5.Make politics begin at the water's edge. Because the deficit is Dullsville,
Democrats will concentrate on the lack of a single foreign policy achievement
and the loss of U.S. lives in the Mideast to no avail. Mr. Reagan will all but
hold the Republican convention in Grenada, and will contrast his hardly
noticeable change of disposition of troops from land to sea to the straw man of
a "bug-out" supposedly recommended by his opponents.

6.Second terms need second terminology. Mr. Reagan changed the SALT talks to the
Start talks and the Camp David Accords to the Sept. 1 plan. (On the domestic
side, the old talk of balanced budgets has changed to the need for a "down
payment" on the deficit.) Similarly, U.S. troops called "men" and "personnel" in
defense budgets became "American boys" when under fire. In the reach for a
second term, the criticism once leveled at Mr. Carter for vacillation and
retreat has now been changed to an explanation of the need for redeployment,
reconcentration and "a move to a little more defensible position." Such
cold-turkey treatment given to hawkish junkies causes redeployment symptoms.

7.Condition U.S. aid on taking U.S. advice. Mr. Reagan will thunder rhetorically
at politicians in El Salvador who impede human rights progress, thereby catering
to the U.S. political center in the area of comparative foreign policy success.
Democrats will blaze away at his inability to enforce prosecution of "right-wing
death squads," and will open a new front: since the U.S. is a party to the Camp
David accords, and since Egypt has chosen to renege on its commitments to Israel
and the U.S. after getting back Sinai, why should we continue to pour billions
into Cairo's coffers?

8.Never let freedom ring. Mr. Reagan restored our pride in the prompt and
purposeful application of power in the Caribbean but reminded us of the
limitations of the purpose-shifting, extended use of our military power in the
Mediterranean. In criticizing his current Middle East policy, which is not as
bad as his foolishly pro-Arab pre-1984 policy, Democrats run the risk of
striking that strident, McGovernite note of the self-righteous loser reminiscent
of the Vietnam era. Similar cries for national self-flagellation today would
lead to an electoral beating, because such hand-wringing plays into Mr. Reagan's
hands: don't mess with a sitting President standing tall.

Campaign diplomacy is to real diplomacy what Sally Rand was to Talleyrand: the
fans provide the tantalizing concealment, and there can never be too much zeal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV WEEKEND; Five Hours of 'Lace'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C, Page 24, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 732 words


TWO weekends ago, Channel 4 unveiled a mini-series based on Tommy Thompson's
best-selling novel "Celebrity." Last week, Channel 2 began unfolding Sidney
Sheldon's "Master of the Game." And now Channel 7 is brining forth Shirley
Conran's "Lace," a celebration of sex and money that runs for five hours, the
first three of which can be seen Sunday at 8.

It is not fashionable to speak of a "woman's novel," but if only for its
consistently unflattering portraits of men, "Lace" certainly tumbles into this
category. The story focuses on four women. Three of them met at the age of 16 in
a private school in Switzerland. The fourth is the daughter one of them had at
the time. The three girls banded together with a local doctor to hide the
identity of the real mother. All three would take care of the child, once they
were settled in their careers and could retrieve her from her caretaker parents.

But life is more complicated than that. The American student, Judy (Bess
Armstrong), later finds herself caught up in a demanding career as a writer,
which takes her from being a correspondent in Vietnam to starting a
celebrity-oriented magazine called Lace. Her British friend, Pagan (Brooke
Adams), takes to drink when a torrid affair with an Arab Prince (Anthony
Higgins) fails to evolve into a nice Angol-Saxon-style marriage, but she does
manage to marry a British aristocrat. And the French Maxine (Arille Dombasle)
marries the fabulously wealthy vintner and begins raising her own family.

Helping the women financially in the eary years is Maxine's worldly and dizzily
charming Aunt Hortense. She is played by Angela Lansbury, wrapped in gorgeous
costumes and a thick French accent. It is Hortense who receives word that the
neglected child has been killed in Hungary during a political uprising. Stunned,
the three friends drift apart.

But the viewer knows the child was not killed. After years in a concentration
camp, Lili (Phiebe Cates) excapes to become a model in sex magazines and a star
in pornographic movies. Poutily embittered, she sets out to discover the
identity of her real mother. Under one ruse or another, she gets them together
in a hotel suite, where the women, now in their late 30's, are confronted with
the question, "All right, which one of you bitches is my mother?" The line so
pleased the producers that it was repeated at least twice in the film.

In fact, Elliott Baker's script has eliminated some of the novel's excesses,
like the question of who is the father. Billy Hale makes the most of location
shooting in Britain, France, Spain and New York. But "Lace" remains basically
ludicrous.

'Fraggle Rock' Series Continuing on HBO

On Home Box Office these days, a new batch of "Fraggle Rock" episodes has
arrived. The weekly series, produced by Henson Associates and the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation, is a close and charming relation to Jim Henson's
renouned Muppets gang. The cast includes the gentle elderly Doc (Gerry Parks),
with his peculiar but adorable puppet dog, Sprocket. Behind Doc's workshed,
there exists a world of charming creatures called Fraggles, who spend most of
their time singingand dancing and good-naturedly getting in and out of scrapes.

Until now, the Fraggles have held center stage, while a group of tiny creatures
called Doozers have labored mostly in the background. This week, however, the
Doozers, who like to do nothing but work, come into their own. "All Work and All
Play" (which can be seen this afternoon at 4:30, tomorrow morning at 7:30, and
Sunday at 11:30 A.M. and 7:30 P.M.) takes us to Dome City, which Jerry Juhl's
script describes as "a high-tech, Aztec, Art Deco fantasy, like a space-age
condominium community with ramps, escalators and moving sidewalks, topped by a
geodesic dome." Done to minuscule perfection, it is really quite spectacular.

The plot features Cotterpin, a young Doozer who is about to undergo the Ceremony
of the Helmet, which will bring her into the Doozer working mainstream.
Cotterpin, though, is not keen on working all the time and wants to become a
Fraggle. The resolution is reached with the usual quota of musical numbers and
gentle observations about living, either in Fraggle Rock or the real world.
Meanwhile, Sprocket has decided that he wants to be a horse and has taken to
neighing instead of barking. "Fraggle Rock" remains completely endearing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. EVALUATES BATTLE LESSONS IN MIDDLE EAST

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


Military officers, starting to assess 18 months of experience in Lebanon, have
found that shelling by 16-inch guns on the battleship New Jersey was far less
effective than hoped, that a new device for spotting enemy artillery worked well
and that the venerable C ration may be a thing of the past.

The biggest problem, many officers here said in interviews, was that political
leaders did not carefully define the mission for the military, and thus that
mission was never fully understood down the chain of command and by the troops
in the field.

They said they also found that intelligence gathering and analysis were
inadequate, that the lack of good maps of Beirut impeded fighting there and that
accurate Soviet-made missiles may have made divebombing obsolete.

Some of the comments by the officers reflected the findings of the commission
headed by Adm. Robert L. J. Long, the retired officer who led an inquiry into
the truck bombing of the Marine compound in Beirut that took 241 American lives
in October, and similar Congressional and newspaper inquiries.



Hampered by Politics

The persistent theme that turned up in several days of conversations with
officers from the four services was that political considerations restricted
military operations on the ground, at sea and in the air.

The officers contended that political constraints interfered with the security
of the marines at Beirut International Airport, the fire control of naval guns
and the tactics in air strikes.

The training of Lebanese troops was hindered, they argued, because American
soldiers were unable to cope with local politics.

''The weapons,'' said a naval officer, ''were chosen by politcs.''

Perhaps the most successful new weapon tested in Lebanon was the Army's
Firefinder radar, which was designed to enable Marine artillery and naval
gunfire to knock out enemy guns and mortars quickly. It pinpointed the sites of
enemy guns and had marines firing back before the first incoming round hit the
ground.

The device has a phased-array radar that detects a projectile as its rises above
the horizon or a hill. It gauges the trajectory, passes that data to a computer
to determine the site of the gun and transmits that data to the artillery
fire-direction center. It tells the gunners where to aim and fire.

About 35 soldiers operated the radar at the airport, keeping it hidden. The Army
unit came from Fort Sill, Okla., headquarters for the artillery, and was
tailored for the Beirut mission. The radar is just being deployed in the Army.

The Secretary of the Navy, John F. Lehman Jr., said data from the Firefinder was
relayed to the battleship New Jersey. He suggested that the radar found targets
for the New Jersey's 16-inch guns that were more than 15 miles from the radar.

Defense Against Small Planes

A new 155-millimeter howitzer of the Marines also performed well in its first
time in battle, officers said. New ammunition increases the howitzer's range to
19 miles and makes it more accurate than World War II guns.

Putting the Army's shoulder-fired Stinger antiaircraft missile aboard ships as a
field expedient to shoot down small planes loaded with explosives on suicide
missions may have discouraged such attacks, officers said.

The Stingers were deployed on amphibious ships, supply vessels and older
frigates that lack new weapons for close-in defense.

Marine officers said ground forces had learned something about feeding troops
from the space program and airlines. When they went ashore in Beirut, the
marines were fed tinned C rations like those used in World War II, Korea and
Vietnam.

''But the M.R.E.'s have pushed out the C's,'' a Marine officer said. An M.R.E.
is a meal-ready-to-eat. Water is added to dehydrated food and it can be heated
or eaten cold. A new portable steam table also heats other meals on trays, like
those on airlines.

A modified helicopter, the CH-53, was used for the first time in hostilities and
carried 16 tons, double the load of older versions. It can lift the new 155-
millimeter howitzer and its basic ordnance.

Constraints on New Jersey

Beyond that, the officers said, were disappointments. At the top of the list
were the 16-inch guns of the battleship New Jersey. ''They scared the hell out
of everybody,'' one officer said, ''but we don't think they hit much of military
value.''

The problems were not in the guns or the ship but in the rules of engagement
that prevented gun crews from knowing what they were shooting at and what they
hit.

Those rules, intended to keep visible American participation in the fighting to
a minimum, precluded sending forward observers out on the ground or in
observation planes to spot targets and direct fire. Ground observers and
reconnaissance planes were also kept from seeing what had been hit. Only 15 to
20 percent of the targets were photographed, officers said.

Naval officers insisted that, under better conditions the guns would still be
useful. ''You don't get prisoners of war with guns,'' one naval officer said. He
alluded to an air raid in which two Navy planes were shot down with the death of
one flier and the capture of another.

Moreover, military officers and civilian officials have asserted that guns of
Syrian-supported forces stopped firing after salvos from the New Jersey and
other warships. They suggested the Army's radar was effective against artillery
even if not against targets such as ammunition depots or bunkers.

Soviet Missiles Improve

The rules of engagement dictated that air raids be conducted in daylight against
targets that could be seen, thus requiring divebombing to avoid killing
civilians and destroying homes near military targets.

But Navy fliers found that Soviet missiles had improved in accuracy since the
days of Vietnam. Navy attack planes crossed the coast of Lebanon at 20,000 feet,
went down to 10,000 feet as they headed for their targets and dived to release
bombs at 3,000 feet.

But they were met by a hail of Soviet missiles fired by Syrians that shot down
two planes and damaged a third.

Army officers said American soldiers training Lebanese troops found them fast
and willing learners. ''But you can't discount the religious thing that
happened,'' one officer said, speaking of the division between Moslems and
Christians.

''Our guys were just not prepared for that sort of thing,'' he said. American
soldiers pride themselves in being apolitical, but that often leaves them
baffled by the political roles of foreign armies.

In addition, intelligence gathering in Lebanon was unsatisfactory, the officers
said. They said commanders there and in the Pentagon had to rely on televised
and printed news reports, particularly on political developments.

They also said that military commanders in the field, accustomed to filing
terse, factual situation reports, often failed to include vital political
information. That led senior civilian officials to search elsewhere, including
news reports, for that information.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of U.S. military personnel leaving Beirut (page 4)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Letter: On Geopolitics Diplomacy Is a Better Battlefield

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 418 words


To the Editor:

In your Feb. 14 editorial ''The Empty Craters of Lebanon,'' you begin by saying
that ''Americans would do well . . . to sort out the lessons of the failure of
the Marine deployment in Lebanon.'' Then you proceed to cite various faulty
judgments by the Reagan Administration in that regard.

One general observation to be made is that the United States in its foreign
relations has too often of late used tactics that are grossly out of balance,
giving undue weight to the military factor. Notoriously, the military
establishment occupies a pre- eminent position in the American official mind.
The proclaimed justification for our massive arms buildup is that we are
readying ourselves to fight, if need be, a ''limited'' or all-out nuclear war
with the Soviet Union.

That war may indeed ensue, with each side destroying the other - and perhaps all
humankind in the process. But cogitating in that ideological framework has, on
occasion, impelled Washington to rely too much on the employment of military
force in international affairs, without due regard for the critical significance
of other elements.  Can the U.S.S. New Jersey determine the future of Lebanon?
Quite obviously not. In short, political factors beyond American control by
military means will frequently prevail, whether in Vietnam, the Middle East or
Central America; and we are at present winning no laurels for strategic acumen
in the geopolitical field.  There is also the economic component. Here, given
towering military budgets, the annual Federal deficit contributes generously to
a burdensome Federal debt that has topped $1.3 trillion. The unfavorable foreign
trade balance, already uncomfortably large and threatening to grow bigger in
1984, adds to the national economic distress. And, to top this all off, American
banks are deeply involved in the burgeoning international indebtedness of some
$700 billion - for much of which there exists no visible means of effective
amortization. The United States has a real ''window of vulnerability'' that
opens onto the field of geoeconomics.

Add to the strategic equation such geopolitical and economic components,

with

The lesson? Diplomatic skills and the promise of economic advantage are
generally more useful than MX missiles in advancing American interests
(embodying ''national security''), and both are currently in short supply.

O. EDMUND CLUBB New York, Feb. 14, 1984

The writer is a retired Foreign Service Officer.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

POLICE IN PEEKSKILL ARE CRITIZED IN VIETNAM VETERAN'S SUICIDE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 589 words


Police officers in Peekskill, N.Y., failed to supervise adequately a troubled,
suicidal Vietnam veteran who killed himself in their jail last December,
according to a report released yesterday by the Governor's office.

A Peekskill police sergeant saw the veteran, Karl Lerchenmueller Jr., attempt to
cut his wrist with a plastic coffee cup at 8 P.M. on Dec. 2, yet kept Mr.
Lerchenmueller locked in his cell, the report said. An hour later Mr.
Lerchenmueller hanged himself.

Police logs were then altered, making it ''extremely difficult'' to determine
precisely what happened, the Governor's report said.

The death of Mr. Lerchenmueller, who was arrested on a charge of disorderly
conduct while on a day pass from the Veterans Administration psychiatric
hospital in nearby Montrose, prompted investigations by the Governor's office
and the V.A. in Washington and caused an outcry among Vietnam veterans
organizations.

Prisoner Not Supervised


While the V.A. investigation, released two weeks ago, focused on problems in the
administration of the Montrose hospital, the Governor's investigation centered
on the state police, who had arrested Mr. Lerchenmueller, and the Peekskill
police, who had held him in their jail pending arraignment.

Among the key findings in the Governor's 21-page report were these:


- Mr. Lerchenmueller ''was not properly supervised by Peekskill police'' after
he had attempted suicide in the cell. Sgt. Harry Rice took the coffee cup from
Mr. Lerchenmueller but did not consider the action a serious suicide attempt,
the report said. The sergeant is quoted as saying in the report that it was an
effort to ''get attention.'' Sergeant Rice did not respond to telephone messages
left for him yesterday at Police Headquarters.


- After Peekskill Police Commissioner Walter Kirkland observed Mr.
Lerchenmueller's condition early in the evening, he ordered that the prisoner be
arraigned by a judge immediately or be released on his own recognizance. The
prisoner, who had a long history of suicide attempts, was in ''no condition to
be lodged in our cells,'' the report quotes Commissioner Kirkland as saying. Mr.
Lerchenmueller remained in jail.


- Surveillance cameras installed throughout the jail and intended to monitor
troubled inmates have not worked for three years.

2 Charged With Infractions


As a result of Mr. Lerchenmueller's death, Sergeant Rice and Officer Barry
Martin were charged with ''departmental infractions'' by the Peekskill police,
the report said. Sergeant Rice was charged with disobeying the Police
Commissioner's order to release Mr. Lerchenmueller, with failing to safeguard
the prisoner after he had tried to cut his wrist and with failing to report the
attempt to a superior.

While the charges against Sergeant Rice are pending, he is still working in his
same job as a jail desk officer, according to Peekskill Police Lieut. James
Nelson.  Officer Martin pleaded guilty to altering the police log, was
reprimanded and is still on the force, Lieutenant Nelson said.

The Governor's investigation found no wrongdoing by the state police, who had
arrested Mr. Lerchenmueller. Nor did it find any evidence that Mr.
Lerchenmueller had been beaten, as one of the other jail inmates had charged.

The Governor's report was also critical of the V.A. hospital. The director of
the hospital, Corydon F. Heard Jr., has announced he will retire April 14. The
V.A. investigation recommended he be relieved of his position.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPAIGN NOTES;
Bush Calls Grenada 'Proud Moment' for U.S.

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 136 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


Vice President Bush defended President Reagan's leadership today, saying Grenada
was ''a proud moment for this country.''

''Four years ago I really think it was fair to say there was in the country, in
the broader sense, a crisis, a crisis in leadership,'' he told the American
Soybean Association. ''Confidence in the future was at an all time low.''

''Today America really feels the future is bright,'' he said.

When Mr. Reagan took over, inflation was soaring and the ''legacies of Vietnam
and Watergate still haunted our own conduct of foreign policy,'' Bush said. He
said President Carter talked of ''paralysis, stagnation and drift.''

''When the President faced this crisis in Grenada,'' Mr. Bush said, ''he didn't
wait until we were taken hostage, he acted before the crisis became a
humiliation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NO MAJOR DISEASES CITED IN AGENT ORANGE SPRAYERS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 584 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


Veterans who sprayed the herbicide Agent Orange in the Vietnam War and sometimes
got doused in it are not suffering from an abnormally high rate of major
diseases but have some inexplicable health problems that must be watched, the
Air Force said today.

Among the problems found in the veterans or reported by them are unusually high
rates of benign skin cancers, liver disorders, minor birth defects in their
children, leg pulses that could be an early indication of hardening of the
arteries and fatigue, anger, fear and anxiety. Moreover, the death rate of their
offspring is far higher than normal.

In addition, the veterans generally think they are in worse health than a like
group of men who did not participate in the spraying project, the study showed.
It said these problems warranted further study.

Nonetheless, the results of the most exhaustive study yet conducted of
servicemen exposed to the herbicide were ''reassuring,'' the Air Force told a
Pentagon news conference. The herbicide contained the toxic substance dioxin,
known to cause cancer in laboratory animals.

No Dioxin-Related Ills


The study uncovered no cases of three ailments associated with dioxin:
chloracne, a severe skin disease, porphria cutanea tarda, a rare liver disorder,
and cancers of the soft tissues.

The Air Force compared the health of 1,045 of the 1,269 pilots and crew members
who sprayed the herbicide against a similar group who had not.

Noting the higher incidence of some diseases, a civilian who took part in the
study, the biomathematician Richard A. Albanese of the Air Force School of
Aerospace Medicine, said, ''A degree of concern is warranted.''

''I cannot account for such differences by chance; on the other hand, I cannot
explain their cause,'' he said.

In five of 13 areas of medical concern, Dr. Albanese said, airmen who sprayed
the herbicide had more health problems than the other group, but the Air Force
study said those problems tended to be minor.

'No Big Diseases'


''No early diseases, no big diseases, are showing up,'' said Maj. Gen. Murphy A.
Chesney, who added that he would be confident about using Agent Orange in
another war. ''It saved thousands of lives,'' he said,''and so far we've seen
nothing that makes us think we shouldn't have used it.''

More than 12 million gallons of the herbicide were sprayed in Vietnam to destroy
the jungle canopies that concealed communist forces. It was also sprayed to
destroy Viet Cong rice fields, but the chemical's use was ordered stopped after
miscarriages were reported among Vietnamese women who lived near the sprayed
areas.

High Infant Death Rate


One disquieting finding in the study was that there were 14 deaths within the
first 28 days of life in babies fathered by men who sprayed Agent Orange and
sometimes got soaked in it as against only four deaths for babies fathered by
men in the comparison group.  Representative Thomas Daschle, Democrat of South
Dakota, said a group of Congress members who were briefed privately on the
study's findings were told that scientists who reviewed the data had
''significant'' differences of opinion concerning what they meant.

John Terzano, Washington director of Vietnam Veterans of America, said: ''I
firmly believe this report substantiates what we've been saying all along: that
Vietnam veterans are at an increased risk of suffering adverse health effects as
a result of their exposure to herbicides in Vietnam.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'SPLIT SECOND,' A CRISIS OF CONSCIENCE

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 54, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 680 words


On a lonely West Side street a black policeman arrests a car thief, handcuffs
him and waits for his backup patrol to arrive. The thief, who is white, tries to
cajole the officer into releasing him, and after that approach fails he showers
him with a torrent of racial insults. Silently, the policeman listens, and we
can feel him bristling with years of suppressed rage. Finally, pushed past the
breaking point, he takes out his revolver and shoots the man through the heart,
turning off the stream of abuse.

So begins Dennis McIntyre's ''Split Second,'' an explosive new play dealing with
primal dramatic issues, using - and lifting - the familiar police genre to tell
a story about an individual facing a crisis of conscience. Presented by the
Amistad World Theater, the play is now running at the tiny Intar Stage 2. Mr.
McIntyre is the author of ''Modigliani,'' a study of artistic desperation, and
''Split Second'' is as different from that as one could imagine, except that
both are clearly the work of a gifted playwright. In addition, Mr. McIntyre, who
is white, is able to write perceptively about blacks in urban society.


The opening scene is stunning, and it is followed by a tautly connected series
of scenes in which the policeman faces an investigating officer, a friend on the
force, his wife and his father. At first he invents a cover story, and then
gradually confronts his guilt and tries to comprehend the reasons for, and the
implications of, his inexcusable act. He is torn between the polarities of truth
and pragmatism, self-justification and a desire for absolution.

We learn about his boyhood trauma, growing up in the shadow of a proud father, a
policeman of unflinching probity. Woundingly, he reminds his father how, from an
early age, he was indoctrinated with police lore and honor. ''At 11,'' he says,
''I was arresting every other kid on the block.'' A decade later, he was a
soldier in Vietnam. Skillfully, Mr. McIntyre gives us a compassionate portrait
of a man unable to live up to expectations of others. Two by two - son and
father, husband and wife, comrades in action - we hear about the stresses and
demands on the firing line, how an intelligent man has twisted himself into
knots and why he finally detonates.

As he did in ''Modigliani,'' the author has clearly made an exhaustive study of
his chosen environment and of the popular mythology that surrounds it. With
pungency and humor, he compares life in the station house with images of that
life on television. Much of the evening deals with role- playing, especially as
it refers to black men within a white infrastructure. Despite that opening
gunshot, the play never descends into melodrama, as it accelerates to its
conclusion with a ''Wozzeck''-like inevitability.

Under the astute direction of Samuel P. Barton, the Amistad actors have a
uniform sense of identification with their characters. In the central role, John
Danelle maintains his good-soldier facade even as he is assailed by doubt and by
a compulsion to confess; his is a subtle performance.


Each of the other characters sheds a different light on the central predicament.
As the demanding father, Norman Matlock has the authority of a saddle-sore
veteran. Stiff-backed and unyielding in retirement, he is unable to accept any
divergence from the letter of the law. Peter Jay Fernandez and Helmar Augustus
Cooper bring conviction to their roles as policemen, and Michele Shay as the
protagonist's wife rises to her moment as she challenges the equity of supposed
justice. In order to accept what ensues, one must believe that the thief
provoked his own death, and in his single scene Bill Cwikowski is perfect,
offering a scathing portrait of a low-life punk.

The production has a workshop simplicity, using a few interchangeable chairs and
tables. A detailed scenic design would add a firmer naturalistic base. ''Split
Second'' already has emotional depth. One of the evening's several surprises is
how a work of such excellence managed to elude all of our major institutional
theaters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John Danelle in role

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POPE WORRIED ABOUT ANTI-VATICAN REGIMES

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 594 words

DATELINE: ROME, Feb. 25


The Vatican has become increasingly concerned about what it sees as efforts by
governments to alienate Roman Catholics from loyalty to the church, according to
officials here.

Pope John Paul II expressed his preoccupation with the issue last Monday in an
address to a group of French visitors who are descendants of some of the 99
people put to death in Angers during the Reign of Terror because of their faith.
The 99 martyrs were beatified last Sunday.

Although John Paul did not name the countries to which he referred, the
circumstances that he described apply particularly to the situation of the
church in China.

Church officials also said they feared that Vietnam was undertaking a similar
effort to create a rift between Rome and its three million Catholics.

'World of the Persecuted'

The Pope urged the French visitors to reflect on ''the immense world of the
persecuted of all times, and above all of those who suffer today for their
faith.''

''Their case is different from that of the time of the French Revolution,'' the
Pope said. ''They begin always by accusing them of political failings, of a lack
of patriotism. They want to detach them from the church united with the Pope by
making them believe that they can continue to practice their faith in full
independence.

''They try to create a church cut off from the Apostolic See,'' he said, ''and
from the community of the Catholic communion. They want to force them into
compromises that will estrange them further. And in justice they have no
possibility of really defending themselves. God alone knows their number and
their sacrifice!''

The Pope is known to be deeply concerned about the fate of the Roman Catholics
of China, who since the Communist victory in 1949 have been cut off from the
Vatican and obliged to denounce it as a foreign, anti-Chinese conspiracy. Their
only legal worship is in churches that are controlled by the so-called Patriotic
Church, run by ordained priests who have openly rejected papal authority and
reject everything that the Vatican has done since 1949. The priests continue to
celebrate mass in Latin, for example, because they do not recognize the
innovations of the Second Vatican Council of 1965.

Concern About Vietnam

Church officials say they have received reports from Vietnam in recent months
indicating that Roman Catholic bishops there fear that the Government is
creating Catholic organizations under its control with the goal of alienating
Catholics from Rome.

The Pope's strictures were also read in Rome as applying to Czechoslovakia, the
East European nation whose church is considered to be the most hard-pressed by
its Government. The Czechoslovak Government has created an organization called
Pacem in Terris that priests are under pressure to join and that espouses views
that are closer to those of the Prague Government than those of the Vatican.

In the three cases, Vatican officials have voiced concern in private
conversations that the creation of church groups termed ''patriotic'' and more
or less openly antagonistic to the Vatican constitute an important step in
detaching them from the Pope's authority, as is already the case in China.

The Pope added to his condemnation of Communist policies a critique of what he
is known to consider the other side of the coin, a dropping off in religious
feeling and observation in the Western counties in which religion is free. He
said the example of the 99 French martyrs whom he beatified should lead
Westerners to question themselves.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEFOLIANT STUDY SETS OFF DEBATE

BYLINE: By KENNETH B. NOBLE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 33, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 891 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 25


Both sides in the continuing legal dispute over the effects of the herbicide
Agent Orange in the Vietnam War asserted today that an Air Force study
vindicated their opposing positions.

A spokesman for the Dow Chemical Company, a manufacturer of Agent Orange that is
being sued by more than 20,000 veterans and their families, said the study
provided ''overwhelming'' evidence that Agent Orange was not responsible for a
variety of diseases suffered by Vietnam era veterans.

An attorney for the veterans, however, said the higher death rates among infants
and the presence of liver and circulatory problems suggested the substance had
toxic effects.

At the same time two scientists, a biochemist at Harvard University and a former
Veterans Administration researcher who performed several Agent Orange studies
for the Government, questioned the methodology of the Air Force survey.



Findings of Study

The study, which was released Friday, said Vietnam veterans who were sometimes
doused with the herbicide showed higher rates of benign skin cancers, minor
birth defects in their children such as skin rashes and circulatory problems in
their legs, which could be an early indiction of hardening of the arteries.
Death rates of their offspring were also found to be far higher than normal.

But the study, which the Pentagon described as the first statistically valid
Government examination of the effects of herbicides, concluded there was no
evidence establishing that exposure to the Agent Orange was responsible for
those ailments.

The lack of a clear cause-and-effect relationship has frustrated Vietnam
veterans who have sought compensation for health problems they say are related
to the herbicide.

Moreover, the Air Force report uncovered no cases of three ailments associated
with dioxin, a highly toxic substance that contaminated some of the Agent Orange
sprayed in Vietnam. The ailments are chloracne, a severe skin disease; porphria
cutanea tarda, a rare liver disorder, and soft tissue sarcoma, a form of cancer.


Scientists Express Concern


Several scientists have challenged the findings of the Air Force study,
expressing particular concern about a finding that 14 infants fathered by men
who sprayed Agent Orange died within 28 days of birth, as against only four
deaths of babies fathered by men in a comparision group.

Alvin L. Young, a senior policy analyst in the Office of Science and Technology
Policy in the White House, expressed concern about what he called
''limitations'' in the methodology of the study. Mr. Young, who performed
several of the better known Federal studies of the Agent Orange for the Veterans
Administration, said, ''I can't quibble with the statistical analysis, but I
don't think the Air Force simply had enough time, because of the pressure to get
it out, to answer many of the questions that needed to be answered.'' As an
example, he cited the statistics on infant deaths.

Matthew Meselson, a professor of biochemistry at Harvard University, said the
study was flawed because it did not analyze the levels of dioxin in the people
under study. ''It is the only rational way to deal with the problem, and it's
never been done,'' he said.

Agent Orange was the name of a chemical defoliant used by the United States in
the jungles in Vietnam to deprive the enemy of cover. Millions of gallons of the
defoliant, made of a 50- 50 mix of the butyl ester of 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T, two
herbicides, were contaminated with TCDD, a dioxin that is one of the most toxic
substances known.

The study compared the health of 1,045 fliers who sprayed Agent Orange from
giant drums as they flew over Vietnam from 1962 to 1971 on a mission called
Operation Ranch Hand.

Garry Hamlin, a spokesman for Dow in Midland, Mich., said in a statement:
''Considering the 1,100 different health parameters studied, chance alone should
have resulted in more anomalies than were reported as characteristic of the
Range Hand group. While further investigation of Ranch Hand patterns is
warranted, the casual hypothesis implicating Agent Orange is not supported by
the study.''

Veterans Dispute Dow on Study


But lawyers for veterans who have sought compensation for their health problems
said the report strengthened their case.  David Dean, a lawyer representing more
than 20,000 veterans who are suing the manufacturers of Agent Orange, said the
Air Force study ''certainly doesn't hurt us.''

''Ranch Hand indicates significant increases with respect to liver and
circulatory problems, certainly with respect to certain types of cancer, and
indeed, most tragically, with certain types of birth defects,'' he said.

Dow is one of seven manufacturers of Agent Orange who are being sued in Federal
District Court in Brooklyn. The other defendants in the lawsuit, which is in the
pretrial stage, are the Monsanto Company; the Diamond Shamrock Corporation;
Uniroyal Inc; the T. H. Agriculture and Nutrition Company; the Thompson Chemical
Corporation, and Hercules Inc.

The companies contend that the trace amounts of dioxin in their product did not
harm soldiers in Vietnam.

Veterans suspect Agent Orange may have caused or contributed to such problems as
cancer, deformed children, stillbirths, miscarriages, loss of sex drive and
changes in personality.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS SEARCH FOR A WINNING ISSUE

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2726 words


WASHINGTON CLOSE your eyes, listen to what they're saying and you'd think it was
the G.O.P.

Good government, the Democrats are saying in New Hampshire, need not be big
government. It can be and should be cost-effective government.

Tax cuts, often a plank on Democratic platforms, are not on the agenda this time
around. Instead, several of the Democratic candidates are calling for tax
increases, spending cuts and a reduced Federal budget deficit - ''this
Administration's Vietnam,'' in the words of one of the eight on Tuesday's
primary ballot, Senator Gary Hart.

The dialogue of the campaign, like those of all recent elections, is already
heavily economic. But this time, it is a wholly different dialogue because the
party roles seem reversed.

Democrats, for example, have often been guilty of rampant spending, notably in
the 1960's when Lyndon Johnson balked at cutting butter from his Great Society
programs to pay for the guns of Vietnam. Yet four years after promising a
balanced budget in 1984, Ronald Reagan enters the campaign on the crest of a
$200 billion deficit, more than three times the size of those of any of his
Democratic predecessors.

Thus the Democrats this year find themselves plying the unfamiliar terrain of
their adversaries' rhetoric, and bearing, by default, the banner of fiscal
responsibility.

''This is a colossal role reversal,'' said John Glenn's policy director, Leonard
Bickwit, ''one of the greatest in American history.''

The deficit spenders today are Republicans, and deficit reduction is the
Democrats' No. 1 issue, ahead even of such perennials as ''fairness and equity''
in jobs and taxes and restraint in military spending. ''There is no way of
having healthy, long-term economics unless we bring these deficits down,''
candidate Walter F. Mondale said recently, conceding, as all the candidates
have, that deficit reduction means that the first years of a Democratic
Presidency could be years of sacrifice.

And nearly all the candidates' other proposals are linked to paring that deficit
with the result that there is more unity over the issues in the Democrats' 1984
campaign than in any election since Watergate. On only one major issue -
protectionism in trade - are the men in New Hampshire widely divided, and trade
is the only issue that is not directly linked to tackling the deficits.

Two candidates, Mr. Mondale and Senator Alan Cranston, fully endorse ''domestic
content'' legislation, the bill before Congress requiring that most of the cars
sold in the United States be made in the United States, and four oppose it. Two,
Senator Glenn and Jesse Jackson, say they support it but with little enthusiasm.

The deficit, understandably, is not an issue that the Democrats are entirely
comfortable with. After all, their party has been historically predisposed
toward deficit spending. But more important, politically, the deficit does not
appear to be an issue to stir the blood of the electorate. It does not seem to
offer the ringing impact that wins elections.


MOST troubling for the candidates, they can offer only the specter of what might
happen, not what is happening. President Reagan asks the electorate if it is
better off than it was four years ago, and despite rumblings in the stock market
and elsewhere, it is a failsafe question.

The economy is still expanding strongly, more strongly as the election year
begins than even the White House expected. Inflation has plunged from 12.4
percent in 1980 to the 4 percent level currently, and interest rates have
dropped to half their peaks of 1980. Take-home pay is up since Mr. Reagan was
elected, and unemployment, while higher than it was when Jimmy Carter left
office, is still down sharply from the 10.8 percent peak of the recession.

Certainly some harbingers of another severe recession have sprouted of late, in
the plunge of the Dow, in incipient signs of rising prices, in the new shakiness
of the high-valued dollar, in stubbornly high interest rates. ''But how do you
convince people we're on a very dangerous course?'' asks Charles L. Schultze,
who was President Carter's chief economic adviser, and is now the dean of
Democrat economists here and a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. ''We
have to try to couch it in the best political rhetoric,'' he said. ''My guess is
there's a key somewhere to selling it.''

But the deficit is a difficult issue as well because Democrats, if hard on
deficits now, have often been identified with deficit spending. They still
endorse the Keynesian, pump-priming sort to ease the trauma of recessions and
generally support Government entitlement programs, like Social Security,
Medicare and Medicaid, that started small but are now the biggest component of
the budget.

All of which leaves them exposed to the mockery of President Reagan, who at his
news conference Wednesday night labeled the Democrats ''born-again budget
balancers.''

''Roughly for 50 years,'' said Mr. Schultze, ''we were the party that felt that
an additional role for the Government was needed in various areas - education,
income security, health care for the poor, environmental control and so on. Now
there's a sense of 'Enough! We don't want the Government any bigger.' Jimmy
Carter was the first to face this. So the problem is, how do you manage, with
sympathy, understanding and compassion, the realization that the Federal
Government is not going to get any bigger?''


''THE new President's first order of business, is going to be a great deal of
damage repair,'' said George L. Perry, a colleague of Mr. Schultze's at the
Brookings Institution and one of a large, loosely organized group of economists
from whom the Mondale camp seeks counsel. ''He is going to have to put together
a budget that is in shambles,'' Mr. Perry said.

Candidate Reagan is indeed vulnerable on the budget and the deficit. He calls
the deficits ''unacceptable,'' and he ordered Congress and the Administration
together to negotiate a $100 billion reduction on deficits over three years,
beginning with the new, fiscal year 1985 budget. But the Democrats have
challenged his sincerity, because he has balked at tax increases and cuts in
military spending, which the Democrats see as the two richest sources of deficit
cuts.

''I'm encouraged by knowing that the American electorate is made up of grownups,
that the country has been on a $200 billion credit card spree and that Ronald
Reagan has no proposals to solve it,'' said Ann Lewis, political director of the
Democratic National Committee.

Beyond that, the issue of deficits - how they happened, how to deal with them,
how serious a threat they represent - has sorely split the Reagan
Administration, confusing its efforts to fashion a consistent position on the
issue.

The Feldstein-Volcker-Stockman encampment of conventional conservatives is
aroused by the deficits while the Treasury-White House faction of supply-siders
is more inclined to believe that much of the problem will subside with a
continuing economic recovery.

Given the Democrats' history of generous spending, critics inevitably wonder
whether a Democratic Administration would actually propose, and a Democratic
Congress actually vote, the legislation to fulfill the candidates' campaign
prescriptions for reducing deficits. Among voters, Senator Ernest F. Hollings
said last year, ''The definite perception is, 'Ye gods, this fellow's got a $200
billion deficit, but if we let Tip O'Neill and Cranston and Mondale and Hart and
that crowd get back in there, there'll be $400 billion deficits.' ''

Former Vice President Mondale, in part because of his position as the
front-runner, has come under the harshest scrutiny on those grounds. While
cutting such major weapons programs as the B-1 bomber and the M-X missile, his
fellow campaigners say he would refill the gap and then some with the price of
his promises to special-interest groups. ''We don't want the interest groups to
rob us of our party,'' Senator Hollings said during a campaign stop in Iowa.

All the Democratic candidates deal with the deficit in part with tax increases,
first on higher incomes. But of the eight candidates, Mr. Mondale would be the
harshest, eliminating the third year of the Reagan cuts on incomes over $60,000
and adding a 10 percent surtax on incomes over $100,000. Senator Hart is nearly
as harsh with a proposal to limit the third-year cut to incomes under
approximately $50,000.

''That's demogogic and dangerous,'' said Herbert Stein, President Nixon's chief
economist, a fellow at the Republicans' think tank, the American Enterprise
Institute, and a writer and teacher at the University of Virginia. One of
Washington's severest critics of Reaganomics, Mr. Stein advises looking instead
to John Glenn. ''He offers the more responsible solution - tax increases across
the board.''

The unity of the Democrats on reducing deficits and on many of the methods
they're proposing to make the reductions is widely attributed to the efforts of
the 70-member House Democratic Caucus, chaired by Gillis W. Long of Louisiana.
For two years, one day and sometimes two days a week, 20 to 25 of the members,
among them Congressmen who have become senior participants in the campaigns of
Walter Mondale, Gary Hart and John Glenn, met over sandwiches in the Longworth
House Office Building to redefine the party's goals after the dissension of the
Carter years and the election of Ronald Reagan.


THEIR 90-page report, published

last month under a baby blue

cover with the bell-ringing title of ''Renewing America's Promise,'' listed the
party's objectives for the decade. No. 1, of 8, was ''attacking the Federal
budget deficits.'' All the others - including simplification of the tax code,
containment of health- care costs, rebuilding the nation's infrastructure of
highways, ports and sewers, and bringing labor, management and Government
together to revitalize the country's industrial base - are showing up now on the
various candidates' platforms.

''When you look at this book,'' said Alvin From, executive director of the
caucus, ''you're looking at the future of the Democratic Party.'' It is a
partisan boast, but the ''blue book'' has become the standard reference on party
policy in the political offices of Washington.

For a while last year as the candidates were maneuvering toward the campaign,
they and the caucus thought they spotted a salable idea in industrial policy. In
its more ambitious form, the Government would create a new agency and a publicly
financed bank to direct the country's industrial growth.

But the appeal of industrial policies subsided, as its advocates feared it
might, not only as the recession ended, but also because of the objections of
pennywise Democrats who argued that the marketplace could do the job better.
''Industrial policy is dead in the water,'' said Mr. From. ''Or certainly the
bank, which many people see as the key to it, is dead in the water.'' Most of
the candidates now limit their industrial policy proposals to improving the
dialogue between labor, management and Government to face the challenge of
foreign competition in American markets. Some, like Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart,
would go a little further, with aid to education and research. Only George
McGovern would actually open Government banks.

Significantly, Senator Hart, the candidate most identified with such
''neo-liberal'' themes as industrial policy, proposes to deal with the fading
skills of workers in basic industries with a program in which the Government
would have only an incidental role. Employers and their workers would make
voluntary contributions to a pension plan of sorts, one to finance retraining
for workers who lose their jobs in shrinking industries.

Entitlements, however, pose the stiffest test of the Democrats' campaign
rhetoric because the entitlement programs - Social Security, Medicare for the
elderly, Medicaid for the poor, food stamps, nutrition programs - strike at the
bedrock of Democratic theology, the issue of ''fairness.''

Most of the candidates would leave Social Security as is as a result of last
year's reforms. But cautiously, the candidates say they would attempt to curb
the growth of spending for Medicare and Medicaid by curbing the overall rise in
health care costs.

Eisner


The Economy: What the Democratic Candidates Want.

MONDALE:



* Cut deficit by more than half of Reagan's 1988 projected levels.


* Biggest defense cuts; kill B1 bomber and MX missile; reduce ''procurement
waste and overcharges.''


* Contain health care, and medicare costs.


* Contain cost of farm support programs.


* Corporations and wealthy individuals to pay ''their fare share'' of taxes;
individuals making more than $60,000 a year lose last 10-percent cut of Reagan's
three-year tax reduction program; those with incomes over $100,000 pay 10
percent surtax; enact 15 percent minimum corporate income tax.


* Supports domestic content legislation.


* Endorses limited industrial policy to boost competition.


* Restore $10 billion in Reagan cuts from education, health, nutrition,
environmental protection programs.  HART:




* Cut B1 bomber, MX missile, chemical weapons, nuclear aircraft carriers from
military budget.


* Impose income tax surcharge on corporations and the wealthy.


* Reform Medicare and Medicaid to contain costs.


* Opposes domestic content legislation.


* Rehabilitate nation's highways, bridges, water systems, sewers and ports.


* Opposes federal industrial policy; business, labor, management and private
capital to facilitate growth of key industries.  GEORGE MCGOVERN



*

* Cut defense spending 20 to 25 percent; name Chrysler Chairman, Lee A. Iacocca
Defense Secretary.


* Rebuild nation's highways, sewers, mass transit, bridges with defense savings.


* Overhaul tax system; adopt a flat tax.


* Transfer Medicare and welfare programs to Federal Government; require states
to use savings for primary and secondary education.


* Provide low-interest, subsidized loans for new home buyers.


* Opposes domestic content legislation.


* Create industrial development banks at state level.  CRANSTON



* Cut the MX missile (the ''missile without a mission''), chemicals weapons,
Reagan's ''Star Wars'' defense systems.


* Eliminate loopholes, tax shelters and other tax avoidance schemes.


* Raise taxes to offset third year of the Reagan cuts.


* Supports domestic content legislation.


* Require Federal Reserve Board to foster economic growth.  GLENN:



* Cut projected $300 billion 1988 deficit in half.


* Raise $129 billion in taxes by 1989 with surtaxes on individuals and
corporations solely to reduce deficit.


* Slight cuts in Reagan defense spending; cut annual increase to 6 percent real
growth.


* Contain cost of Medicare and Medicaid; No change in Social Security.


* Co-sponsor of Senate's domestic content bill but unenthusiastic.


* Opposes large industrial policy agency and development bank.  RUBIN ASKEW



* Cut annual growth of defense spending to 5 percent; eliminate B1 bomber, MX
missile and chemical weapons.


* Repeal 3rd year of tax cut; maintain 50 percent maximum individual tax rate
and depreciation tax breaks for industry.


* Limit annual growth of entitlement programs, except those for the poor, to 2
percentage points below growth rate of Consumer Price Index.


* Opposes domestic content legislation.


* Opposes industrial development agency.  JACKSON



* Cut defense spending 20 percent; eliminate ''fraud, waste and overruns.''


* Require industry use tax cuts and depreciation allowances to create new jobs
and plants, not in take overs.


* Opposes protectionism generally, but short-term domestic content program might
be necessary to help auto industry.


* Supports an industrial policy, but no large new agency.


* Contain health care costs.


* Reduce farm subsidies.  ERNEST HOLLINGS



* One-year freeze on federal tax and spending increases.


* Limit defense spending increases to 3 percent real annual growth.


* Close tax loopholes.


* Supports domestic content legislation but unenthusiastic about it.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of the nine Democratic candidates

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD

BYLINE: By Henry Giniger,Milt Freudenheim and Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 289 words


The Pressure

Rises on Help

For El Salvador

Officials in Washington had more than one Presidential election campaign on
their minds last week. With voting in El Salvador on March 25, Secretary of
State George P. Shultz said the Salvadoran Government was running low on weapons
it might need to combat ''increased guerrilla efforts to disrupt'' the
elections. If Congress doesn't speedily approve the Administration's $178.7
million supplemental aid request, he said, Presidential powers and legal
loopholes might be used to keep the weapons flowing.

Helicopters, for example; this month the Salvadoran Army has lost three, two
last weekend with the loss of 28 soldiers. That has left eight still flying out
of 21 helicopters purchased with American aid.

Democratic senators accused the Administration of repeating the mistakes of
Vietnam. It was ''losing the war for the hearts and minds of people,'' Senator
J. Bennett Johnston of Louisiana said. Blowing up bridges and power stations as
the rebels have done, Mr. Shultz replied, was not winning Salvadoran hearts and
minds.

Several senators insisted Salvadoran aid must be tied to progress reports on
human rights, a Congressional demand vetoed recently by President Reagan. Mr.
Shultz said the Administration agreed on the need to end death-squad activities
and improve the Salvadoran justice system. But when Senator Nancy L. Kassebaum,
Republican of Kansas, said Congress should be the judge of the progress, he
groaned.

In San Salvador, meanwhile, Roberto Ismael Ayala, a conservative politician, was
killed by gunmen outside his home. He was the fourth conservative legislator
slain since the 60-member Constituent Assembly was sworn in two years ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NAVY LIMITS ITS GUNFIRE ON BEIRUT TO RETALIATION

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26


Spokesmen for the Department of Defense said today that, under the rules of
engagement governing United States naval gunfire and air strikes in Lebanon,
attacks were limited to firing back after hostile fire had been aimed at
Americans.

But the spokesmen acknowledged that the source of almost any fire into Beirut
from Syrian forces or from areas controlled by Syrian allies in Lebanon would be
subject to United States naval gunfire or strikes by planes from aircraft
carriers.

The circumstances under which naval guns and planes can be used by the United
States fleet of about 25 warships off Lebanon have been intensely debated here
as the Lebanese Army has disintegrated.

Response to Hostile Fire

With an eye to the War Powers Act, Reagan Administration officials have said the
policy was to respond to hostile fire at American forces. But those officials
appear to have left open an interpretation of the policy permitting support for
Lebanese Government forces.

Officials here have said that because American diplomats, Marine guards, Army
trainers, and military assistance specialists are still in Beirut, any hostile
fire coming into Beirut could bring a response from American warships offshore.

In addition, senior officials have said specifically that United States forces
would respond if Syrian-backed Moslem militia forces tried to take the strategic
Government-held town of Suk al Gharb overlooking Beirut.

For the Administration to acknowledge that American forces would fire in direct
support of the Lebanese Army might stimulate even more debate over the War
Powers Act, Administration officials have suggested privately.

U.S. Support for Government

The Secretary of the Navy, John F. Lehman Jr., said in public recently that it
was ''no secret'' that the United States supported the Government of President
Amin Gemayel of Lebanon. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger ordered Mr.
Lehman to retract that statement several hours later.

The Administration's policy has been criticized in Congress, largely by
Democrats who have expressed the fear that the United States would become deeply
engaged in full-scale hostilities like those in Vietnam.

With Marine combat troops leaving their posts at the Beirut airport for ships
offshore, that question seemed likely to be debated even more vigorously in
coming weeks - particularly during Congressional consideration of the
Administration's military budget for fiscal 1985.

A spokesman for the Defense Department said that the battleship New Jersey fired
16 rounds from her 16-inch guns earlier today at the source of hostile fire at
an unarmed F-14 Tomcat jet from the carrier John F. Kennedy. He said the plane
was on a reconnaissance mission.

The spokesman said the destroyer Caron had fired another 50 rounds from her
5-inch guns at the same targets. The spokesman would not say where the targets
were.

Plane Returns Unharmed

Attacks of this sort in the past have usually been directed at Syrian-held sites
outside of Beirut from which surface-to-air missiles have been fired at American
planes. A spokesman said the American jet returned to the carrier unharmed.

The spokesman declined to disclose what damage had been done, if any, to the
Syrian sites.

Other officials have said that shelling in Lebanon from the New Jersey's 16-
inch guns, the largest naval artillery in the world, had been ineffective,
largely because no spotters had been available on the ground or in the air to
direct fire.

The spokesman for the Pentagon said that the naval commander on the scene, Rear
Adm. Jerry O. Tuttle, had the authority under the rules of engagement to order
fire without referring to higher headquarters.

That appears to have been the case involving naval guns' responses to reported
shooting at American planes. The responses have been swift in those cases.
Military officers here said, however, that political sensitivities in Lebanon
had often made local commanders careful to check with higher headquarters or
with Washington before acting.



Saturday Shelling

On Saturday night, the Caron fired 90 five-inch shells at targets east of Beirut
in response to what a Defense Department spokesman in Washington said were two
separate artillery attacks against marines.

Today a State Department spokesman said the naval fire had been in response to
attacks on American military personnel serving as advisers to the Lebanese Army.

However, the initial reports of the Caron's shellfire Saturday night could not
be officially confirmed either in Beirut or Washington, even though the shelling
could be clearly heard in central Beirut. It was also reported by the state-run
radio, residents and Lebanese Army officials.

However, Michael I. Burch, the chief Pentagon spokesman, said initially that he
knew nothing of any naval gunfire off the Lebanese coast.

In Beirut, reporters' calls to the marine office went unanswered. A reporter's
effort to obtain information on the naval shellings from Ambassador Reginald
Bartholomew ended when the envoy hung up the telephone. It was also learned that
the United States Embassy press officer was in Cyprus during the shellings.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of battleship New Jersey

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Miami Cubans Object To Jane Fonda Visits

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 184 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Feb. 26


Publicity appearances by Jane Fonda at two Miami department stores were canceled
today because of a bomb threat and pressure from the conservative Cuban exile
community, department store officials said.

The actress and activist had been scheduled to appear at two stores in the
Burdines chain Wednesday to promote a new line of sportswear.

''Burdines was concerned about the safety of our associates and our customers,
and it has turned into a battle of political viewpoints,'' said Ted Shola,
operations manager for the Burdines store at Dadeland Mall, which was evacuated
Saturday because of the bomb threat.

''We've had numerous phone calls and we have to be concerned about safety,'' he
added. No bomb was found at the Dadeland store.

Dozens of Cuban-Americans had phoned the department store saying they agreed
with anti-Fonda commentaries broadcast since Thursday by Salvador Lew, general
manager of a Spanish-language radio station, WRHC.

He called Miss Fonda ''a leftist Communist,'' a ''poor patriot'' and charged
that Miss Fonda ''betrayed her country'' by visiting North Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 973 words


RIGHT IN HER SOUL. The Life of Anna Louise Strong. By Tracy B. Strong and Helene
Keyssar. 399 pages. Random House. $22.95.

SHE was a peculiarly American character, this stout, blustering woman from
Nebraska. A minister's daughter, born in a two-room parsonage on the prairie,
Anna Louise Strong inherited her family's restless, frontier spirit and its
radical, reformist zeal, and though history subjected her 19th-century optimism
to one disillusioning blow after another, she never gave up her belief that
change was possible, that a new and better world could be built here on earth.

Miss Strong's commitment to socialism - which she delineated in some 30 books
and hundreds of newspaper and magazine articles - would take her to the Soviet
Union, to China, to Spain and to Vietnam, and she would get to know Stalin, Mao
Zedong, Zhou Enlai and Che Guevara on firsthand terms. And yet, as the authors
of this solid, new biography observe, her soul always ''remained in America,
where she could find neither shelter nor peace.''


Written by Anna Louise Strong's great-nephew Tracy B. Strong and his wife,
Helene Keyssar, ''Right in Her Soul'' draws upon the writer's own voluminous
body of work as well as correspondence, 6,000 pages of F.B.I. files and
interviews with family and acquaintances. Though the authors point out that they
have tried ''to subordinate our own voices to that of Anna Louise,'' they also
attempt to put their subject's problematic personality and even more problematic
work into critical perspective.

If their narrative lapses, at times, into a lumbering chronology, a crisp
portrait of this formidable woman nonetheless emerges from beneath the
descriptions of itineraries, illnesses and fluctuating moods. In addition, a
reader comes away from ''Right in Her Soul'' with an appreciation of the
tumultuous political period in which Miss Strong lived and of the curious ways
in which ideology intersects with personal emotional needs.

Rude, lonely and willfully self-absorbed, Miss Strong once remarked that her
vaunted independence simply meant that ''there is nobody in all the world who
cares,'' and the sense of connection that a short marriage and a series of
flirtations - with such characters as Leon Trotsky, Mikhail Borodin and Zhou
Enlai - failed to supply was, in the end, provided by immersion in progressive
politics. Miss Strong wanted to make herself indispensable to the cause; and
when the Russians - and later, the Chinese - gave signs that their revolutions
could survive very well without her, she dropped her tough, professional image
and cried.  Behind Miss Strong's conviction that she could single-handedly help
to shape history lay a monumental ego and an absolute faith in the rightness of
her mission. As a student, write the authors, ''she confided to her diary that
Bryn Mawr was not as irreligious as she had previously feared, which
paradoxically made it less important that she be there.'' And as an adult, she
based many of her actions on ''the assumption that everyone around her had the
same feelings she had and was in unspoken harmony with her.'' ''The existence of
such a harmony, she said to a friend, 'is what God is - or could be.' ''


Socialism - a vision of a society ''where work and job and wages were public
matters'' - became Miss Strong's gospel, and she defended it with evangelical
fervor. There was a kind of innocence to her unquestioning commitment - Nym
Wales, Edgar Snow's wife, once called her a ''Red Riding Hood among Marxist
wolves'' - and in later years, her youthful idealism hardened into a willful
na"ivete. She suppressed whatever doubts she had about the Soviet purge trials,
the Nazi-Soviet nonaggression pact and the collectivization of Soviet
agriculture; and she portrayed Stalin as a cautious man who moderated his
party's excesses.

The fact that Soviet officials arrested and expelled Miss Strong from the
country in 1949, allegedly for ''spying activities'' - a move, the authors
imply, that was connected with the Stalinist bureaucracy's displeasure with her
pro-Chinese views - only heightened her desire to ingratiate herself with the
party. Like a spurned mistress groveling before her lover, she proceeded to
write a series of articles in which she declared, ''The U.S.S.R. carries the
great hope of mankind . . . as a mother carries a child toward birth.'' Until
the charges against her were dropped some six years later, however, she was
rebuffed, even insulted, by other party members. ''The more I kneel,'' she wrote
a friend, ''the harder they kick me. They love to hammer a supplicant. The more
I show love, the more vicious they get.''


Clearly Miss Strong's desperate need to be accepted by the party resulted, at
times, in moral hypocrisy - having been friends with Trotsky, she was quick to
denounce him as a traitor when he fell out of official favor - and in a
compromising of journalistic ethics. Though she built up a wide readership in
the United States, Europe and Asia, her writing, as the authors of ''Right in
Her Soul'' observe, tended to lapse into propaganda. She allowed Stalin to
''correct'' passages she had written about him and later took orders from Mao on
how best to convey the situation of the Communists in China.

''The people I really cared for,'' she said in 1950, ''on whose side I felt
myself to be fighting - they winced so if a single human weakness in the
U.S.S.R. were noticed. So I let my audiences pressure me into giving what I knew
was a partial picture.'' ''I told no lies,'' she went on, ''but I didn't tell
all the truth. And I still think this may be the correct procedure.'' With such
statements, Anna Louise Strong revealed herself not as a journalist, committed
to reporting the news, but as a passionate - and sometimes blind - evangelist
bent on remaking the world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Anna Louise Strong

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FACES AND MEMORIES FROM MCGOVERN'S PAST REAPPEAR IN NEW HAMPSHIRE

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: KEENE, N.H., Feb. 24


Their beards are sometimes flecked with gray now, and their arms often hold
small children. But their hearts have not lost the memory of a special moment in
their lives, George McGovern's campaign for President in 1972, a campaign that
was launched with a surprising second-place showing in the New Hampshire
primary.

Twelve years later, the political landscape of this state is filled with people
who got their start working for the former Senator from South Dakota. Some are
working for him again. Others have joined his rivals in Tuesday's primary,
particularly the Presidential campaign of Senator Gary Hart, the Colorado
Democrat who was Mr. McGovern's campaign manager in 1972. Many of them share, as
a legacy from their common experience, a sense that politics does make a
difference to individual lives, and one individual can make a difference in
politics.

''It was really the experience of a lifetime,'' recalled Dottie Lynch, who quit
her job to work for Senator McGovern 12 years ago and is now Senator Hart's poll
taker.  ''We lost so badly, but it was great fun. We were the baby boom
generation who protested the war and turned out to be right. That experience
gave us a great sense of efficacy and expanded our horizons. We developed
confidence in our ability to handle responsibility and big jobs.'' ''So many of
the campaign workers in all the campaigns came into politics in 1972 - it's
incredible,'' said Mr. McGovern, as he drove through the rain- speckled hills of
western New Hampshire on his way to deliver a speech here. ''I'm highly cheered
by that, even if only a fraction of them are in my campaign.''

Doubts About McGovern


Some of the old McGovernites backed other candidates long before their old hero
announced his decision to run. Others doubt that he can win this time and place
a top priority on defeating President Reagan.

''I was very happy McGovern got into the race, but I didn't think he had much of
a chance,'' said Betty K u s s m a u l , who supported him as a college student
in Boston and brought her infant son to hear him speak at Keene State College.
''My quandary right now is whether I vote for who might win, or whether I vote
for where my heart is.''

The memories of 1972 are not all warm and cheerful. John R. Kayser, a professor
of political science at the University of New Hampshire, said of Mr. McGovern,
''People see him nostalgically, but they also see him as a loser.''

But the 1972 campaign also left a powerful and positive imprint on many
supporters who felt they learned some important lessons, even in defeat. Joe
Grandmaison, who organized New Hampshire for Mr. McGovern and is now a political
consultant here, says he has a ''firm belief that by Election Day, a campaign
takes on the personal characteristics of the candidate.''

And what drew many McGovernites back to his cause this year were those personal
characteristics. Marshall Gordon, campaign coordinator for the Keene area,
emphasizes Mr. McGovern's ''general integrity,'' while Barry Crimmins, a
political satirist who sometimes appears at campaign rallies, admires the
candidate's ''guts and common sense.'' Dot Baytosh, a school administrator, said
after the Keene rally, ''We've missed him and the idealism he stands for.''

Love and Politics


Mindy and Ed Leek met 12 years ago at a McGovern headquarters in Chicago. Now
they live in Oregon, where he is a state Representative and she is a Democratic
Party official, but they put their careers on hold, and moved their small child
here, when Mr. McGovern asked them to work in New Hampshire.

''If I look back on my life, and could pick one experience to relive, it would
be the '72 McGovern campaign, without a doubt,'' Mrs. Leek said as the
telephones jangled in the Nashua storefront that serves as state headquarters.
''I think being involved in that campaign made me realize that the system was
accessible.''

Mr. McGovern says this sense of excitement and achievement was bred by the
singular nature of the 1972 campaign. ''We came to prominence,'' he noted, ''on
the transcendent issue of the decade, the war in Vietnam. And we won over what
was perceived as the established political structure. We built a new political
process out of people who had never had political power.''

Nancy Richards-Stower, who also met her husband on the campaign trail, remembers
organizing antiwar rallies and feeling ''scared and frustrated by the Richard
Nixons of the world, who told us we were unpatriotic.'' It was Mr. McGovern, she
said, who made her feel good about herself.

''Here was this United States Senator saying, you kids are right,'' she said.

If the campaign left some workers disillusioned, it only encouraged the young
woman, who is now head of New Hampshire's Human Rights Commission and state
chairman of the McGovern campaign.

''It made me dig in my heels and sent me off to law school,'' said Mrs.
Richards-Stower, who is now 33 years old. ''I knew I was going to be involved in
politics.''

Today, as a practicing lawyer and practicing mother, Mrs. Richards- Stower feels
even more strongly about political activism than she did as a student 12 years
ago. ''I want this country to be a positive experience for my son,'' she said,
''and not something he has to fight against.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PAROCHIAL AID QUESTION TO BE DECIDED

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1272 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 27


The Supreme Court, continuing its active re- examination of the permissible
boundaries between church and state, agreed today to rule on the
constitutionality of a Michigan program of public aid to parochial schools.

The case is an appeal by the state on behalf of the Grand Rapids school
district. The district's program, under which public school teachers teach
remedial and enrichment courses on a regular basis in the parochial schools,
''shared time,'' was declared unconstitutional by two lower Federal courts.

Under the program, the district leases classrooms in some 40 parochial schools.
Religious articles are removed from the classrooms while the ''public school''
classes are in progress. The 11,000 students who attend the classes are
designated ''part- time public school students,'' and they count as part of the
public school district's enrollment for purposes of state financial aid.



Challenge by Taxpayers' Group

The program was challenged by a group of Grand Rapids taxpayers. The Federal
District Court in Michigan ruled that the program was a direct benefit to
religious education that violated the Constitution's prohibition against the
establishment of religion. Upholding the district court, the United States Court
of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit observed that ''the separation of church and
state would be effectively ended in the field of public education'' if such an
arrangement were regarded as constitutional.

In its Supreme Court appeal, Michigan argued that the program met the district's
obligation to ''reach out to all students in the community.''

The case, Grand Rapids v. Ball (No. 83-990), will be closely watched for signs
of shifts in the Supreme Court's thinking on the parochial aid issue. Votes in
similar cases in the last few years have been close. Last year, the Court
upheld, by a vote of 5 to 4, a Minnesota program of state tax deductions for
school expenses that benefitted parochial school parents almost exclusively. In
the Grand Rapids case, the court of appeals acknowledged that ruling but
distinguished it on the ground that while the Minnesota benefit was at least
theoretically available to all parents, the Grand Rapids program was entirely
for the benefit of the religious schools.

The Court also dealt with these matters:

Agent Orange

The Court refused a request by the manufacturers of the chemical defoliant known
as Agent Orange to block a trial scheduled to begin May 7 in Federal District
Court in Brooklyn.

The five manufacturers are defendants in a large-scale lawsuit brought by
Vietnam veterans who charge that their exposure to the chemical during the war
caused a variety of physical ailments in themselves and their offspring.

The manufacturers were appealing Judge Jack B. Weinstein's definition of the
plaintiff class, which could eventually number well over 1 million. Judge
Weinstein ruled in December that anyone who served in Vietnam from 1961 through
1972 in the armed forces of the United States, Australia or New Zealand and who
was injured by exposure to Agent Orange or other herbicides was eligible to join
the lawsuit. He also extended eligibility to spouses, parents and children who
were ''derivatively'' injured.

The five defendants are the Diamond Shamrock Chemicals Company, the Dow Chemical
Company, Hercules Inc., the Monsanto Company, and the T. H. Agriculture and
Nutrition Company. In Diamond Shamrock v. Ryan (No. 83-1174), they argued that
the class was too broadly defined because the plaintiffs came from different
states and countries and did not have ''common claims.'' They also argued that
Judge Weinstein erred in not requiring the plaintiffs to do everything possible
to notify individually all the veterans who might be eligible. The judge
permitted notice through public service announcements, governors' offices, and
other relatively inexpensive techniques.

Aging Pilots

The Court agreed to decide whether Trans World Airlines violated the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act by refusing to permit 60-year-old pilots to
transfer to a different job.

Under Federal Aviation Administration rules, commercial pilots must stop flying
at age 60. Flight engineers, who occupy the third seat in the cockpit, do not
come under that rule. T.W.A. permits pilots to transfer to the flight engineer's
job if they do so before age 60, but requires 60-year-old pilots to retire if
they have not made the switch.

A group of pilots, supported by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,
sued both the airline and their union, the Air Line Pilots Association, on the
ground that the policy violated the Federal law that prohibits forced retirement
before age 70. They won in the United States Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit, which ordered the airline to pay double back wages on the basis of its
''willful'' violation of the pilots' rights.

The airline's appeal, T.W.A. v. Thurston (No. 83-997), challenges both the
finding of the violation and the court's refusal to assess the union for back
pay.

Ukrainian Boy

The Court refused to step into the long-running case of Walter Polovchak, the
Ukrainian boy who ran away from home rather than go back to the Soviet Union
with his parents. The parents had immigrated to Chicago but decided, when Walter
was 12 years old, to return to the Ukraine.

The Illinois juvenile court system assumed control over Walter as a ''minor in
need of supervision,'' an action that was found by the state's appellate courts
to have been improper. Last May, the Illinois Supreme Court ruled that Walter,
now 16 years old, was to be returned to his parents' custody if they ever
returned for him.

Both the state and the boy, through his lawyers, filed Supreme Court appeals
from that ruling (In re Polovchak, No. 83-845). Both argued that Walter's
constitutional right to due process was violated by the court's continuing
supervision of him. It would be a ''permanent blot on the record of this
country's judicial system,'' the state's appeal said, if the boy were returned
to the Soviet Union against his will.

Because it is unlikely that the parents will return to the United States before
Walter turns 18, the age of majority in Illinois, the latest legal developments
may have little practical effect. The Carter Administration granted the boy
political asylum, and the Reagan Administration gave him permanent resident
status.

Welfare Payments

The Court agreed to hear an appeal by the Federal Government from a decision of
the Federal appeals court in California on the calculation of benefits under the
Aid to Families with Dependent Children program.

Under Federal law, the amount of the welfare grant is determined by comparing a
family's income with a ''standard of need'' as set by each state. The question
in Heckler v. Turner (No. 83-1097) is whether money withheld for taxes is to be
considered part of the family's income in calculating the welfare grant.

The court of appeals ruled that the withheld money should not be counted because
it is not available to the family and because counting it as income would
discourage people on welfare from seeking work.

In its appeal, the Government told the Supreme Court that despite the apparent
effect of counting withholding as income that was the intent of Congress when it
tightened welfare eligibility in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981.
Congress was aware, the Government said, that the new law would permit a welfare
family to retain only about 20 percent of its earned income, compared to the
previous 50 percent, but chose nonetheless to enact the new standard.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 986 words


A TIME OF PASSION.  America 1960-1980.  By Charles R. Morris. 270 pages.
Cornelia & Michael Bessie/Harper & Row. $17.50.

ONE caricature of the years from 1960 to 1980 might go as follows: President
Kennedy sought to get America moving again after the doldrums of the Eisenhower
era, but he was killed before he had a real chance to try. His successor,
President Johnson, pushed what he had begun beyond reasonable limits, which led
to upheaval, violence and President Nixon, who overdid things so much that the
country turned to Jimmy Carter, who underdid things. In the process of it all,
the nation grew fed up with Government and elected Ronald Reagan, who promised
to do away with it. The rest is whatever the arms race and the Federal deficit
may have in store for us.

I offer this little summary not because of whatever truth it may contain, but
only to demonstrate how very differently Charles R. Morris sees things in his
latest book, ''A Time of Passion: America 1960-1980,'' which analyzes the entire
country in the way that his much-respected 1980 study, ''The Cost of Good
Intentions: New York City and the Liberal Experiment - 1960-1975,'' dissected
New York City's fiscal crisis. Mr. Morris, whose experience has ranged from work
in city government to international banking, does not set out primarily to
''confound left/right ideologues,'' as he puts it at one point. But a series of
shocks to people of liberal and conservative persuasion is not the least of what
this discerning and articulate book has to offer.


For instance, he doesn't see the Presidency of John F. Kennedy as representing
something fresh after the sterile years of the Eisenhower Administration.
Instead, in his view, Mr. Kennedy ''was the culmination of a fifty-year
tradition of expansive pragmatism'' that had its roots in the enormously popular
ideas of John Dewey and Henry James. And far from representing an end of
ideology, as Mr. Kennedy and a number of intellectuals around him saw his role,
he enthroned the pragmatic approach to problem-solving and thereby elevated
method to an end in itself. By luck, the economy turned upward while Mr. Kennedy
and his advisers thought they were fine-tuning it. The effect was to reinforce
the Administration's rationalistic arrogance and get it into the quagmire of
Vietnam.

For another instance, Mr. Morris doesn't see Richard M. Nixon's Presidency as
the exercise in cynical villainy that liberals and intellectuals have depicted
it. Mr. Morris grants that Mr. Nixon was mean-spirited and self-destructive as
Chief Executive and that he brought Watergate upon himself. But, according to
Mr. Morris's analysis, Mr. Nixon was more genuinely concerned with offering
direct help to the social and financial underdog than was the Administration of
Lyndon B. Johnson with its elaborate program for curing poverty through various
therapies that once again represented pragmatism triumphant. And Mr. Morris
believes that during the entire 20-year period he covers, it was only the Nixon
Administration that for a brief time displayed the sort of ''wisdom, strength,
and subtlety'' that will be required in the future ''to bring the world's
bristling armories under control.''

As for President Reagan, instead of seeing his election as a reaction to
excessive government, Mr. Morris regards it as a mirror-image of the Kennedy
era. ''Intellectuals of the right,'' he insists, ''are as prone to simplistic
rationalism as intellectuals of the left. Reagan is even less of an intellectual
than Kennedy was, but enthusiastic academic theorists, although of quite a
different political stripe, set the policy tone at the start of his
administration just as they did in Kennedy's.'' ''The pendulum, perhaps, had
swung completely from one side to the other, but it was the same pendulum, and
the sounding chimes rang much the same as they ever had.''

Yet much of what Mr. Morris writes has a familiar ring to it - his contention
that while it was Mr. Nixon who supplied the sword of Watergate, he never would
have been hurt if the media with national circulation had not wielded it against
him, or his argument that the fault of the civil-rights movement was to lapse
from removing the legal barriers impeding equality to legislating legal passages
that tried to promote equality. But Mr. Morris cannot be pigeonholed as a
neo-conservative or even a traditionalist in the spirit of Edmund Burke. For one
thing, he's far too scrupulous about conceding both liberals and conservatives
the merit of their views - up to a limited point - whether the issue is Vietnam
or black-revolutionary violence.


Most extraordinarily, Mr. Morris takes a tentatively optimistic view of the two
decades and what may lie beyond them. After all, he points out in a footnote
near the end, the period from 1960 to 1980 seems relatively peaceful compared
with the decades from 1940 to 1960, or even 1920 to 1940. Moreover, the
upheavals of the last 20 years may well have been prologue to an era of peaceful
prosperity, such as the 1950's were. Indeed, Mr. Morris concedes in a
bibliographical note, he shares the optimism that the late Herman Kahn expressed
in the last book he published before he died, ''The Coming Boom.''

However one regards Mr. Morris's conclusion - as a case of whistling in the dark
or proof positive that we are about to be cured of our passion for rationalism -
there is much to be said for how he arrives at it. He has a remarkable facility
for elucidating such potentially murky subjects as economics and sociology. Part
of the reason for this is that he writes better than most social observers. Part
of it is simply that writing a few years after the end of the period as he does,
he has the advantage of the longer view. But whatever the reason, he makes a
fascinating case that what we think of as a time of passion was actually a time
when reason overreached itself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 5, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A book review Tuesday of ''A Time of Passion'' by Charles R. Morris
misidentified one of two authors of popular ideas that formed the root of ''a
fifty-year tradition of expansive pragmatism'' culminating in the Presidency of
John F. Kennedy. He was William James.


GRAPHIC: photo of Charles Morris

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 29, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE CAMPAIGN RESHAPED

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1493 words


Senator Gary Hart's unexpected triumph over former Vice President Walter F.
Mondale in the New Hampshire Democratic primary runs counter to national public
opinion polls, but it fits the history of New Hampshire voters, who have been
hard on front-runners and prone to help underdogs.

In the last two years, Mr. Mondale has built a nationwide organization and
public support that by common consent far surpasses those of his rivals for the
party's Presidential nomination. But Senator Hart, by concentrating on New
Hampshire after his second-place showing in Iowa eight days ago, generated an
emotional surge of support in the last week that gave him local strength in New
Hampshire out of proportion with his more modest national following.



New Hampshire Tradition


Interviews by The New York Times and CBS News with 1,278 voters leaving the
polls showed that Mr. Hart's appeal for new leadership caught on, particularly
with political independents, who provided the crucial margin for his upset
victory.

Both the Senator from Colorado and his campaign officials also suggested that he
had benefited from the New Hampshire tradition of helping underdogs and of
preventing front-runners from sweeping to an early hold on a Presidential
nomination.

''People in this state don't want to be told that it's all over,'' remarked
Jeanne Shaheen, his New Hampshire coordinator. ''People here have a sense of
wanting a voice in the decision.''

There is a question whether Mr. Hart can sustain his challenge to Mr. Mondale in
other regions, especially on March 13, when nine states hold primaries and
caucuses.

But his victory yesterday changed the complexion of the 1984 campaign, much as
New Hampshire primaries have altered Presidential politics in years past.



Surprises in the Past


In 1968 President Johnson was permanently wounded by Senator Eugene J. McCarthy
of Minnesota, who rode a tide of protest against the Vietnam War to score a
moral victory with a strong second-place finish in the New Hampshire primary.
Within weeks, Mr. Johnson decided not to seek re-election.

In 1972 the leading Democrat, Senator Edmund S. Muskie of Maine, stumbled in New
Hampshire. Senator George McGovern of South Dakota seized on a close
second-place finish to ignite a successful drive for the nomination.

In 1976 Democratic voters in New Hampshire passed over a field of veteran
politicians from Washington to anoint a newcomer to the national political
scene, Jimmy Carter of Georgia.

With those lessons clearly in mind, Senator Hart concentrated his campaign
efforts heavily in Iowa and New Hampshire, making only token efforts elsewhere
and preaching the message that the Democratic Party needed new leadership and
new ideas to challenge President Reagan in the fall election.

The Times/CBS News Poll of voters across snowy New Hampshire yesterday indicated
that Mr. Hart's message hit home. More than 40 percent of his supporters cited
new ideas as their primary reason for voting for him. Too, he took about half
the vote of those under 30 years old.

But political independents, constituting more than a third of the voters
yesterday, were the most important unexpected factor in Senator Hart's stunning
upset.

For months, Senator John Glenn of Ohio had banked on drawing heavily from
independent voters. But Hart strategists said Mr. Glenn's collapse in the last
few weeks, hastened by his fifth-place showing in the Iowa caucuses, evidently
set the independent voters free, enabling Mr. Hart to make big inroads.

Independents Favored Hart


The Times/CBS News Poll showed that while Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale ran about
even among Democrats, the Colorado Senator received twice as many votes from
independents as Mr. Mondale did.

Moreover, Mr. Hart apparently benefited from his deliberate campaign appeals to
women and Mr. Mondale was hurt by his close links to organized labor. Mr.
Mondale drew equal support from men and women but Mr. Hart gained more support
from women than men, suggesting that he may be better positioned to take
advantage of President Reagan's political difficulties with women at the polls.

Nationwide, organized labor has been one of the pillars of Mondale support, but
in New Hampshire it lacks the political muscle and social acceptance it has in
major industrial states.

One apparent consequence was that half the Democratic voters yesterday
criticized Mr. Mondale as being ''too close to organized labor'' whereas only
one-third did not fault him on that point. Senator Hart polled about half of the
votes from those critical of Mr. Mondale's links to labor, and Mr. Mondale got
less than 10 percent from that group.

Matching Voters' Mood


On specific issues, Mr. Hart seemed to have aligned himself more closely than
Mr. Mondale with the dominant mood in New Hampshire. Close to 40 percent of the
Democratic voters yesterday cited ''controlling nuclear weapons'' as one of the
two most important issues in their decisions, followed closely by the Federal
budget deficit.

Although other candidates, such as Senator Alan Cranston of California and
former Senator McGovern put major emphasis on a freeze in the production and
deployment of nuclear weapons, Mr. Hart was apparently the most visible major
candidate on that question. About half of his supporters cited arms control as a
prime reason for backing him.

Social Security was the issue that seemed to worked best for Mr. Mondale, who
polled 47 percent of the vote from those 60 and older, whereas Mr. Hart got only
23 percent of this vote. Mondale voters gave a scattering of other reasons for
picking him, among them the belief of more than a third that he could beat
President Reagan, had strong experience, or cared about ordinary people.

Organization a Factor


Neither the Mondale camp nor rival strategists anticipated that the former Vice
President would win as overwhelming a victory in New Hampshire as the half the
votes he won in Iowa. Mr. Hart had mounted a strong organizational effort in New
Hampshire months ago. Even before Christmas, leading state Democrats said he was
close to overtaking Senator Glenn. Since the Iowa vote, his strength in New
Hampshire mushroomed.

Strong organization was vital for both Senator Hart and Mr. Mondale who, by most
accounts, had built by far the most effective political networks in the state as
long as six weeks ago. Senator Glenn's organization had been beset by problems
since last summer and never recovered despite various shake-ups, although
tonight the Ohio Democrat said Mr. Hart's victory had encouraged him to continue
his campaign rather than to withdraw.

With New Hampshire swept by a morning snowfall that continued through midday,
Mr. Mondale appeared to have held much of his strength through an effective
get-out-the-vote apparatus. Forty-two percent of the voters who said they had
been contacted by a candidate's organization went for Mr. Mondale but only 26
percent of them went for Mr. Hart.

What apparently outdid the advantage Mr. Mondale had built over several months
was the momentum Mr. Hart developed since the Iowa caucuses. In the last week,
each successive opinion poll in the state showed him gaining on Mr. Mondale, as
rival politicians reported that his campaign suffered from lack of passion among
his supporters.

''This has been an incredible week,'' said Miss Shaheen. ''The Mondale people
did all they should have done. The problem he's got is the problem he's had all
along. It's that people aren't excited about him. But Hart's crowds have been
excited all week long. We've had him all over the state, and he's been mobbed.''

In the Presidential debate last Thursday night, Senator Hart appealed to New
Hampshire voters for their support in order to keep the Democratic Presidential
race open. ''The issue in New Hampshire is whether the debate will end here,''
he declared, ''or whether, as in the past, it will begin here.''

After his victory last night, he proclaimed, ''The Presidential race has just
begun.''


How the Poll Was Taken


The New York Times/CBS News exit poll in New Hampshire is based on
questionnaires completed by 1,278 Democratic voters as they left polling places
in 68 randomly selected precincts in all parts of the state.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results from a poll such as this should
differ by no more than four percentage points, in either direction, from what
would have been obtained by interviewing all Democratic voters.

The sampling errors for smaller subgroups are larger. For example, the error for
supporters of Gary Hart would be plus or minus six percentage points.

Assisting The Times in its 1984 polling are Edward R. Tufte, professor of
political science and statistics at Yale University, and Helmut Norpoth,
associate professor of political science at the State University of New York at
Stony Brook.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 29, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BLUEPRINT FOR A U.S. SOUTHEAST ASIA POLICY

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


To the Editor:


I am impressed with Dick Clark's succinct and fair-minded description of the
military and political imbroglio in Cambodia (Op-Ed Feb. 16). I am also
impressed with the fact that he had nothing to say except that the U.S. should
take a more active role.

Yes, the Vietnamese occupiers should leave Cambodia, and yes, the genocidal
Khmer Rouge should be prevented from coming to power once again, and yes, the
U.S. should not blindly follow the Chinese and Asean (Association of Southeast
Asian Nations) goal of bleeding Vietnam white.

But Mr. Clark, despite his distinguished career as a policy maker, has not one
positive word of advice as to what a new U.S. foreign policy in the region might
be. Here are my suggestions, some of which would follow naturally from Mr.
Clark's:


* End the nine-year embargo on Vietnam and Cambodia.


* Recognize Vietnam.


* Use our considerable influence to dissuade the Chinese from giving arms and
supplies to the Khmer Rouge.

* Vote to unseat the Khmer Rouge representative at the United Nations.  This is
a controversial agenda, but if the spirit of Mr. Clark's article is ever to be
translated into action, the U.S. must begin evaluating alternatives to the
muddled inactivity he so rightly criticizes.

MARLOWE HOOD Boston, Feb. 19, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 29, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and Maurice Carroll

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


Vietnam Memorial Contest


So far, there have been close to 800

entries in the design competition for the New York Vietnam Veterans Memorial,
according to Peter Mahoney, deputy director of the memorial commission, ''and
we're going to break 1,000 sometime in the middle of next week,''

The last date for obtaining an application is March 14, and the winner is
expected to be announced by May 31. Although the commission has the official
sanction of the city, no government money is involved in the competition or
building the memorial.

''We're looking to raise $1 million in private funds,'' Mr. Mahoney said. Part
will come from the $30 fee charged for each competition entry and the rest from
donations. Half the $1 million will go toward construction of the memorial.

''The other half will go to a jobs program for Vietnam vets,'' said Mr. Mahoney,
a Vietnam vet himself, ''because they still have problems and most of those
problems seem to be related to getting jobs.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 1, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
TIME FOR A CHANGE?

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Feb. 29


Organization, money, endorsements and an aura of inevitability are not enough,
after all, to assure victory in a primary. That is the news from New Hampshire,
and even some supporters of Walter Mondale must feel it is good news. Elections
with real live voters are still different from landslides in the press.

What happened in New Hampshire? There was, first, an extraordinary movement of
voter intentions. On the morning of the Iowa caucuses, Feb. 21, the
ABC-Washington Post poll showed 41 percent of New Hampshire Democrats for Mr.
Mondale, 10 percent for Gary Hart. One week later they gave Mr. Hart 41 percent
of their votes, Mr. Mondale 29.

Why? Among all the theories one undeniable reality stands out. A lot of people
who said they were for Mr. Mondale had no real attachment to him. They had
doubts underneath, and when an alternative candidate emerged from the pack they
moved to him.

The doubts about Mr. Mondale are not restricted to the famously cantankerous
voters of New Hampshire. They were felt by many Democratic strategists, even
when he looked like a certainty for the nomination. The doubts relate to a
generational change in political perceptions.

The Democratic Party that Franklin Roosevelt built was a party based on interest
groups and dedicated to government intervention as the solution to social and
economic problems. It nurtured the big labor unions and the legislation of the
New Deal, Harry Truman's Fair Deal and Lyndon Johnson's Great Society.

But for many Democrats today, and many potential Democratic voters, all that is
the past. They do not believe in the beneficence of Federal spending as such.
They worry about the size of the deficit. They think big labor is often selfish
and backward-looking.

The difference of perceptions was symbolized a while ago in two leaders of the
party: Hubert Humphrey and John F. Kennedy. Humphrey was the true believer in
interventionist government, the insider with labor and other interest groups.
Kennedy was the skeptic, the outsider.

Walter Mondale is wholly identified with the older Democratic perception. He is
seen as, and has run as, the liberal establishment candidate. He had the
earliest and most complete support from organized labor of any candidate ever.
And he was, of course, a protege of Hubert Humphrey.

The attachment to those older symbols have hurt Mr. Mondale more than most of us
understood. The ties to labor, for example: He did himself real damage when he
was challenged in debate to say when he had ever disagreed with labor, and could
not come up with an immediate answer.  Some younger people, I find, specifically
regard Mr. Mondale's connection with Hubert Humphrey as a negative. Those of us
who know the good he did will find it hard to accept, but to many of the young
Humphrey stands for Vietnam and big government and hack politics.  One political
analyst did understand Mr. Mondale's troubles with voters under 40. Sidney
Blumenthal of The New Republic, maintaining skepticism about the Mondale
bandwagon, wrote of his ''generation gap.'' But it is not only an age
phenomenon. Some older Democrats fear that a candidate of the old liberalism
would be an easy mark for Ronald Reagan, allowing him to run in 1984 as he did
in 1980 - against the Government.  Can Mr. Mondale recover now? He still has a
superb organization and endorsements by most ranking Democrats. He still is the
most experienced candidate, and one of proved integrity and humanity. But I
wonder. Inevitability was the biggest thing he had going for him, and once that
has been punctured . . .  Gary Hart has made generational change his theme so
far. It is almost mimicry of John Kennedy when he says, ''It is time to get this
country on the move.'' (For those too young to remember, Kennedy's stump phrase
was ''It is time to move again.'') Voters will no doubt be looking for something
deeper in Senator Hart now: some intimations of substance. To be fair, he has
shown policy backbone in the campaign, notably in opposing the half-baked
legislation that labor wants to require a percentage of domestic content in all
cars sold in this country.  Senator Hart does not have complete delegate slates
entered in some of the upcoming primaries, but that need not matter. If he
carries his momentum on for the next few weeks, delegates elected on other
slates will look at him. And most will be free to switch at the convention.  At
a minimum it is a race again. In Time magazine this week, under the heading
''The Preordainment of Mondale,'' Hugh Sidey asks whether ''party operatives, in
their eagerness to be with a winner, and the American voters, in their
dependence on the polls and the media for guidance, are not all locked in an
unwitting conspiracy that selects our Presidential nominees before anybody has a
chance to think - or vote.'' No, they are not.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ DECLARES DEBATE HARMED LEBANON EFFORT

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 854 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that debate over the War Powers
Act had made it impossible to conduct a ''sensible'' policy in Lebanon.

Urging a new approach to protect American interests, he called on Congress to
review the law, which was enacted in 1973 to limit the President's authority to
commit forces without Congressional approval.  In Paris, the French Foreign
Ministry, reacting to the removal of British, Italian and American troops, said
France ''cannot alone bear the responsibility of the international community in
Lebanon.'' The statement stopped short of setting a withdrawal date. (Page A10.)



Shultz Before Senate Panel Mr. Shultz discussed the limitations imposed by the
War Powers Act in testimony before the Senate Appropriations subcommittee on
foreign operations, where he was also questioned about Central America and other
Middle East issues. He was asked, in particular, to justify a plan to sell
Jordan 1,600 shoulder-fired Stinger antiaircraft missiles worth $133 million.

On the war powers issue, Mr. Shultz said:

''Our own debate here totally took the rug out from under our diplomatic effort.

''Still, we have to examine this kind of issue because it involves our
capability to defend our interests, and the circumstances under which we will
commit various levels of forces.

''I think it ought to be reviewed by Congress. I think there is a question as to
whether that piece of legislation is the most desirable way to structure the
interaction between the legislative and executive branches for dealing with
issues involving force.''

As for the proposed Jordanian missile deal, Congress was notified of it today by
the Pentagon. The sale will go through unless blocked by majority votes in both
houses within 30 days.

Senator Robert W. Kasten Jr., Republican of Wisconsin, who is chairman of the
subcommittee, said he would not be able to support a plan to provide Jordan with
$220 million in equipment for a Persian Gulf strike force if the missiles were
included in the package.

Mr. Shultz defended the Jordanian deal as important to American interests. He
said King Hussein was discussing ways of forming a joint delegation with
Palestinians for talks with Israel and would face pressure from Syria if he did
so. He said Jordan would not use the arms against Israel.

The War Powers Act came up when Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of
Pennsylvania, said he was concerned that Americans might become involved in
military action if Iran tries to close the Strait of Hormuz at the exit from the
Persian Gulf, through which a large share of the world's oil passes.

Senator Specter asked Mr. Shultz whether he would support a Congressional
resolution that would set in advance the limits of any American involvement in
the strait, to avoid the kind of debate that was touched off by American
intervention in Lebanon.

Mr. Shultz replied that he did not favor such resolutions. He agreed that
another debate over the War Powers Act should be avoided, but he made that point
for reasons other than those advanced by Senator Specter.

The Senator wanted close consultation on such matters; Mr. Shultz indicated that
he wanted the Administration to have more flexibility.

The law, a consequence of United States involvement in Vietnam, requires the
President to notify Congress within 48 hours after he sends troops into certain
combat situations, and it prohibits him from keeping the troops there for more
than 90 days unless Congress declares war or adopts a joint resolution approving
the action.

Last October, Congress, concerned about the deaths of marines assigned to the
multinational force, adopted a resolution, in conformity with the War Powers
Act, that limited the presence of the marines in Lebanon to 18 months.

In January, after inquiries into the death of 241 American servicemen in a
suicide attack on their Beirut airport compound, debate began again on whether
the marines should remain. House Democrats were considering a resolution calling
for their removal when President Reagan announced Feb. 7 that they would be
pulled back to ships offshore.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, told Mr. Shultz that Congress
had, in fact, been ''gutless'' in its use of the War Powers Act. Senator Leahy
said that instead of inhibiting the Administration, as Mr. Shultz put it,
Congress voted the 18-month extension to avoid facing up to the issue.

Mr. Shultz insisted that the debate ''was an exercise in getting the executive
branch so tied up that it was hard to do sensible things that probably everyone
supported, because the process of consultation you have to go through, which is
public no matter which room you hold it in, makes it impossible to execute the
policy.''

''I think it was absolutely astonishing to the Soviet Union and Syria that we
did not exact a price for moving the marines offshore,'' he said.

A senior aide said Mr. Shultz thought public debate over the marines had the
effect of strengthening Syrian resolve not to make any compromises with the
President Amin Gemayel of Lebanon.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 3, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
53 Missing After Attack On Boat From Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 137 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, March 2


Bands of pirates attacked a boat carrying refugees from Vietnam, robbing, raping
and kidnapping the women and forcing the men overboard, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees said today.

A spokesman, Leo Davico, said 33 refugees were feared drowned and 20 women
kidnapped in the attack, one of two that occurred last month after the boat left
Vietnam carrying 60 refugees.

Mr. Davico said the report was based on the testimony of two 12-year-old girls
who drifted at sea, clinging to a container, for 24 hours before being rescued
by Malaysian fishermen. The girls' account was corroborated by five male
survivors who reached the coast of Thailand, he said.

Mr. Davico called the attack one of the most serious yet involving the boat
people, who still leave Vietnam at an average of 1,600 per month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 3, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HE TOOK SMITHSONIAN OUT OF ATTIC

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 2


When the head of the search committee announced recently that Robert McCormick
Adams would become the ninth secretary of the Smithsonian Institution next Sept.
1, the eighth secretary corrected him.

''Sept. 16,'' said S. Dillon Ripley, the current secretary, the title for the
institution's chief officer, which masks with its quaintness the power and
prestige of the post.

Not one day sooner than absolutely necessary, the 70-year-old Mr. Ripley is to
retire from the secretaryship after holding it for 20 years. He will retain a
connection with the Smithsonian, where he will continue his research in
ornithology and will continue to provide, when needed, an institutional memory.
He has presided over great changes in the Smithsonian, and in the last 40 years
has been a witness to great change in Washington.

''As far as Washington is concerned, I think no one can deny that it has become
a city,'' Mr. Ripley said the other day in an interview in a Victorian parlor
next to his office. ''It's crowded, quite urban, but still has its elegance and
sleepy-time-down-South in the outskirts of the city itself and in parts of the
neighborhoods. But suburbia has taken over Washington, so it's now vast,
staggered, sprawling shopping malls, which I find rather lifeless, unlike the
Southern farms and horses and relaxed cow barns and things of that sort that
used to be in Fairfax, Arlington and places of that sort.''

Vital Changes Registered


But for some, especially blacks, it was suggested, they weren't the good old
days.

''That is certainly true,'' Mr. Ripley said. ''It was far more segregated in
those days and one of the things I rejoice in now is the fact that after those
sad riots in the 60's, the city has come together in a far more positive way.''

The Smithsonian, Mr. Ripley said, played a part in helping the city come
together. It has begun a museum of black history in Anacostia, a predominantly
black neighborhhod of the city. It is part of an attempt to reach out to blacks
and other minority groups, Mr. Ripley said, to get the word out that the
Smithsonian's museums downtown are open to everyone, not ''great palaces on the
Mall'' where they are unwelcome.

Mr. Ripley, an Ivy Leaguer, both Yale and Harvard, and a product of privilege,
said he viewed his contribution to the Smithsonian as not so much for the new
museums he built but rather for whatever success he has had in encouraging more
people - the poor and the minority groups - from all over the city and the
country to visit it.

''I hope to have increased the sense of participation between people and the
museums,'' he said. ''When I came here, I was very much conscious of the fact
that the museums were slightly closed. They had a cathedral-like quality to
them. People went in and became slightly somnolent. They were stunned with the
viewing of large objects and major exhibitions, and there was no real feeling
that this was part of everyday life.''

Broadening of Institution


If numbers are a measure, Mr. Ripley would seem to have succeeded. The Air and
Space Museum, built in Mr. Ripley's tenure, reported it had 10 million visitors
last year, making it the leading tourist attraction in the world. Since the
museums have no admission charges, there are no ticket sales to audit to confirm
the 10 million figure, which was arrived at by counts of people going through
the doors.

Even given the fair number of active youngsters who went in and out through more
than one door in a single visit, there can be no doubt that the number of
visitors there is vast, attracted by a museum that includes the Wright Brothers'
first plane, the latest space gadget and just about everything in between.

The Air and Space Museum is near the Hirshhorn Museum of modern art, also built
in Mr. Ripley's tenure and which has an appeal that is as selective as the
aviation museum's is broad.

The latest Smithsonian museum, which may some day be considered Mr. Ripley's
greatest contribution, is the Quadrangle. That museum, now under construction,
will house the art of Africa, the Middle East and Asia, the only large part of
the world that has not been well represented by the Smithsonian.

''Except for the Freer,'' he said, speaking of one of the other Smithsonian
museums, ''we have never had a meaningful representation of the traditions and
culture of this vast part of the world. Their art is fantastic and their culture
is fantastic, but none of this is still quite on the mark as far as most
Americans are concerned. We don't realize what makes half of the world's
population tick, their roots, their family life, their traditions, their art
objects.''

Birds and Intelligence


That part of the world is of personal interest to Mr. Ripley, who is an
authority on the birds of India and Pakistan, and it was that interest that
brought him to Washington in 1942 as an assistant curator in the Smithsonian's
Museum of Natural History. From the museum, he went to the Office of Strategic
Services, the forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency.

A spy in the disguise of a bird watcher?

''I started off doing research,'' Mr. Ripley said. ''I was never an actual spy
in the sense that I was rushing about trying to get secrets. But I did wind up
in charge of the secret intelligence division which had to do with the war
against the Japanese in Burma, Southeast Asia, Vietnam.''

Did he ever slip into those areas under cover of bird watching to see what the
Japanese were up to?

''Curiously enough,'' Mr. Ripley said, ''the British, and I suppose the Indians,
Pakistanis, Ceylonese and so on, thought that it was such a marvelous part of an
old-fashioned cover. Their theory was that most obviously we were spies. It
never seemed to me to be realistic because I never could discover what someone
out in the bushes could discover in the way of secrets. Geologically interesting
perhaps, but, of course, anyone who knows anything about the geology knows that
there ain't much gold in them thar hills.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of S. Dillon Ripley

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 3, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Agencies Halt Spraying

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 257 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., March 2


The Government today halted herbicide spraying on United States Forest Service
land in Oregon and Washington after a Federal district judge threatened to jail
officials if they failed to comply with his ban.

Judge James Burns also ordered herbicide applications halted on United States
Bureau of Land Management property in Oregon.

The judge said Thursday that his ban would stay in effect until the Bureau of
Land Management and Forest Service completed a ''worst-case analysis'' of the
herbicides' environmental impact.

Judge Burns accused the agencies of ignoring his Jan. 6 order for a study on
herbicide use.

''These officials will spend their spring in jail - in jail - if they do not
stop,'' he said. ''It's as simple as that.''

The herbicides are used primarily to kill underbrush that competes with
marketable young trees for water and soil nutrients.

At a joint news conference today, Forest Service and Bureau officials said the
herbicides the agencies used most were 2,4-D, Atrazine, Roundup and Garlon. The
herbicide 2,4-D is an ingredient in Agent Orange, a defoliant used in the
Vietnam War.

The officials said they had sent telegrams telling their field offices to halt
spraying. But they said the same chemicals are used extensively in agriculture
and on home lawns, and that alternatives would cost millions.  The judge's
ruling came in a lawsuit by three environmental groups, the Northwest Coalition
for Alternatives to Pesticides, the Oregon Environmental Council and the Audubon
Society of Portland.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOTED WITH PLEASURE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 39, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 937 words


Some passages from current and recently published books that we find paticularly
appealing.

JANE AND CYNTHIA

A reflection from John Gardner's ''The Art of Fiction: Notes on Craft for Young
Writers'' (Knopf).

As in the universe every atom has an effect, however minuscule, on every other
atom, so that to pinch the fabric of Time and Space at any point is to shake the
whole length and breadth of it, so in fiction every element has effect on every
other, so that to change a character's name from Jane to Cynthia is to make the
fictional ground shudder under her feet.

BEAUTY AND THE BATTLEFIELD

A soldier leaving the combat zone on the first stage of his journey home, from
Jack Fuller's novel of the Vietnam war, ''Fragments'' (Morrow).

You climbed aboard a truck and rode through the countryside for the last time.
And you finally opened your eyes to it, as though you were coming up from under
a mortar barrage...

You saw things you had never expected.  Buddhist pagodas gaily lavished with
bright icons and odd, unsovereign flages.  Flame trees as delicate as garlands.
Little children at the side of the road, waving and laughing and shouting ''OK!
OK! OK!'' as if you were the first soldier on earth.  Or the last.  And despite
everything, despite the numbness, despite the whole wasted year you had spent
closing your eyes to these things, suddenly they blossomed out before you, as
sad and beautiful as the fragile, momentary flowers in a rain forest.

LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

One of the cases described in Calvin Trillin's stylish chronicle of violent
death in America, ''Killings'' (Ticknor & Fields), is the murder of a successful
criminal lawyer in Miami Beach, Harvey St. Jean.

Even people who assume all criminal lawyers to be part fixer refer to Harvey St.
Jean as a gentleman.  He was a soft-spoken man, close-mouthed about important
matters but affable about routine ones.  People who had known him for years
could not recall ever hearing him raise his voice.  The judges liked him, and so
did the police.  As someone who had been a policeman for years himself, he had
friends on the force who could steer clients in his direction, and he could
translate the stilted jargon of police reports into some vision of what must
really have happened.  He steadily worked his way up from pickpockets to jewel
thieves.  St. Jean was never an eloquent or a flamboyant man--tables went
unpounded and tears went unshed during his summations--but he was shrewd about
picking juries and thorough about rules of evidence that often made it possible
to exclude from consideration the statement or the jewelry necessary for a
prosecution...

As his practice grew and some real-estate investments began to pay off, St.
Jean began to lead the south-Florida version of life at the top.  There may be
cities in which the respectability of a saflmade criminal lawyer will always
have its limits, but in Miami just about everyone seems to have a tenuous hold
on respectability anyway.  The historic attraction of the area for promoters and
grifters and profligates being what it is, Miami remains a hard place to cash a
check.

A RESTLESS REVERIE

Coming of age in Australia--the narrator of Jessica Anderson's ''Tirra Lirra by
the River'' (Penguin) recalls the restlessness ofadolescence in the small town
where she grew up.

I am going to put down a strange word.  Beauty.  I was in love with beauty.  I
carried my pale face, my dropped flag o ashen hair, my abstracted eyes, my damp
concealed body, along the rough roads and streets, and across the paddocks and
vacant lots and playing ields, of a raw ugly sprawling suburb on the outskirts
of a raw but genteel town.  I walked everywhere, oppressed, moody, yet patient
too.  Our suburb merged with arms, and by day, overtaken by a farmer's cart, I
would see the whip flick the horse's rump and the shadow of the cart draw away
from a shining pile o excrement.  On certain hot nights scent and stench would
mingle--frangipani and lantana with the wake of the nightcart.  I walked,
sometimes with an objective--a friend's house, a shop, the church or school--but
mostly at random, to outrun oppression.

THE SIN OF WRITING

One of the poems discussed by Felicity A. Nussbaum in ''The Brink of All We
Hate: English Satires on Women, 1660-1750'' (University of Kentucky) is the Earl
of Rochester's verse epistle ''A Letter from Artemisia in the Town to Chloe in
the Country.'' Its multiple ironies give some idea of the problems confronting
any woman who wanted to set up as a writer in the 17th century.

Artemisia's grave advice to herself to avoid being a poetess is ambivalent:
While cautioning herself that ''poetry's a snare,'' she continues to weave out
the poem.  She stresses the gap between the writer's expectations and the
reader's perceptions as she addresses herself:

Dear Artemisia, poetry's a snare;

Bedlam has many mansions, have a care.

Your muse diverts you, makes the reader sad:

You fancy you're inspired; he thinks you mad.

Consider, too, 'twill be discreetly done

To make yourself the fiddle of the town,

To find th'ill-humored pleasure at their need,

Cursed if you fail, and scorned though you succeed!

Thus, like an arrant woman as I am,

No sooner well convinced writing's a shame,

That whore is scarce a more reproachful name

Than poetess--

But she takes lascivious pleasure in violating the conventions of the
town--''Pleased with the contradiction and the sin.'' In a world of distorted
perceptions the muse inspires her to delight in the supposed sin of writing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawings

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

14 Journalism Awards Announced by L.I.U.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 355 words


Fourteen George Polk Awards, including two for reporters of The New York Times,
have been announced by Long Island University.

Don McNeill, a Moscow-based CBS News correspondent, won the network television
reporting award for providing what the citation said were unusual glimpses of
Soviet life.

Benjamin Weiser of The Washington Post was cited for medical reporting.

Joseph Lelyveld was honored for foreign reporting for The Times from South
Africa, and Philip Taubman of The Times won in the category of foreign-affairs
reporting for coverage of covert United States military operations in Central
America.

The George Polk Awards were created by Long Island University the year after Mr.
Polk, a CBS correspondent, was murdered in the Greek civil war. This year's
awards will be presented at a luncheon on April 4 at the Hotel Roosevelt at
Madison Avenue and 45 Street.

These other awards were also announced: National reporting - Robert R. Frump and
Timothy Dwyer of The Philadelphia Inquirer for a

series on unsafe vessels in the United States

maritime fleet. Regional reporting - Paul Lieberman and Celia

Dugger of The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

for a series, ''Kaolin: Georgia's Lost Inheritance.'' Local reporting - Jim
McGee of The Miami Herald

for a series, ''The Face of Terror.'' Economics reporting - Dennis Camire and
Mark

Rohner of Gannett News Service for a series on

corruption in the Farmers Home Administration. Consumer reporting - Marcia
Stepanek and Stephen Franklin of The Detroit Free Press for a

series on unsafe cars. Local television reporting - John Fosholt and Ward

Lucas of KBTV News, Denver, for ''Theft by Contract.'' Documentary television -
''Vietnam: A Television

History,'' produced by WGBH, Boston, for the

Public Broadcasting System. Special interest reporting - The Amicus Journal,

published by the Natural Resources Defense

Council. Special award - Youssef M. Ibrahim of The Wall

Street Journal for coverage of meetings of the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries. Career award - William L. Shirer for his work as a

journalist, author and historian.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANTI-VATICAN PLAN REPORTED IN HANOI

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 647 words

DATELINE: ROME, March 2


Church officials here report that Vietnam is pressing to bring its three million
Catholics under its direct control and isolate them from the Vatican.

The reported campaign, which the Vatican officials believe parallels successful
Chinese measures to create a schismatic anti-Roman church, has been accompanied
by acts of force against priests and laymen.

Last year Hanoi established a Committee for the Solidarity of the Patriotic
Vietnamese. Word has reached Rome that two leading churchmen, the Archbishops of
Ho Chi Minh City and Hue, protested strongly the creation of a body said to be
Catholic that is outside church control. Playing on the hostility between China
and Vietnam, Archbishop Nguyen Van Binh warned in a speech in Ho Chi Minh City
against following Peking's example of seeking to alienate Catholics from Rome.

'Not Shepherds, but Robbers'

Archbishop Nguyen Kim Dien of Hue urged the new committee's chairman to meditate
on the passage of the Gospel that says, ''Those who do not enter the sheepfold
by the door are not shepherds, but robbers.''

Two major confrontations between churchmen and the state last year have,
according to church sources and recent arrivals from Vietnam, increased pressure
on Catholics.

The parish priest in the village of Doc So, near Hue, was arrested last May
after a long siege of his church and has not been heard from since.

The Rev. Nguyen Van Ly defied Hanoi's ban on a traditional pilgrimage to Rome in
1982 and was sentenced the next year to be defrocked - a right the church says
is reserved for it alone - and ordered to live in the village where he was born.
Five seminarians who had accompanied him were sentenced to two to four years in
prison.

The police made nine attempts to seize Father Ly at his church but were repelled
by parishioners. Last April, on three successive days, the priest read over the
church's public-address system a set of demands on the Government to respect his
and the church's constitutional rights to free worship.

On May 18, according to witnesses whose testimony has reached Rome, about 200
policemen stormed the church compound, smashed the door, beat Father Ly, ripped
off his cassock and then carried him off. Some parishioners were reported hurt
in the melee.

The next month, three priests, including Vietnam's Jesuit superior, a Jesuit
friar and three laymen, all linked to the Ho Chi Minh City Jesuit center, were
sentenced to prison terms for ''plotting the overthrow of the legitimate power
and counterrevolutionary propaganda.'' Four other priests and two lay people
also linked to the center were convicted but received suspended sentences or
admonitions.

Called Counterrevolutionaries

Local press accounts of the trial accused the Vatican of sending the Jesuit
superior, the Rev. Nguyen Cong Doan, to Saigon days before the Communist victory
''to transform the Alexandre de Rhodes Center into a rallying point for the
organization of counterrevolutionary propaganda.''

The army newspaper Quan Doi Nhan Dang denounced the priests as ''reactionaries''
who disguised their ''counterrevolutionary'' designs under cassocks.

Father Doan was sentenced to 12 years in prison. The Rev. Le Thanh Que, who
edited a clandestine, nonpolitical religious newsletter that had long been
tolerated by the Government before being cited in the trial as the Jesuits'
principal anti-Government act, received 15 years, the Rev. Do Quang Chinh 5
years, Brother Pham Huu Lai and Hoang Kim Khanh 4 years and Truong Van Tuyen 3
years.

Nguyen Van Hien was sentenced to life imprisonment. He is suspected by
Vietnamese and church sources of having been used by the Government to stage a
case against the Jesuits.

Amnesty International has reported that it knows of about 150 priests who have
been detained or imprisoned on religious grounds in Vietnam.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA SAYS CHERNENKO'S CALL FOR CLOSER TIES ISN'T ENOUGH

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 538 words

DATELINE: PEKING, March 3


China today criticized a speech in Moscow by Konstantin U. Chernenko, saying
that the remarks by the new Soviet leader had ignored Peking's conditions for
improved ties.

The official New China News Agency, in its report of Mr. Chernenko's speech,
gave an account of the Soviet leader's remarks during which he proclaimed
Moscow's desire for peace and nuclear disarmament and called for better
relations with the United States and China.

The agency reported that Mr. Chernenko said the Soviet Union ''is a consistent
proponent of normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China.''

''However,'' the agency quoted Mr. Chernenko as saying, ''political
consultations show there remain differences on a number of questions of
principle.''

China's Three Demands

''Eluding China's proposal for removing barriers to normalization of relations
between the two countries,'' the agency said, ''Chernenko went so far as to say
that the Soviet Union 'cannot make any agreements to the prejudice of the
interests of third countries.' ''

China has said relations with the Soviet Union cannot improve until Moscow quits
Afghanistan, stops supporting Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia and withdraws its
troops and weapons from the Chinese border.

The criticism of Mr. Chernenko's speech came one day after China's senior Deputy
Prime Minister, Wan Li, confirmed that the Chinese had invited Moscow's First
Deputy Prime Minister, Ivan V. Arkhipov, for talks. He would be the
highest-ranking Kremlin official to visit China in 15 years.

In an interview with Japanese journalists carried by the agency, Mr. Wan
indicated that Mr. Arkhipov's visit would focus on trade rather than political
issues.

Mr. Wan did not say when Mr. Arkhipov would come, but Soviet sources have said
he is expected in May. They said the exact date would probably be settled at the
March 12 round of Chinese-Soviet discussions in Moscow.

China sent Mr. Wan to the funeral of Mr. Chernenko's predecessor, Yuri V.
Andropov, last month in Moscow. Though Mr. Wan was the highest-ranking Chinese
to visit the Kremlin in two decades, Mr. Chernenko did not meet with him.

The two nations were friendly in the 1950's but relations deteriorated in the
1960's over ideological and territorial disputes.



Mongolia Rejects Peking Demand

MOSCOW, March 3 (Reuters) - Mongolia today rejected a Chinese demand that the
Soviet Union withdraw its troops from Mongolian territory to improve
Chinese-Soviet relations.

A statement by the Ulan Bator Government, carried by the Soviet press agency
Tass, said the question of Soviet troops on its territory was a domestic matter.
''The allegation that their stay poses a threat to China's security is
absolutely groundless,'' it said.

The statement said Mongolia attached great importance to Chinese- Soviet
consultations aimed at improving ties. But, the statement added, the Mongolian
Government rejects the troop-withdrawal demand.

There are an estimated 25,000 Soviet troops in Mongolia under a 1966 20-year
friendship treaty. Ulan Bator told Peking in 1978 that they would remain there
until China ''abandoned forever its policies of annexation regarding Mongolia.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ELUSIVE QUEST FOR NEW IMAGE MAKER

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words


It would seem a Madison Avenue advertising agency's dream. The commodity is
already popular in the marketplace. The advertising budget is almost $25 million
and the client is President of the United States.

Yet in four months of courting the creative minds that market cat food, cola
drinks, Japanese automobiles and other consumer goods, the President Reagan's
campaign has been unable to find an advertising expert to sell him to the
American electorate for four more years.

The latest negotiations broke up Thursday when Jerry Della Femina, who describes
the advertising business as ''the most fun you can have with your clothes on,''
decided the risks were too serious to allow him to take the account.

The normally outspoken Mr. Della Femina declined comment, but his assistant,
Jacqueline Topche, explained the problem. ''He does run the company,'' she said.
''He couldn't promise that he would give them all his time because otherwise the
business would suffer.''

A Gap in Reagan Campaign


Mr. Della Femina turned his attention back to Beech-Nut baby foods and Isuzu
cars, and thus, just two or three months before the Reagan campaign television
advertisements were to begin appearing, there is no one committed to make them.
The lack leaves a hole at the center of the Reagan campaign organization, and
disagreement about how to fill it.

But the basic problem is more fundamental, and has to do with Mr. Reagan's own
training as an actor, his technical proficiency with camera and microphone, and
his wife and staff's insistence that such skills be matched by the most creative
producer that the advertising industry can provide.

''This President uniquely has the ability to convey a message to the public,'' a
campaign official said. ''We felt that we want to have his message in the media
put across with the same kind of professionalism and sophistication that the
President brings to it in his own right.''

The President's campaign aides speak admiringly of the warmth, the vitality and
good feeling conveyed so artfully in Pepsi-Cola and beer commercials. The
talents which lie behind such productions line Madison Avenue.

But by shunning an experienced range of political media talent and bringing his
needs instead to Manhattan, like Procter & Gamble with a commercial product line
to merchandise, the President's campaign has signaled a major shift in strategy.
The approach bucks the direction in politics and advertising for the last 20
years.

President's Advertising Budget


The Reagan campaign is committed to spend $3 million to $4 million in the
preconvention season and $20 million or more in the three months leading up to
the general election.

The man originally presumed to be the choice to direct that effort was Peter H.
Dailey, a California advertising executive who had years of experience aiding
Republicans on the Presidential level and who produced the quiet, purposely
undramatic television commercials for Mr. Reagan's successful 1980 campaign.

To counter the public's perception of Mr. Reagan as an actor, and to build a
sense of his knowledge of government, those commercials showed him speaking
seriously about such topics as foreign policy, inflation and unemployment. The
point was to give Democrats and independents who were tired of President Carter
a basis for voting for Mr. Reagan for President.

Despite the apparent success of those commercials, Mr. Reagan, his wife, Nancy,
and Michael K. Deaver, the White House deputy chief of staff, disliked various
aspects of the advertisements. They regarded the advertisements as too flat and
unsophisticated in tone, a campaign official said, ''so we thought we'd better
look for something else.''

Priorities Are Reversed


The search became one for a talent that could orchestrate productions of higher
quality than the campaign staff felt that political advertising people usually
produce. And so, four years later, the priorities have been reversed, with the
emphasis on showcasing the President's professional ability to communicate
warmth and trust rather than stressing the former actor's ability to govern.

''We don't want to put Ronald Reagan, no matter who does the ads, in any kind of
situation where he looks packaged,'' a Reagan campaign official insisted. But
the risks in seeking out an advertising expert accustomed to selling products
rather than political candidates are real.

''If this is the kind of advertising that the people in the Reagan-Bush campaign
are calling for, then I think they are making a terrible mistake,'' said Michael
S. Lesser, chairman of the Marschalk Company, an advertising firm in New York.



Not Like Selling Cornflakes

''It's not like selling a box of cornflakes,'' said Mr. Lesser, who managed a
group of advertising people assembled to mount President Nixon's 1972
re-election campaign. ''It requires so much of the people involved that you've
got to like the candidate, you've got to be committed.''

The obstacle to committing a relatively small, dynamic agency like Mr. Della
Femina's to Mr. Reagan, Mr. Lesser said, is the common knowledge that most
advertising writers and art directors in New York are liberal Democrats.

''You've got to go to a good agency, but they've got to believe in you,'' said
George Lois, chairman of Lois, Pitts, Gershon. ''Jerry Della Femina's the only
Republican creative person I know.'' The choice of Mr. Della Femina's firm by
the Reagan campaign reminded him of when Hubert H. Humphrey's campaign for
President in 1968 enlisted one of the largest advertising agencies on Madison
Avenue, Mr. Lois said.

There was great resistance to Mr. Humphrey's position on Vietnam among the
agency's young staff. ''They couldn't get anybody to work on it,'' said Mr.
Lois.

Increasingly, over the years, Republican and Democratic Presidential campaigns
have turned away from the commercial world of Madison Avenue, relying instead on
political advertising experts bonded to either Democrats or Republicans.



Reluctance of Agencies

And as Mr. Della Femina's case illustrates, commercial agencies in recent years
have shied away from taking on Presidential campaigns, which are exhausting,
disruptive and threatening to regular clients, despite the big budgets they
bring.

''An awful lot of us, when approached, have developed a policy of saying no,''
Mr. Lesser said.

As the Reagan campaign continues its search in New York, toying at the same time
with the idea of developing some in-house production effort supervised by
outside talent, Shep Kurtin, chairman of Epstein, Raboy, articulated another
feeling about politicians which has grown up on Madison Avenue.

Mr. Kurtin does not think candidates should be allowed to stage political
advertisements. ''I think they should be forced to stand up on their own two
feet, speak with their own voices and lie with their own tongues,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY'S CHAPLAIN'S ARE AT CENTER OF LEGAL DEBATE

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 970 words

DATELINE: FORT BENNING, Ga., March 2


When Capt. Jay Romans, an Army chaplain, is faced with young soldiers too
frightened to jump out of a military plane flying high above this sprawling
base, he stops for a moment and whispers a little prayer. Then he walks to the
door of the airplane and leaps out.

As the trainees watch the 36-year-old chaplain's white parachute open 1,200 feet
above the ground, they say, they invariably feel better about what they are
about to do.

''I've got my rosary in my pocket,'' Lieut. Sharon Smith of Buffalo, N.Y., said
Thursday just before her second jump for an airborne training course. ''And when
I see the chaplain, I've got double reassurance.''

Of course, not all chaplains leap out of airplanes. Some restrict themselves to
church service or office work. But when the question of replacing military
chaplains with civilian ministers is raised here, the example of Captain Romans
is cited again and again.

Those who favor a civilian chaplain program, such as Americans United for the
Separation of Church and State, would like to see chaplains taken out of uniform
and placed under the jurisdiction of church bodies, which would administer the
program and pay them.

Suit Over Chaplains


A lawsuit aimed at accomplishing this was dismissed last month by Federal
District Judge Joseph M. McLaughlin in New York. The suit, brought by two
Harvard Law School students in 1979, argued that the system of salaried military
chaplains violated constitutional principles.

One plaintiff, Joel Katcoff, said he planned to appeal the decision. Mr.
Katcoff, who now practices law in New York, brought suit as a taxpayer
challenging the $85 million annual appropriation for Army chaplains.

Other branches of the armed services also have chaplains, but the suit was
brought against the Army, the largest branch, with the expectation that a ruling
would apply to the others.

Judge McLaughlin, in deciding in favor of the Army's current chaplain program,
said the First Amendment required two things of the Government: to provide
citizens the freedom to pursue a faith but not to establish a religion.

The Army, the judge wrote, ''maintains that the free exercise needs of military
personnel should not be risked on an untried civilian chaplaincy, particularly
since the current program functions so well.''

In the 38-page decision, Judge McLaughlin added that ''it is not without
significance'' that the First Congress, which drafted the Bill of Rights, also
established the chaplain program. ''It indicates, if nothing else, that our
founding fathers saw no inconsistency between the two.''

The suit raised questions about practices that have survived since July 1775,
when the Continental Congress authorized the payment of $20 a month, a captain's
salary, to a clergyman serving in the Continental Army.

Marching With the Troops


There are now 1,476 Army chaplains, 30 of whom are assigned to Fort Benning. At
the base they represent Roman Catholics, Jews and 22 Protestant denominations.
Their tasks, the chaplains say, go well beyond conducting church services,
giving Bible classes and handing out prayer books.

''Army chaplains get involved in almost everything the troops get involved in,''
said Lieut. Col. Michael Ortiz, a Catholic priest who is the deputy post
chaplain at Fort Benning.

Chaplains here go on 10-mile marches with the troops, sleep outside with them in
the cold, and, as Captain Romans does, sometimes lead them in jumping out of
planes. One thing they do not do is carry weapons, but they are there to give
support and counsel when recruits qualify to use M-16s or hand grenades.

''We're not forever going about praying or talking about God,'' said Col. Joel
E. Andrews, the post chaplain at Fort Benning, who is a Methodist minister.
''Ours is a ministry of presence.''

Minister May Be Scared, Too


Captain Romans, a minister of the Church of Christ, said, ''We are there to
reassure the soldiers.''

''On the aircraft, they figure that if the chaplain is here, then everything is
going to be okay,'' he said. ''All the same, we may be just as scared as they
are.''

Some of the most frightened people at Fort Benning are the new recruits. As they
line up for their haircuts, better known as head shavings, at the Reception
Center, Captain Charles White stands by. ''This is where they lose their hair,
their blue jeans, their tennis shoes, all those things they feel make them
unique,'' he said.

Some of them look at the minister, a member of the Church of God, and say,
''Chaplain, pray for me.'' Others ask, ''What am I getting into?''

Military Trusts Chaplains

Chaplains, as well as other officers here, have a definite opinion about a
civilian chaplaincy. ''It would never work,'' said Colonel Ortiz.

Lieut. Col. Ray Kauffman, commander of the Officer Candidate School, said that
he often turned to his battalion chaplain, Capt. Donna Weddle, a Presbyterian
minister, for guidance on ethical issues. ''I wouldn't be comfortable with a
civilian making such judgments,'' he said.

Military chaplains, he said, understand the Army and are trusted by both
officers and enlisted men and women.

''And besides,'' he added, ''you might have trouble recruiting civilian
chaplains to join my four-mile run at 5:15 Friday mornings.'' He requires his
officers to join him.

The lawsuit was yet another challenge to the chaplaincy, an institution buffeted
in recent years regarding such issues as the morality of the Vietnam War and the
armament for nuclear war. Much of the criticism, chaplains say, reflects the
tension they feel of serving ''two masters'': God and the Army.

''It is a question we live with,'' said Captain Weddle. ''How do you represent a
God of peace in an institution that is training for war?''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Capt. Jay Romans waiting to board

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

InternationalCivil defense is fact of life in

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 301 words


Index Guatemala4Around the World5Morocco exempts farmers from

taxes until 20006Congress disputes Administration on food aid for Ethiopia7U.S.
and Soviet weapons technology compared in report8New book: The world according

to Prince Philip10Portuguese journalists oppose

proposed new press law11Life in Beirut: Random shelling,

unrandom fear12Iran says its forces drive six

miles on Basra12Soviet oil output starts unusual downward trend14
Government/PoliticsDrive on balanced budget

amendment appears stalled22Army chaplains are on the front

lines of a legal debate22Hart strategists say money and

delegates are coming in26Reagan's elusive quest for

image maker26Mondale assails Hart's Senate

voting record26Jackson wraps up campaign

swing through South26McGovern says Massachusetts

will decide fate of candidacy27Debate on prayer in schools begins Monday in
Congress29Report questions suitability of

new Navy destroyer30A dozen candidates try for Westchester seat in
Congress32Lautenberg protests dumping of

waste into the Hudson34 Education/WelfareNeediest Case Fund ends 72d appeal46
GeneralRape trial keeps Massachusetts

area on an emotional edge22Ex-prosecutor agrees to pay couple arrested for
sedition in 196723Report urges city to limit conversions of lofts33Fire damages
hotel being renovated by homeless group34 Health/ScienceFour cigarette brands
rated low

in three risk areas25Blind urologist is disciplined for

performing surgery38 ReligionVatican asserts that Vietnam

seeks to isolate its Catholics15 Arts/EntertainmentMartha Graham translates

Greek myth in ''Maze'' dance48O.K.'' is presented by Puerto

Rican Traveling Theater52Charles Moulton's choreography

sparks dance program52Vienna Philharmonic concludes

New York series53 StyleThe new party givers54

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOREGIN AFFAIRS;
THE USE OF FORCE

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 3


President Reagan has proclaimed that the U.S. is ''standing tall'' and can now
deal with the Soviets in self-confidence. He says American might has been
restored and Moscow has seen that the U.S. is not afraid to use force when it
chooses.

This is a peculiar reading of what has actually been happening and what Mr.
Reagan has done. Mirror- tricks may be used either to frighten or to exhilarate
the American public but they don't change the real world and its intractable
problems. On the contrary, they weaken our capacity to deal wisely with facts.

The fact is that except for deployment of a few American missiles in Europe, the
military balance hasn't changed. Whether they are really needed or not, and I
think not, the big new weapons planned haven't begun to come off production
lines and it will be years yet before they are operational.

The fact is that the U.S. has suffered a resounding setback in the Middle East.
It has pulled out of Lebanon without huge casualties, which is a lot better than
not pulling out and plunging into another tragic Vietnam-type frustration. But
that cannot transform a policy failure into a success.

The big mistake in Lebanon stemmed from the Israeli invasion in 1982, and
Washington's willingness to grasp at Gen. Ariel Sharon's mad dream of installing
a strong, friendly, Christian central government in Beirut. The proof of his
disconnection from reality is that he has just told David Shipler, The New York
Times' Jerusalem correspondent, that he still believes it possible.

But U.S. policy compounded the errors even after Jerusalem came to realize them.
The nebulous ''strategic consensus'' accord with Israel, concluded in an attempt
to dissuade it from drawing obvious conclusions after the wrong-headed attempt
to remake Lebanon, added to the harmful consequences for America in the Middle
East.  The fact is that three years after the Administration announced it was
making a ''test case'' of El Salvador, expecting a quick, inexpensive victory,
the guerrilla war rages on and is coming to engulf Central America.  The
curious, central fact is that an Administration which much of the world
perceives as militaristic in its foreign policy has made a minimal use of force.
The one exception was Grenada, where five times as many marines were sent on an
essentially simple operation than were plopped into the Lebanese imbroglio. Tiny
Grenada was the one success.  No doubt the Congress and the U.S. military
establishment, reluctant to invest heavily in dubious adventures, have had a lot
to do with this salutary restraint. But it isn't clear that President Reagan
would have wanted otherwise.  The characteristic of his decisions has been to
make a vast show

That sometimes worked in the old days, when a few gunboats on the Yangtze or in
Havana's harbor were enough to bring the recalcitrant to heel. Iraq now seems to
be trying bluff on the relentless Iranians. But Baghdad's claim to have sunk an
unspecified number of tankers at the Kharg Island terminal didn't raise
insurance rates by a penny at Lloyd's of London, the presumable target of the
trick.

The world has changed. Communications are immediate. Nuclear parity forbids the
big powers to make use of their great force. The spread of modern weaponry
enables little countries to weigh on local situations a lot more heavily than
their actual strength represents.

And the peoples of the West have had their fill of blood, gore and destruction.
There are still parts of the world where war is considered heroic, the noblest
proof of manhood and nationhood. But others sagely look down on them as
backward.

Syria won this round in the battle for the fate of Lebanon because Moscow's
guarantees against direct U.S. attack have given its tough President Assad a
sense of impunity. Everyone in the region knows that the bomb- size shells of
the battleship New Jersey can do a lot of damage but they can't control the land
and the people.

The display of force and the attempt to use it antiseptically, without risk, no
longer really impresses those who are determined to fight back. We only fool
ourselves.

The sensible course is to stop pretending and seek political solutions where
possible, and step aside when we can't prevent others fighting. The U.S. is too
important to the stability of the world to blow away its influence in empty
bluster.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 5, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
THE DEATH GRIP

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 792 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, March 4


Failure in Lebanon now dominates thinking on U.S. foreign policy. But that
preoccupation is likely to be overtaken soon by a far more menacing situation:
in El Salvador. There President Reagan's policy is visibly unraveling, and there
is no sign that he will change course as he did in Lebanon.

El Salvador was the first area in which Mr. Reagan sharply changed American
policy after taking office. He saw the guerrilla war, then at a fairly low
level, as the work of the Soviet Union and its clients and as a threat to U.S.
security. He greatly increased American economic and military aid. He promised
liberty and justice for Salvadorans as the guerrillas were defeated.

Three years later events mock the policy. The guerrillas, whom our experts
numbered at 3,000 to 5,000 in 1981, have grown to 9,000 to 12,000 and have the
military momentum. After all the American aid, the Salvadoran economy is in
tatters, with about a third of the labor force unemployed. There is no justice:
Thousands have been murdered by right-wing death squads, and not one killer
convicted.

The Reagan policy is working in reverse, and the reason by now is obvious. The
policy is said to aim at social peace in El Salvador, but in practice it gives
support to those who have torn the society apart by exploiting it for
generations - and who intend to go on as they were, holding power by force.

It is a lunatic notion, and recent reports have dramatized its lunacy. Most
dramatic was a New York Times article by Stephen Kinzer reciting charges made by
a former high-ranking official of the Salvadoran security forces. This unnamed
officer described in gruesome detail how some of his country's leaders were
involved in organized murder.

Roberto d'Aubuisson, a leading candidate for President of El Salvador, has often
been said to have links with the right-wing death squads. The officer quoted by
Mr. Kinzer said that Mr. d'Aubuisson organized the death squads starting in 1979
and continues to direct them and pick their victims.

According to the officer, Mr. d'Aubuisson personally planned the assassinations
in 1980 of Archbishop Oscar Romero and a leading Christian Democratic
politician, Mario Zamora. For those killings, it was said, he used gunmen who
were veterans of the former Nicaraguan National Guard.

The officer said two Salvadoran army officers working for Mr. d'Aubuisson killed
Jose Rodolfo Viera, head of the land redistribution program opposed by the
right, in 1981. Shot with him in the San Salvador Sheraton were two U.S. labor
advisers. The failure to bring their killers to justice has significantly
alienated the American labor movement.  Mr. d'Aubuisson and his killers are
funded by Salvadoran exiles who want to undo the beginnings of reform, the
officer quoted by Mr. Kinzer said. Mr. d'Aubuisson met regularly with them first
in Guatemala, but they now operate from Miami. Working with him also in the
death squad activity is the chief of the treasury police, Col. Nicolas Carranza.
The report also supported previous charges that El Salvador's minister of
defense, Eugenio Vides Casanova, is personally directing a cover-up of the
murder of four American churchwomen in 1980. It said his cousin, Col. Oscar
Edgardo Casanova, ordered the killings.  The fresh story of Mr. d'Aubuisson's
role in the death squads is acutely embarrassing to the Reagan Administration.
In just three weeks, on March 25, Salvadorans vote for president, and Mr.
d'Aubuisson is running strongly. He will probably be one of the top two
finishers, putting him into a runoff. Many observers think he will then either
win or stage a coup against the Christian Democratic candidate, Jose Napoleon
Duarte, if Mr. Duarte wins.  By any rational calculation of American interests,
the situation is a nightmare. And it is a direct result of Ronald Reagan's
policies. Mr. d'Aubuisson, for example, had been frozen out by American
diplomats, who regarded him as a pathological killer. Mr. Reagan's diplomats
thought it would be a good idea to let him get into the country's politics.  The
Reagan Administration's answer to the failure of its policy is to do more of the
same. It has asked Congress to quadruple military aid to El Salvador. It says it
deplores the right- wing political murders but does not want to condition aid on
their end. Why should Mr. d'Aubuisson or anyone else end them when the reward
for that behavior is quadrupled military aid?  Barbara Tuchman has a new book
out called ''The March of Folly: From Troy to Vietnam.'' It is about obsessive
governmental folly, ''perverse persistence in a policy demonstrably unworkable
or counter-productive.'' For the second edition she can add a chapter on the
Reagan policy in El Salvador.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 6, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

UNDERDOG ROLE SUITS UNCONVENTIONAL VICTOR

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2063 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, March 5


Gary Hart's role as the underdog of this year's Presidential campaign, a role he
is reluctant to yield, suits a personal temperament molded in rural Kansas and
the study carrels of Yale, and a political style shaped in another man's race
for the Presidency a dozen years ago.

He is, moreover, something of a mix of elements, some contradictory; he is one
part quiet scholar, one part political agitator, one part self-styled ''Western
Jeffersonian Democrat,'' one part leader of a traveling salvation show. ''From
the time I first got to know him,'' one of his colleagues says, ''he has been a
hard guy to figure.''

This morning the temperature was well below freezing, and a shiver ran through
Mr. Hart's trunk when he was asked, time and again, whether his triumphs in New
Hampshire and Maine had transformed him into the front- runner for the
Democratic nomination.

No, he said in the rosy light of sunrise outside the Quincy shipyard, the words
coming in a burst of steam from his mouth, he was ''just an underdog trying to
make my way in the world.''

Gary Hart, of course, is no longer having trouble making his way in the
political world, but after one of the most astonishing weeks in recent
Presidential politics, the Colorado Senator hesitates to give up his status as
underdog. It is as important to his political strategy as the idea of
inevitablity once was to the campaign of former Vice President Walter F.
Mondale, whom he surprised with his New England primary and caucus upsets.

Mr. Hart, in fact, takes comfort in his role as a political guerrilla, striking
here and there, almost always by surprise, at a Mondale political organization
that only two weeks ago seemed so formidable. It is a part he understudied in
1972, as head of George McGovern's Presidential campaign.

Early that year, when Senator Edmund S. Muskie of Maine was thought to hold a
commanding lead for the Democratic nomination by virtue of his high poll
ratings, a rich campaign treasury and the endorsement of leading party
officials, Mr. Hart reached into the pages of the great Russian novels for his
political strategy, comparing himself with General Kutuzov of Tolstoy's ''War
and Peace.''

''Kutuzov was under the same pressure to attack and win, to attack anywhere,''
Mr. Hart said at the time. ''But we're an insurgency. I believe we should attack
and retreat, attack and retreat.''

Mr. Hart is still something of a Kutuzov on the American political scene. If Mr.
Mondale, who rose to prominence in the customary fashion, slowly progressing up
the political ladder with the assistance of organized labor and traditional
Democratic voting groups, is the quintessential product of the coalition of the
New Deal and the ideas of the Great Society, then Mr. Hart, whose rise has been
far less conventional, can be viewed as the product of the television era and
the Vietnam War, the decade of youth rebellion in the 1960's and the
frustrations of the 1980's.

'A Very Sensitive Individual'


Mr. Hart speaks broadly and brashly of new ideas and new programs, sometimes in
the manner of a pop psychologist, but he can carry on detailed discourses on
issues of religious philosophy. His Senate colleagues recall him retreating into
the pages of serious novels during international fact-finding missions.

''He's a very sensitive individual who thinks a lot about deep philosophical
issues,'' says Senator William S. Cohen, a Maine Republican. ''Most people don't
have the time or the interest to talk or to think about those sorts of things,
but Gary always did.''

He is outgoing, winning and, on occasion, inspiring on the stump, but withdrawn
and almost shy in private. ''He's not unfriendly, but he is distant,'' says
another Senate colleague. ''He's very hard to communicate with. I don't know
whether it's shyness or aloofness.''

At the same time, Mr. Hart, whose appearance on the national scene was due in
large measure to opposition to the war in Vietnam, today is regarded as an
expert on military affairs and one of the leading voices in an effort to make
the American military system more mobile, more flexible and more cost-effective.

In recent years, in fact, Mr. Hart has become known in the warren of Capitol
Hill committee rooms as an outspoken advocate of small aircraft carriers, planes
capable of vertical takeoff and the use of light infantry divisions. In the
Senate chamber itself, he has helped lead the battle against the MX missile,
arguing that it would be a destabilizing element in the international arms
calculus.

''He's a real military reformer,'' said Senator Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat
who also sits on the Armed Services Committee. ''He worries about the size of
the military budget, but also about its effectiveness.''

Small-Town Kansas Roots


The contradictions remain, going back to his childhood in the small community of
Ottawa, Kan., where his parents were churchgoing people with a Republican tint
to their politics.

He was born Gary Warren Hartpence on Nov. 28, 1936, though for some time the
grown Gary Hart has listed his birth year as 1937. He has often said that
questions about his actual birth year and about why he changed his name were
''not relevant or justified to most of the voters,'' but last week, with the
political spotlight on this unusual newcomer from Colorado, he was forced to
address the question.

He said that the discrepancy on his age grew out of ''lighthearted discussion
between my mother and her sister over my mother's age.'' He said that Senate and
campaign aides had carried his mother's subtraction into a variety of records
and that he had done nothing to correct it.



PICK UP FROM GARY LEDE



x x x to correct it.


Ralph Hartpence, Mr. Hart's uncle and a retired gas company employee in Ottawa,
said in a telephone interview today, ''I don't think his mother had anything to
do with it.''

Early in the fight for the nomination Mr. Hart said the change of his name from
Hartpence came when he was a youth and was prompted by a decision by his
parents. Now Mr. Hart says the name change was a joint decision by his parents
and himself, adding that Hart was the family's original name in Ireland.

Fundamentalist Background


He also said that the name change, which took place when he was in his early
20's, had nothing to do with a possible political career, an assertion that his
uncle also questioned. ''At the time, I thought that was why he did it,'' Mr.
Hartpence said. ''It was easier to pronounce and shorter. He didn't change it
because he had anything to hide.''

Mr. Hart's critics, who are wont to portray him as overambitious, suggest that
the controversy is revealing, but the issue remains unresolved. ''I don't want
to get into an argument with my uncles,'' Mr. Hart said.

Mr. Hart is remembered in Ottawa as a quiet, somewhat contemplative young man,
polite and friendly, disciplined in the ways of the Church of the Nazarene. He
went off to Bethany Nazarene College in Oklahoma, where he came under the
influence of an intellectual named J. Prescott Johnson, who introduced him to
philosophy.

Later, married to the former Lee Ludwig, he went to Yale, first as a divinity
student, later as a law student, and he became involved in John F. Kennedy's
drive to the Presidency. After stints in the Justice Department of Attorney
General Robert F. Kennedy and as an assistant to Interior Secretary Stewart K.
Udall, he went into private law practice in Denver.

Kept an Eye on Politics


All the while, however, Mr. Hart kept one eye on the political world, and Robert
F. Kennedy's attempt in 1968 to win the Democratic Presidential nomination lured
him back. But it was a couple of years later, as Senator McGovern was preparing
for the struggle for the 1972 nomination, that the man and the moment were
matched.

It started out, as these things so often do, with a memorandum: Mr. Hart's
thoughts on how the South Dakota Democrat could take the Mountain West. Before
long, Mr. Hart was directing the McGovern effort, and in the meantime became
perhaps the best-known political organizer of the decade.

''He was the genius behind the creation of McGovern's primary organization,''
said Frank Mankiewicz, another top McGovern campaign aide. ''He picked the right
people. He knew how to get them going in New Hampshire and Wisconsin and Oregon.
He's a tactician, he's an organizer. He knows how to get up machinery and to run
it.''

The McGovern organization was, in military parlance, lean and mean, more like
third-world insurgency movements than career armies of 19th- century Europe and
fueled, from the top, with the fervor of the true believer. Like Mr. Hart's own
experiences later in New Hampshire and Maine, the McGovern campaign upended a
supposedly superior organization possessed of all the customary advantages.

He Stayed Away From Issues


In a campaign known for taking politically unusual positions, Mr. Hart seldom
spoke on issues and was known to be almost totally occupied with questions of
organization. There was, however, no indication that Mr. Hart disagreed with
positions taken by the candidate.

The McGovern campaign swept to victory at the Democratic convention and then
failed to meet the challenge of President Nixon and the Republicans, who took
every electoral vote save those of Massachusetts and the District of Columbia
and sent Mr. Hart back to his Denver law practice.

But the politician in him still stirred, and he prepared for a campaign to
oppose Senator Peter Dominick, a Republican. He was in his familiar role, the
underdog, but with the assistance of some 3,000 workers around the state, many
of them new to politics, he won the Democratic nomination.

The 1974 struggle with Senator Dominick included charges that his opponent,
chairman of the Republican Senatorial Campaign Committee, had improperly
diverted donations from a dairy cooperative to the Nixon campaign committee. Mr.
Dominick denied any wrongdoing.

'Now It's Our Turn'


Then, as now, Mr. Hart saw politics through a generational prism. ''While one
generation has power, it also has strength, and some fleeting claim to
immortality,'' he wrote in ''Right from the Start,'' a book about the McGovern
campaign. ''It relinquishes power only under duress, because the loss of power
is a blunt reminder of mortality.''

Now Mr. Hart began casting himself as the personification of a new generation
and of new ideas in politics. ''They had their turn,'' his campaign slogan said
in 1974. ''Now it's our turn.''

By winning 57 percent of the vote, Mr. Hart got his turn in the Senate. He took
on the military, arms control, environmental issues, often with eloquence and
competence, but often found the chamber a frustrating place.

''Gary had some of the same frustrations a lot of young members do,'' said
Lawrence Smith, executive director of the Center for Science and International
Affairs at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government and a former chief aide to Mr.
Hart in the Senate.  ''He saw dysfunctions in the way things worked and problems
in the way things were conceived. Gary had high aspirations for the quality of
what he and the Senate wanted to do, and the frustration would at times be
intense.''

Difficult to Pigeonhole


He was re-elected six years later, defeating Mary Estill Buchanan by only 1
percent of the vote. And though a loner among the clubmen of the Senate, Mr.
Hart made a mark there, particularly in arms control. Skeptical of big spending,
troubled by what he saw as interventionist impulses in foreign policy, intrigued
with the idea of industrial policy, he did not fit easily into conventional
political pigeonholes.

His personal life has not been untroubled. He and Mrs. Hart have separated and
reconciled twice, and now Mr. Hart introduces his wife at campaign rallies as
''the next First Lady.''

He has wanted to change politics, and already, in barely more than the first two
months of 1984, he has transformed the political world.

''There's something more important than money and endorsements and the rest, and
that's a message,'' he said in the cold outside the shipyard this morning. ''I
think what people have been looking for is a message about a new agenda and a
new vision for this country.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Gary Hart (page A14)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 7, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HART, ASSESSING HIS RUSH OF SUPPORT, SAYS IT REFLECTS A DESIRE FOR UNITY

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1183 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, March 6


''What I think I may have tapped, and I don't know yet, is a reservoir much
vaster than anyone ever contemplated,'' Senator Gary Hart said, referring to the
sudden rush of support that has flowed to him in the wake of his victory in the
New Hampshire primary a week ago.

''It has little to do with me,'' he added. ''It has a lot to do with that
pent-up, latent need to re-identify with national purpose.''

Musing about the volatile shifts in the campaign for the Democratic Presidential
nomination on a flight Monday night to Atlanta after a day of stumping across
Massachusetts, the 47-year-old Colorado Senator called the current election ''a
watershed year'' whose outcome ''will determine whether we continue to be a
world-class power or a second-class power.''

''To understand this election, you have to get out of the linear, left-right
spectrum,'' he said. ''This is not a left-right race. This is a future-past
race. That's what '32 was. That's what '60 was. This is a watershed in the sense
of future versus past.''

Two Economic Changes Are Cited


In a relaxed 40-minute interview, Mr. Hart asserted that the nation was now
going through two economic changes as profound as the Depression. He also denied
that he was a cool and aloof politician and talked about how his carefully
plotted timetable for making the Presidential race took off from his own
re-election to the Senate in the Reagan landslide of 1980 and was solidified in
December 1982.

Mr. Hart took issue with the national press, saying it paid too much attention
to public opinion polls before the Iowa caucuses on Feb. 20, in which he
finished second.  ''My definition of organization is different from the way it
is used journalistically most of the time,'' he said. ''The mistake a lot of
people made in '83 was to believe that a highly paid, highly professional,
highly efficient staff in Washington was an organization.''

He said it had taken a ''grass-roots, indigenous, sacrificial'' organization to
keep his message alive in Iowa and New Hampshire at a time when he got little
attention in print or on television. But he added that press coverage now was
leading public opinion, making his momentum more important than organization in
states like Maine, where he won the Democratic caucuses last Sunday.

Main Objectives Identified by Candidate


Identifying his own main objectives as ''modernizing the economy, ending the
nuclear arms race, cleaning up the environment, re-establishing education,'' the
Colorado Senator said he still felt vulnerable to the organizational power of
Walter F. Mondale in the major test of strength that looms next Tuesday, when
nine states have primaries or caucuses.

''This race isn't over,'' Mr. Hart said. ''I am still a challenger.'' Referring
to Mr. Mondale, the Senator added: ''He has the money. He has the endorsements
and labor organization at the grass roots.''

But Mr. Hart, who has long had a reputation in the Senate as a reader and an
intellectual who specializes in analyzing issues and avoiding ideological
positions, suggested that his sudden popular strength reflected a historic
hunger of Americans to break out of established approaches to the nation's
problems.

''I think there's been a pent-up desire in this country to break out of the old
political modes and old arrangements for a long, long time,'' he said. ''I think
people thought they got it in '76 and I think some people think they got it in
'80. But I think there's still an awful lot of people out there that have been
frustrated for a long time by assassinations, by Watergate, by Vietnam, and I
think there's been a tremendous desire for somebody to express that latent
idealism, that desire for national unity, for a common purpose.''

1932 and '60 Elections Recalled


As he does in his speeches, he repeatedly compared the current election campaign
to 1932 and 1960, invoking the memories of Franklin D. Roosevelt and John F.
Kennedy. Rather than being ideologues, Mr. Hart said, both men were innovators
who responded to special circumstances, and he cast himself in that same role
now.

In his stump speeches and position papers, Senator Hart has called for
government leadership to develop a cooperative campaign with management and
labor to stimulate new private investment in such ''old'' industries as
automobiles, steel and machine tools, coupled with tax incentives to promote
investment in new technology industries to compete better with Japan and other
countries.

He has also called for larger American investment in research and development
and in education as well as widespread retraining of unemployed workers and a
large public job program to rebuild urban transportation systems, interstate
highways, dams, ports and river facilities.

''We can have, in fact, a job program that in the next 15 or 20 years provides
employment for every citizen in this country doing productive, necessary and
meaningful work,'' he said in the interview.

''I am not saying I'm the only human being on earth to turn this country around
by any means,'' he continued. ''But I do think a second Ronald Reagan term means
a serious decline in so many ways for this country, and perhaps for the world. I
do not think this is an ordinary election in its implications.''

'Two Dramatic Revolutions'


''Five, 10 years from now,'' he said, ''the current circumstances will be so
apparent to people - two dramatic revolutions. One is the emergence,
unwillingly, of this country into the international economy, symbolized as much
as anything else by the OPEC oil embargo and the Japanese import problem. The
second is the transformation of our own domestic economy to one increasingly
based on services. I can't think of a time, probably, in American history where
this country has undergone two dramatic revolutions simultaneously.

''Now if those circumstances aren't as profound, or almost as profound, as the
Great Depression than I don't know what is.''

The Senator, who is increasingly larding his appearances with quips and local
allusions, brushed aside news articles that have depicted him as a cerebral,
self- assured but somewhat aloof politician who was uneasy at raising funds or
working crowds. ''If I were all that cool and aloof,'' he said, ''I wouldn't be
here today.'' The tall, trim Senator, his brown hair blowing in the breeze and
green eyes peering out over high cheekbones, adopts a vigorous campaign style
that some voters have compared to that of President Kennedy. But he resents
pressures to be more like typical back-slapping members of Congress.

''I think too many of us are still held to the traditional political standard of
gregariousness and all that,'' he said. ''As a matter of fact, you can be warm
in so many different ways that avoid the service-club back-slapping, loud,
boistering, joke-telling style. It is fundamentally relating to human beings.
You don't need to do that by telling funny stories, pounding people on the back,
taking over a room.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 7, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Gun That Shoots Fans

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 397 words


To understand some of the priorities of military procurement, consider the
Army's new Sergeant York air-defense gun.

The weapon is a computerized, radar-guided pair of guns mounted on a tank
chassis. Designed to shoot down planes and helicopters, it is programmed to fire
at whirring blades. In recent tests, the newsletter Defense Week reports, the
first production model ignored all the targets presented to it. But the gun is
no dummy. Instead, it zeroed in on what it considered a more promising target:
the exhaust fan in a nearby latrine.


All new weapons have bugs, says a manufacturer. Then why not fix them in the
prototype, rather than the production models? But the Sergeant York's flaws
transcend repair. Its radar, adapted from a fighter plane's, is probably too
delicate to withstand rough terrain. Should the radar keep working, its
emissions will give away its unit's position. Its gun is a different caliber
from other NATO guns. It can shoot planes only if they fly in straight lines,
leaving helicopters as its only real target.

But a man with a machine gun can bring down a helicopter. The Army should know:
it lost 4,643 of them in Vietnam, nearly all to rifles and machine guns. Why
does it need radar-guided guns, which cost $6.5 million each?  Because, as Gregg
Easterbrook has recounted in The Atlantic Monthly, in 1973 the Israelis captured
a Soviet radar-controlled gun called the Shilka. Tested by the Army, the Shilka
proved a poor weapon, incapable of hitting maneuvering aircraft. But the Army
was envious. Ten years later it has a high-tech, armor-plated lemon all its own.
After the test fiasco of the Sergeant York, will Congress not cut the $4.2
billion budgeted for the program? No: because of jobs and contractor pressure,
Congress can almost never cut a weapon once production has started. But, knowing
its own weakness, it's pursuing other reforms.  Last year Congress told the
Pentagon to seek warranties on all weapons and to set up a truly independent
testing office. The intensity of the protests now heard from the Pentagon and
its contractors betrays how seriously these two simple reforms threaten the
present procurement system.  Apparently combat-effective weaponry is not the
highest concern of that system. Let those who disagree ponder the Sergeant York
gun, shooting out the fan in the latrine.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 7, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 913 words


THE MARCH OF FOLLY. From Troy to Vietnam. By Barbara W. Tuchman. 447 pages.
Illustrated. Knopf. $18.95.

IN her latest book, Barbara W. Tuchman - the author of such well-known and
successful works as ''The Guns of August'' and ''Stilwell and the American
Experience in China'' - has set herself no less a task than to probe the very
roots of folly as it has revealed itself over the long course of human history.
Among her conclusions is that folly is sometimes caused by people's
''wooden-headedness.'' At other times, it results from ''cognitive dissonance,''
or an unwillingness to listen to the facts. On still other occasions, folly
occurs as a consequence of ignoring previous history - or, one might almost say,
as a result of folly.

But then it may be that I'm muddling Mrs. Tuchman's message. Let me try another
approach.

What she is also trying to do is look as closely as possible at four major acts
of folly in human history. These are the Trojans' decision to move the Greek
horse within the walls of their city; the refusal of six Renaissance Popes (or
what Mrs. Tuchman blithely refers to at one point as ''the Renaissance six'') to
arrest the growing corruption of their church and to recognize the increasing
restiveness that would lead to the Protestant secession; the British misrule
under King George III that eventually cost England her American colonies; and
America's mishandling of the conflict in Vietnam.


Mrs. Tuchman takes pains to point out that she chose these particular examples
because they have in common three criteria. Those who were responsible were
warned in advance of the potential for disaster of what they were getting
themselves into. There were feasible alternatives to the course they took. And
it was groups, not individuals, who perpetrated the foolishness.

The first two seem to me gratuitous since it is hardly a case of folly to act
without knowledge of the consequences when there is no alternative line of
action to pursue. The third may be part of what gets her into such trouble in
''The March of Folly,'' for it is hard enough to explain why individuals act a
certain way in history, let alone to account for group behavior in the past. As
for undertaking to explain four such wildly different cases of folly in human
history - well, I suppose if one has promised oneself to square the circle, one
might as well go ahead and cube the sphere.

But perhaps I'm still misunderstanding what she is up to. And there is yet
another possible way one might approach her new book. In it, she has gathered
four historical essays, each approximately twice as long as the one that
precedes it, and the fourth, on the United States's conduct in Vietnam, about 10
times the length of the first, called ''Prototype: The Trojans Take the Wooden
Horse Within Their Walls.'' Having noticed that in each example a group pursues
a policy contrary to its own interest, Mrs. Tuchman has tried to generalize,
calling her the result ''The March of Folly.''

But the generalization doesn't work. First, the four examples don't bear any
resemblance to one another, except, very superficially, for the British loss of
her American colonies and America's ''loss'' of Vietnam. Second, the essays are
detailed narrative accounts of certain historical events and not at all
concerned with the search for underlying principles. Thus, when Mrs. Tuchman
gets around to drawing conclusions, she is forced by the breadth of her canvas
into uttering fatuities. ''Failure of communications appears to be endemic to
the human condition,'' she informs us at one point. ''Historical mistakes are
often irretrievable,'' she discovers at another.

And in summing up why the Renaissance Popes provoked the Protestant secession,
she drops the following bombshell: ''First, it must be recognized that'' the
attitudes to power of ''the Renaissance six'' ''and their resultant behavior
were shaped to an unusual degree by the mores and conditions of their time and
surroundings. This is of course true of every person in every time,'' (what -
that he is shaped to an unusual degree by the mores and conditions of his time
and surroundings?) ''but more so in this case because the mores and conditions
of the Italian governing class of this period were in fact so exotic.''

Exotic to whom, besides outlanders like Martin Luther and his fellow Northern
Europeans, who were bound to find their Southern neighbors exotic? Did the
Italian governing class seem exotic to the people they ruled, who, one would
assume, were part of ''the surroundings'' that shaped that class? Or is it
simply that the mores and conditions seem exotic to Mrs. Tuchman, which leaves
her, not for the first or last time in this book, committing the historical
fallacy of judging the past by present standards.

But any way one approaches ''The March of Folly,'' it is unsatisfying, to say
the least. Better books have been written about Vietnam, the American
Revolution, the Renaissance Popes and the Trojan Horse. Better things have been
said about human folly. In her book's introductory essay, Mrs. Tuchman cites ''a
perceptive comment by Ralph Waldo Emerson,'' who apparently once warned, ''In
analyzing history do not be too profound, for often the causes are quite
superficial.'' The problem is that she has taken his advice too literally. Not
only has she confined herself to the shallower wellsprings of history, she has
committed the further sin of treating them superficially.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Barbara Tuchman

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 8, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
WHY GARY HART?

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 778 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, March 7


The incredible can no longer be denied: Walter Mondale is at the end of the
road.

The former Vice President may do better in the South on Super Tuesday next week
- by all the usual logic he ought to. But the usual logic has had a way of
failing this year. And his string of defeats in New England, despite great
advantages of money and organization, has raised mortal questions about his
electability.

The rise of Gary Hart is as jarring to the conventional wisdom as the fall of
the supposedly inevitable Mondale candidacy. There is a certain asperity in the
press comment on Senator Hart now, as if to say: Who is this whippersnapper? How
has he mesmerized those voters? But the explanation is not really that
complicated.

Successful campaigns in this country need themes. Gary Hart has identified a
yearning in the electorate that he meets with his theme of New Ideas. It is a
generational yearning: a feeling among Americans under 45 that their generation
has been shut out of political power, that it is time for their experience and
ideas to count.

Some establishment Democrats and commentators dismiss ''New Ideas'' as an empty
phrase. But when Senator Hart uses it, his younger audience knows that he is
calling for a new generation of leadership. And he identifies some of its
concerns by saying that he has worked for the environment, for women's rights,
against the Vietnam War, for arms control.

Figures tell how important the generational theme is, and how well Senator Hart
has used it. In the New Hampshire primary, 64 percent of the vote was cast by
men and women under 45. They voted overwhelmingly for Mr. Hart whether they were
union members or non-union, whether they called themselves liberal or
conservative.  ''To understand this election,'' Senator Hart told Hedrick Smith
of The New York Times the other day, ''you have to get out of the linear, left-
right spectrum. This is not a left-right race. This is a future-past race.
That's what '32 was. That's what '60 was. . . .'' In that interview Senator Hart
broadened out his theme in a way that I thought was significant. He spoke not
only of past and future but of an American idealism seeking new ways of
expression - a theme that speaks just as much to voters over 45.  ''I think
there's been a pent-up desire in this country to break out of the old political
modes and old arrangements for a long, long time,'' he said. ''I think people
thought they got it in '76, and I think some people think they got it in '80.
''But I think there's still an awful lot of people out there that have been
frustrated for a long time by assassinations, by Watergate, by Vietnam, and I
think there's been a tremendous desire for somebody to express that latent
idealism, that desire for national unity, for a common purpose.'' Recently I
asked a young couple who are tuned in to Senator Hart what they thought he
offered to older voters of liberal views. They answered that he offered hope -
the hope of preventing a second Reagan term that would remake this country,
destroy the humane tradition, put Ed Meese on the Supreme Court.

Gary Hart does not seem to have the personal magnetism that marks some
politicians - his model John Kennedy, for example. At least I do not sense it.
But if that is so, his message is getting across on its own: which says
something about the appeal of the message.

''It has little to do with me,'' he said in the Smith interview. ''It has a lot
to do with that pent-up, latent need to re- identify with national purpose. . .
. I am not saying I'm the only human being on earth to turn this country around
by any means. But I do think a second Ronald Reagan term means a serious decline
in so many ways for this country, and perhaps for the world.''

Senator Hart has a long way to go in this campaign. He has to show that he can
do well in a major industrial state: New York or Pennsylvania or Illinois. He
has to show the ability to work with the older forces in the Democratic Party,
the labor leaders and elected officials who mostly support Mr. Mondale.

But the party powers have to show some understanding, too. Labor leaders, for
instance, have so far reacted to Senator Hart's victories with indignation. In
fact he puts the highest priority on new jobs and a revitalized American
economy. But Lane Kirkland, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. president, derided him as a
Democrat who would abandon labor for ''the fabricated futurism of microchip
minds.'' The phrasing was out of Spiro Agnew.

The point is that Gary Hart may well be the Democratic nominee. All those who
want to defeat President Reagan had better start adjusting to that possibility.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 8, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Koch Seeks Funds For Vietnam Veterans

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and Maurice Carroll

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 127 words


''Never have we had a war where

we have treated our veterans so shabbily,'' Mayor Koch said yesterday, urging
support of a $1 million fund drive by the New York Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Commission.

A person's stand on the war was ''irrelevant, irrelevant,'' he told a skimpily
attended luncheon in the Grand Hyatt Hotel run by the real-estate figures
Maurice Paprin and Donald Trump. What was important is that, in caring for the
Americans who fought in it, ''we have not done what we should,'' the Mayor said.

Only 25 people were at the meeting, but Mr. Koch said he expected a huge crowd
at the big fund-raising event, a Red, White and Blue Gala on Memorial Day.

Half the money will be used for a monument, the rest for a veterans' job
program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 8, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Presidential Roots

BYLINE: By William E. Farrell and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 670 words


Steeped as we are in the quadrennial foray over who will reside

in the White House, the Smithsonian Institution Press has published a book in
which historians take a look at former Presidents and their roots. Most
occupants of the Oval Office, concludes the book, ''Every Four Years,''
''arrived there through a combination of circumstance and happenstance, often
with little preparation for the job.''

Abraham Lincoln, according to one historian, Mark E. Neely, ''had absolutely no
executive or administrative experience.'' Harry S. Truman was a haberdasher
whose business failed as he neared 40. Woodrow Wilson at 54 withdrew from the
cloistered groves of academe to enter the political arena. The early Presidents
- Washington, John Adams, Jefferson, Madison, Monroe and John Quincy Adams - had
patrician backgrounds. Andrew Jackson speculated in land and tolerated somewhat
rowdy fetes at the White House while Ulysses S. Grant is described by another
historian, Michael Lawson, as showing ''absolutely no distinction as a youth.''

The bottom line, espoused by the book's editor, Robert Post, is, ''Who knows
what it takes to be qualified?'' Left unresolved was whether a man as homely as
Lincoln or a man with wooden teeth, George Washington, would be eliminated early
in the modern race for the Presidency because of the fierce eye of the
television camera.

For Full Accounting

There are still 2,490 Americans

unaccounted for in the lingering

sorrow of the Vietnam War. Representative Thomas N. Kindness, Republican of
Ohio, reminded his colleagues of this the other day and noted that more than
100,000 signators of the Vietnam Veterans Vigil Society recently petitioned
Congress to address itself towards finding ''answers to our questions about
these Americans.'' Representative Douglas Applegate, Democrat of Ohio, has
introduced a resolution that puts Congress on record ''demanding a full
accounting of Americans missing in Southeast Asia.'' The Vietnam War Memorial
here contains the names of the missing 2,490. The unaccounted for have their
names marked by a star.

On Mail Reform

Apostal rate policy that an Illinois Congressman contends favors the mailing of
salacious publications to the detriment of serious ones has prompted him to
press for legislative reform. The Representative, Tom Corcoran, a Republican who
is on the House Subcommittee on Postal Operations and Services, says, ''It is
three times more expensive to mail a one-pound Bible to Aunt Minnie in Chicago
from Washington than it is to send a copy of Hustler magazine the same
distance.''

This is so, he explains, because under present postal regulations a Bible mailed
at book rate to Chicago from Washington costs 63 cents while a magazine, such as
Hustler, is mailed at a bulk rate costing 20 cents. Mr. Corcoran wants a new
policy that he says ''would give needed relief to serious nonprofit publications
that are being pressed to the wall.''

''At the same time,'' he adds, ''a postal rate policy should be established
which does not encourage the wholesale mailings of pornography.'' Subscribers
have the right to receive ''such trash'' he says, but they ought to pay a
stiffer price for it.

Image of Yore

It's been a long time since Babe La

Tour graced the burlesque stages

of Hoboken, N.J., but the image of the ''artiste,'' as such performers were then
referred to, is here in Washington. The performer, wearing a tutu and tights, is
the subject of a watercolor by Stuart Davis done in 1912 and is a recent proud
acquisition of the National Museum of American Art. It joins the museum's
growing collection of works by Davis that focused on urban life. Davis, who died
in 1964, had a studio in Hoboken and loved to roam the streets and sample the
city's saloons, music halls and burlesque houses. The new acquisition, titled
''Babe La Tour,'' was done after Davis, then only 18 years old, saw her perform
one night. Babe's real name was Jesse M. Lang and her long career lasted until
1957.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 8, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MARTIN NIEMOLLER, RESOLUTE FOE OF HITLER

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1525 words


The Rev. Martin Niem"oller, the German Protestant preacher, theologian and
church leader who led church opposition to Hitler and survived the Dachau
concentration camp, died Tuesday at his home in Wiesbaden, West German
Protestant church officials announced. He was 92 years old.

The church did not give the cause of death, saying only that Pastor Niem"oller
had died after a long illness.

A U-boat commander in World War I, Pastor Niem"oller was serving a Berlin parish
when he became the best- known advocate of clerical resistance to the Nazi
regime, which came to power in 1933.

Interned Eight Years

But in 1937 he began eight years in Nazi internment - at the Sachsenhausen
prison camp and later at Dachau - because of his criticism of the Nazi party and
the Third Reich, particularly for its persecution of Jews. He went on to become
West Germany's most prominent pacifist in the 1950's and 1960's and an outspoken
critic of nuclear arms.

After American soldiers freed him from captivity in 1945, he propounded the view
that Germans bore collective guilt for World War II.

From 1961 to 1968 Pastor Niem"oller was a president of the World Council of
Churches, traveling to the United States and the Soviet Union as well as to
North Vietnam.

He was awarded the Soviet Union's Lenin Peace Prize in 1967 and West Germany's
highest honor, the Grand Cross of Merit, in 1971.

Chancellor Praises Clergyman

Chancellor Helmut Kohl praised Pastor Niem"oller yesterday as one of ''the most
oustanding personalities in the fight of Protestant Christians against the
totalitarian claims of the National Socialist state.'' In a telegram to the
pastor's wife, the Chancellor said the clergyman fought for his beliefs without
compromise until his last days.

Over the decades, Pastor Niem"oller's views went far afield from his early
right-wing German nationalism and opposition to the Weimar Republic in the years
after World War I.

He served as president of the Evangelical Church - which is Lutheran - in Hesse
and Nassau, West Germany, from 1947 to 1964. After retiring from active church
work, he went on preaching and writing.

''Live according to the Gospel without fear or fail,'' he used to say in
response to critics.

Was Called a Communist

While the Cold War raged, he spurred assertions that he was a
''fellow-traveler'' of the Communists because of a 1952 visit to Russian
clerical leaders in Moscow and other journeys in the East Bloc in the early
1950's.

''You do not have to fight Communism in order to save Christianity,'' he
contended. But he repeatedly denied that he was a Communist, and he took steps
to forestall anticlerical measures by the East German Government.  Emphasizing
his pacifist views, he served as president of the German Peace Society and was
active in West Germany's draft-resistance movement. He spoke out against German
rearmament after World War II as well as against nuclear weapons, and he
traveled widely to denounce the United States role in Vietnam.

After a trip to Hanoi in 1967, he declared: ''Even if 10 million American
soldiers are sent there, Vietnam will never be reduced to the status of an
ideological colony of a non-Vietnamese power.'' Only months later, he received
the Lenin Prize.

Applying his energies to West German politics in 1965, he stirred a commotion by
scorning the ruling coalition that was formed that year by the two main parties,
the Social Democrats and the Christian Democratic Union. He contended that they
had engaged in what he called a ''dictatorial monopoly'' in forming a Cabinet,
and he went so far as to call on West Germans to protest by abstaining from
elections.

A Native of Lippstadt

Friedrich Gustav Emil Martin Niem"oller was born Jan. 14, 1892, in the former
Hanseatic town of Lippstadt - known for its 12th- and 13th-century churches - in
what is now the West German state of North Rhine-Westphalia.

His activism in Germany's Protestant Church, which traces some of its origins to
Martin Luther, was his by birthright. He was the son of Heinrich Niem"oller,
also a Lutheran pastor, and the former Paula M"uller.

Young Martin attended public schools in Lippstadt and in Elberfeld, a
textile-mill center which is now part of the West German city of Wuppertal. He
decided to become a career naval officer and, in 1910, when he was 18, he
entered the German Navy as a cadet. He later rose to lieutenant and proved to be
a skillful submarine commander in World War I when he raided Allied shipping in
the Mediterranean and became known as ''the Scourge of Malta.''

After World War I, he studied theology. He was ordained in 1924 and in 1931 was
called to a parish in the fashionable Dahlem district of Berlin, then the sole
German capital.

He was not at first a foe of Nazism, saying at one point he was ''confident that
Hitler will support collaboration between church and state.'' It was reported
later in the United States that Pastor Niem"oller had voted for the Nazis before
they took power.

Then came a confrontation in which, Pastor Niem"oller later said, he told
Hitler: ''You have just said, 'I will take care of the German people.' But we,
too, as Christians and as pastors, have a responsibility to the German people.
That responsibility was entrusted to us by God, and neither you nor anyone in
this world has the power to take it from us.''

Suspended and Interrogated

Before long, the pastor was suspended from preaching because he had opposed the
Nazi regime's rule that people of Jewish ancestry could not serve as pastors. A
few months later he was interrogated by the Gestapo because he had criticized
the paganism of some Nazis.

Pastor Niem"oller soon founded and became director of the Pastor's Emergency
League to Resist Hitlerism, an organization that aided clergymen who were
struggling against Nazi influence within German Protestantism.

From that organization developed the German Confessing Church, a grouping of
like-minded Protestants who felt the need, in the Hitler era, to voice public
opposition to the Nazi regime.

In 1934, the year of his suspension, he wrote a volume of memoirs of his early
years that was later published in the United States under the title ''From
U-Boat to Pulpit.''

Late in 1934, Dr. Ludwig M"uller, a former navy chaplain, was installed as Reich
bishop of the German Evangelical Church under Nazi pressure. More than 8,000
German pastors refused to accept him, and Pastor Niem"oller denounced him as
''the scourge of the church of Christ.''

Undaunted by his suspension, Pastor Niem"oller kept preaching at his crowded
church. Then, in 1937, the Gestapo seized him on charges of seditious activities
and abuse of the pulpit. He was tried, convicted and sentenced to seven months
of what was officially termed ''honorary imprisonment.''

'Hitler's Personal Prisoner'

Pastor Niem"oller rejected terms offered for his release, and his detention was
prolonged into a kind of administrative internment. He was imprisoned in
Sachsenhausen and Dachau, as he later put it, ''as Hitler's personal prisoner.''
He was quoted later as saying that, as such, he was treated somewhat leniently.

After being freed in 1945, Pastor Niem"oller worked to reconstruct German
Protestantism. He went back for a short time to his Berlin parish, then began
wide-ranging travels, propounding pacifism and the concept of Germans'
collective guilt for the war.

In the early postwar years, he also inveighed against waging any ''crusade
against Communism'' and contended that Germany should be a neutral nation,
supervised by the United Nations, and should not rearm.  In 1946, he paid his
first visit to the United States despite opposition by Eleanor Roosevelt and
other liberals who contended that his anti-Nazism sprang entirely from church
considerations and that he was still a nationalist and an advocate of
authoritarian government.

Pastor Niem"oller joined the Council of Protestant Churches in Germany, a new
church agency, and became the head of its Frankfurt-based foreign department.
But in 1955 he was criticized at a church gathering in Weimar, East Germany, as
''too political,'' and in 1956 he quit the post under protest.

A Visit to New York

In 1960, on a visit to New York, he created a stir by telling American churchmen
that there was ''more Christian church life'' in Communist East Germany than in
West Germany. He argued that a postwar resurgence of Protestantism in West
Germany had been stifled by prosperity after economic reforms in 1948.

Several collections of Pastor Niem"oller's sermons were published in book form
over the years, and he wrote numerous articles, largely on theological topics.

Pastor Niem"oller was married in 1919 to Else Bremer, and they had four sons -
the eldest, Hans-Jochen, was killed on the Eastern Front during World War II -
and three daughters. Mrs. Niem"oller died in 1961 in an automobile accident in
Denmark in which Pastor Niem"oller was seriously injured.

In 1971, he married Sibylle von Zell, a former member of his Berlin parish.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rev. Martin Niemoller

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

20 YEARS AFTER KEY LIBEL RULING, DEBATE GOES ON

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1120 words


A landmark Supreme Court decision that strengthened press protections in libel
cases is being eroded by new court decisions and growing public antagonism
toward news organizations, press lawyers said yesterday at a conference marking
the 20th anniversary of the ruling.

Lawyers for libel plaintiffs, however, said the Court's decision in the case -
The New York Times v. Sullivan - continued to give the press an unfair advantage
in attacking the reputations of public figures, as well as those of private
citizens.

More than 250 lawyers from around the country went to the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel
for the conference, which brought together the three lawyers who argued the
Sullivan decision before the Supreme Court.

On March 9, 1964, in its most famous and hotly debated finding in defamation
law, the Court threw out a $500,000 judgment in favor of L. B. Sullivan, the
Police Commissioner of Montgomery, Ala.

The Justices ruled that the press would not be able to meet the need for
vigorous debate of public issues if it had to prove the factual accuracy of
every statement about a public official. Rather, the Court said, a public
official has to prove that the news organization knew its report was false or
showed a reckless disregard for its truth or falsity.

M. Roland Nachman, the lawyer who represented Mr. Sullivan, said he had
successfully invoked the Sullivan decision to defend press clients. But, he
said, the issues he raised two decades ago would get a more favorable hearing
before the present Supreme Court.

''My arguments are still so persuasive,'' he said, ''that I fear so long as I
continue to represent media publishers, I am in constant danger of losing the
Times case twice.''

Press lawyers on the conference panel cited the increase in multimillion-dollar
jury awards in libel cases as evidence of broad public antipathy toward the
press.



Judgments Overturned

The lawyers acknowledged that the majority of those judgments had been
overturned or sharply reduced by appeals court judges who cited a need to
maintain the guarantees of free speech and a free press. The lawyers mentioned a
number of cases, including the reduction to $200,000 of a $1.6 million jury
judgment against the National Enquirer involving the entertainer Carol Burnett.

But in the last decade, they said, the Supreme Court has substantially narrowed
the definition of a public official, the group that must meet tougher standards
in suing the press for libel. In addition, they said, the Court has encouraged
judges to let more cases go to trial instead of dismissing them on First
Amendment grounds.

''Each of us is going to see more juries, and jury results will be given more
respect,'' said Conrad M. Shumadine, a Norfolk, Va., lawyer who specializes in
press cases.

The keynote speaker was Judge Irving R. Kaufman, the chief judge of the United
States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. According to Judge Kaufman,
jurors, like other citizens, often see news organizations as ''aloof and
arrogant, insensitive to human needs and concerned only with the profits reaped
from sensationalist coverage.''

''While still a lodestar,'' he said, the Sullivan decision ''has not fulfilled
its entire promise.'' He suggested that the law should go further in most states
to bar punitive judgments against news organizations that admitted error and
retracted offending articles.

In addition to Mr. Nachman, the attorney for Mr. Sullivan, the panelists who had
argued the case before the Supreme Court were Herbert Wechsler, the Columbia law
professor who represented The Times, and William P. Rogers, a Secretary of State
in the Nixon Administration, who represented four civil- rights leaders also
named as defendants.

Mr. Rogers said the case should be remembered not only as a precedent in press
freedom, but also for its effect on the civil-rights struggles then being waged.
Although the Times case involved a judgment of $500,000, there were $300 million
in libel cases then outstanding, he noted.

If Alabama's libel laws ''could have been used to punish those who spoke out
against abuses of the state,'' he said, they would have become a powerful weapon
to silence dissent of all kinds.

Before the Sullivan decision, Mr. Wechsler noted, libel laws put the burden on
the news organization to prove that what it had published was true. The force of
the decision, he said, came in its recognition that ''defamation is intrinsic to
criticism of public affairs,'' and that debate of public issues would be
inhibited if officials were not required to show that the article was not only
false but knowingly false.

Westmoreland Case Cited


But Dan M. Burt, a Washington lawyer who is representing Gen. William C.
Westmoreland in a $120 million libel suit against the CBS television network,
said the Sullivan decision created ''a real license for irresponsible people to
do wrong things.''

Foreshadowing what he said would be an argument in the Westmoreland case, Mr.
Burt said that highly paid ''media stars,'' eager to advance their careers,
could ''concoct a fraud'' without fear of punishment, and had done so in that
instance. The case involves a CBS documentary that charged the general with
falsifying reports of enemy troop strength in Vietnam,

He said that while he did not think that libel questions ought to be resolved in
court, ''it's the only forum that we have.''

In a vigorous rebuttal, Louis D. Boccardi, executive vice president of The
Associated Press, said Mr. Burt ''describes no newsroom that I know.''

Reporters and editors understand, he said, that the Sullivan decision ''is not a
hunting license for us to get public officials, it is not a license to lie, it
is not a charter for an attack on the nation's capacity to trust its public
officials or on the public officials' capacity to govern our citizens.''

The conference, organized by the Practising Law Institute, a group that runs
continuing education programs for lawyers, reflects a continuing press concern
about the direction of libel law. A second major symposium, organized by the
American Bar Association, the American Newspaper Publishers Association and the
American Society of Newspaper Editors, is scheduled in Washington next month.

Richard N. Winfield, a New York lawyer directing yesterday's conference, said
defamation suits reflected broader issues.

Times v. Sullivan came amid ''the passions embroiling the integration struggle
in the South,'' he said, and other famous cases mirrored the national debates
over the cold war, the problems of energy supplies or the conduct of the Vietnam
War.

''In a word,'' he said, ''libel litigation is often politics.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of lawyers

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IS STEPPING UP MILITARY ACTIVITY FOR SALVADORANS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 9


Reagan Administration officials said today that United States military activity
in Central America was being stepped up in advance of El Salvador's presidential
election March 25.

Officials said the actions included new small-scale United States military
maneuvers in Honduras; doubling to 1,700 the number of United States military
people in Honduras, and arming United States military advisers in El Salvador
with heavier weapons to protect themselves.

The officials said that small United States ground units would conduct limited
maneuvers, some of which will take place in the region of Honduras between El
Salvador and Nicaragua, from now until the start of a large exercise in June.
The exercises are intended to intimidate Salvadoran guerrillas and their
Nicaraguan backers, one official said.



Purpose of the Exercises

The officials contended that shows of force in Honduras would help keep
Salvadoran guerrillas and the Nicaraguan Government from interfering with the
election campaign. The Administration has contended that Nicaragua is arming and
helping the Salvadoran guerrillas.

The State Department spokesman, John Hughes, said, ''We think it is clear that
the guerrillas, or at least segments within them, wish to see the elections take
place within an atmosphere of terror.''

Defense Department officials said Army companies of 200 soldiers or detachments
of 100 soldiers, some from the 193d Infantry Brigade on duty in Panama, would be
sent to Honduras on ''no notice'' exercises.



Troops at Limit

In those drills, they are told without warning to pick up their weapons and
equipment and move to the field to test their ability to respond in a crisis.
The drills also give the Reagan Administration a reason to deploy forces without
public notice.

Defense Department officials said the number of United States military people in
Honduras had risen to 1,700, the maximum authorized, in the last month. That
does not include troops in exercises or a special reconnaissance team.

A month ago, Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger told several
Congressional committees that 700 to 800 United States military people had
stayed behind in Honduras after a large combined training exercise called Big
Pine II.

The troops in Honduras include specialists to maintain weapons and equipment,
advisers, medical teams, planners preparing for the next big exercise and radar
operators watching for aircraft carrying arms from Nicaragua to leftist
guerrillas in El Salvador.

An Army military intelligence battalion of 350 soldiers has begun operating in
Honduras, flying observation planes there and over El Salvador to collect
information on trucks moving Nicaraguan supplies to Salvadoran guerrillas and on
other ground movements.

Purpose of the Flights

Officials here said observers from the battalion would fly over El Salvador at
the invitation of the Salvadoran Government to look for guerrilla bands that
might be trying to disrupt the election campaign and voting.

The Administration officials also said the 52 United States military advisers in
El Salvador were carrying heavier weapons, such as the M-16 automatic rifle, to
protect themselves against violence that is expected to increase as the election
draws closer.

Two years ago spokesmen for the Administration told Congress that those advisers
would carry sidearms, such as pistols, for personal protection and would confine
their activity to training Salvadoran soldiers and would not accompany them as
advisers on field missions.

Defense Department officials said today that the United States Ambassador in
Honduras could authorize American advisers to carry rifles if needed.

Administration officials said the increased United States military activity
would probably continue until June because there may be a runoff election.
Details of the next big exercise, beginning in June, have not been disclosed.

Meanwhile, the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, Fred C. Ikle, criticized
members of Congress for opposing the Reagan Administration's program in Central
America, particularly those who have voted against military aid to El Salvador.

Mr. Ikle, who has become a leading Administration spokesman on Central America
policy, asserted that ''those who profess the most concern about human rights
abuses in Central America act as if they did not care whether democracy has a
future there.''

''They seek to deny sufficient military assistance to permit those who wish to
build democracy to overcome their totalitartian enemies,'' he said. The
Administration has asked for $93 million in emergency military aid because the
Salvadoran Army, officials said, was about to run out of ammunition and critical
supplies.

Mr. Ikle also said the Administration ''wants to provide training for police
forces, both to instill respect for human rights and to improve the will and the
capability to apprehend those participating in death squads,'' the rightist
terror groups.

But he noted in an address to the Association of National Junior Leagues that
such training was prohibited by Congress during the war in Vietnam.

Mr. Ikle said ''prohibiting such training while professing concern about death
squads is a bit like prohibiting the training of teachers while complaining
about illiteracy.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Honduras

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LIBEL AWARDS FOUND TO EXCEED 2 OTHER GROUPS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 837 words


Juries award more money to people whose reputations have been blackened by news
organizations than to people hurt by incompetent doctors or faulty products,
according to a new study.

The study, by the Libel Defense Resource Center, was released this week at a New
York conference on the 20th anniversary of a landmark Supreme Court libel
decision.

Experts in journalism law at the conference said the rising tide of libel
verdicts endangered the First Amendment guarantee of free speech and undercut
the goals of press protection set by the Supreme Court in its March 9, 1964,
decision in The New York Times v. Sullivan.

In that case, the court overturned a $500,000 award by a state court to L. B.
Sullivan, the Police Commissioner of Montgomery, Ala., saying the need for
uninhibited debate of public issues justified setting special barriers to libel
suits by public officials.

The study said the average award in the 80 cases that it was aware of having
gone to a verdict from 1980 to last year was nearly $2.2 million. Even
discounting three ''megaverdicts'' of more than $10 million each, the average
was $871,891, the center said, compared with $785,651 in product-liability suits
and $665,764 in medical-malpractice cases. The latter figures were obtained from
a survey of 332 liability and 322 malpractice awards by Jury Verdict Research
Inc. of Solon, Ohio.

Frivolous Actions Excluded


The center, which is financed through contributions from news organizations,
said juries found for libel plaintiffs in 83 percent of the recent trials.
One-third of the malpractice and product cases are decided in favor of the
plaintiffs, the center said. It noted that all of the multimillion-dollar libel
awards were being appealed and that news organizations won more than 70 percent
of the appeals.

The director of the center, Henry R. Kaufman, said the size of the libel
verdicts was influenced by such legal safeguards as those set in the Sullivan
case that winnow out many frivolous actions. He also contended juries may award
large ''punitive damages'' against news organizations that they think
intentionally harmed a reputation, while feeling that doctors who hurt their
patients do so by accident.

Judges, journalists, law professors and lawyers, speaking to 250 press lawyers
at the conference, at the Waldorf- Astoria Hotel, said that if legislatures were
concerned about protecting free speech, they should set limits on how much a
jury could award. The Supreme Court could also help, by barring ''punitive
damage'' awards, they said, but it has so far refused to do so.

Judge Thomas P. Griesa of Federal District Court in Manhattan said awards should
be capped, because ''juries get in their minds millions where they used to have
thousands.''

'Too Eager to Invade'


Judge Sol Wachtler of the New York Court of Appeals, the state's highest court,
said court decisions making it easier to bring a libel case before a jury had
attracted the interest of trial lawyers who used to handle malpractice and
automobile-accident cases. The ''adversarial cauldron'' of a trial, he said, is
not a good forum to determine such issues as ''the truth'' of a news report.

In a keynote address, he said the press would be in a better position with the
courts and the public if it would recognize that reporters have been ''too eager
to invade privacy and to destroy reputations in order to satisfy a public
curiosity.''

''Satisfying the public curiosity does not necessarily generate public love,''
he warned.

Some state courts, such as New York's, have treated the press's libel arguments
more kindly than the High Court, according to Floyd Abrams, a New York lawyer
who frequently represents news organizations, including The Times. ''That's
quite a turnaround, 20 years after Sullivan,'' he said.

Issue of 'State of Mind'


Mr. Abrams said the Supreme Court ruling in Herbert v. Lando, requiring news
organizations to surrender reporter's notes so a plaintiff can ask about the
reporter's ''state of mind,'' had made newsrooms more cautious. Deletions are
made from articles, he said, although ''I can't prove it in any way my clients
would want me to.''

In Herbert v. Lando, Col. Anthony Herbert is suing a CBS News producer, Barry
Lando, over a report on ''60 Minutes'' about the officer's actions in Vietnam.
Colonel Herbert's lawyer, Jonathan W. Lubell, said that without a reporter's
notes, a plaintiff could not prove that the news organization knew the
defamatory article was false or misleadingly incomplete.

Eugene L. Roberts, executive editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer, which recently
lost a $4.5 million verdict, said the emphasis on reporter's notes was intended
to confuse juries. ''When faced with essentially accurate stories,'' he said,
''plaintiff's attorneys simply soft-pedal or ignore the question of accuracy and
try to prove that the story was not fair, which is a far more subjective
proposition than what is simple truth.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HART'S APPEAL IS TO CYNICS, MONDALE TELLS 400 STUDENTS

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, March 9


Walter F. Mondale, concerned about a rush of young voters to Senator Gary Hart,
asserted today that his opponent had ''marketed himself'' to appeal to a cynical
generation that grew up in ''an earthquake zone'' of war, economic uncertainty
and political corruption.

''You are said to be suspicious of government, leery of politicians and
mistrustful of institutions,'' he told 400 students at Emory University. He said
most young Americans were not cynical but rather wanted ''to help those less
fortunate than they'' and to ''nudge the world a little closer to peace.''

The former Vice President's address was his strongest and most emotional effort
in the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination to stem the reported flow
of young support to the Senator from Colorado.

Hollings Endorses Hart


And as reports of Mr. Hart's gains in the nine states that will hold primaries
and caucuses Tuesday mounted among various groups of voters, Senator John Glenn
of Ohio and former Senator George McGovern of South Dakota also attacked Mr.
Hart, who within a few days has replaced Mr. Mondale as the clearly perceived
leader.

One sign of Hart strength was that political leaders across the South were
beginning to endorse the Coloradan, who had few elected officials in his camp
last month.

In South Carolina, which will hold caucuses March 17, Senator Ernest F.
Hollings, who dropped out of the Presidential race after the New Hampshire vote,
endorsed Mr. Hart this afternoon. And in Florida, aides to former Gov. Reubin
Askew, another dropout from the contest, were working openly for Mr. Hart and
encouraging Askew delegate candidates to do the same.

Hart Aide Challenges Mondale


Aboard the Hart campaign plane today, a key strategist, Patrick H. Caddell, said
Mr. Mondale should consider withdrawing from the race in the hope of assuring a
Democratic victory this November. Mr. Caddell said his suggestion was the same
the Mondale camp had been offering when the former Vice President appeared
certain to lock up the nomination.

Other Hart aides moved quickly to dissociate the Senator from the comments,
saying that Mr. Hart still viewed Mr. Mondale as ''formidable.'' Kathy Bushkins,
Mr. Hart's spokesman, said Mr. Caddell was merely an unpaid volunteer for the
campaign and that only she was authorized to issue statements on behalf of Mr.
Hart.

Three weeks ago Mr. Mondale was confident of winning Massachusetts, Florida,
Alabama and Georgia in Tuesday's primaries. But as support has turned to Senator
Hart, Mr. Mondale was clearly on the defensive and putting most of his effort
into winning the one state where he appears to have the best chance: Georgia.

Hart Gains Among Young


His Emory speech contained a frank admission that he had been losing the young,
especially those who came of age in the 1960's and 1970's, to his younger rival.

''It's no secret,'' he said, ''that up until now Mr. Hart has obviously been
getting more support from young people than I.'' Then he began a detailed
analysis of the reasons and made it clear that he thought young people were
being offered promises that could not be fulfilled.

He noted that their view of the world had been shaped by the Vietnam War, the
Watergate scandals and economic roller-coasters of ''boom and bust.''

''No wonder you are said to be anxious about your prospects of a good job, a
good home and a happy life,'' he said. ''You have known turmoil and hype. In the
age of the Cabbage Patch dolls, no wonder you are suspected of being addicted to
novelty.''

Hart Painted as Exploiter


Then he moved into his explanation of faulty promises.

''If a Presidential candidate wanted to capitalize on these things that are said
about you, imagine how he might try to win your vote,'' he said. ''To appeal to
your suspected cynicism he would market himself as an outsider gunning for the
establishment. To play toward your alleged insecurity he would build a platform
with plenty of room for self-interest and a little space for generosity. And to
exploit your rumored taste for tinsel he would drape himself in newness.''

''There is one small problem with that analysis,'' Mr. Mondale told the audience
of clean, young faces. ''It is dead wrong.''

And to the Hart challenge he repeated a statement that he has used with
increasing frequency:

''I am who I am. A family man, the son of a minister and a music teacher,
brought up on the values of rural Minnesota. My integrity is more important to
me than public office.''

Criticism by Others


And criticism of Mr. Hart continued to mount from his other opponents. In
Georgia, Mr. Glenn, whose campaign has been slipping steadily, said Mr. Hart had
failed to support legislation in Congress that would have stopped the ''crazy
thing'' of breaking up the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.

And in an appeal to Southern conservatives he criticized Mr. Hart for urging
Federal sanctions against states that failed to ratify the proposed equal rights
amendment to the Constitution. Mr. Glenn said that he supported the amendment
but that states should not be pressured by the Federal Government to ratify it.

In Massachusetts, Mr. McGovern said in an interview with The Associated Press
that he was skeptical of Mr. Hart's ''new ideas'' and would feel more
comfortable with Mr. Mondale as the Democratic nominee.

''It may turn out that these new ideas may be wonderful,'' Mr. McGovern said,
''but it would be even more wonderful if we knew what they were.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John Glenn

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Divers Find 12 Bodies In Sunken U.S. Ship

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 100 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, March 10


Divers searching the wreck of an American oil-drilling ship that sank off South
China last year have found the remains of 12 of the 81 crewmen, most of them in
the vessel's recreation area, the ship's owner said.

There had been no trace of the crew, mostly Chinese and Americans, since the
Glomar Java Sea sank Oct. 25 in a typhoon south of Hainan Island. There was
speculation that some crewmen might have reached Vietnam.

The owner, Global Marine of Houston, said Friday that the search for bodies
would continue. The ship had been searching for oil for the Chinese Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HANNAH WEINSTEIN, PRODUCER AND POLITICAL ACTIVIST, IS DEAD

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 443 words


Hannah Weinstein, a Hollywood film producer and a political activist, died of a
heart attack Friday at her home on Park Avenue. She was 72 years old.

Among the many feature and television films produced by Mrs. Weinstein over 30
years were ''Claudine'' in 1972, starring Diahann Carroll and James Earl Jones,
and ''Greased Lightning'' in 1976 and ''Stir Crazy'' in 1980, both starring
Richard Pryor.

Mrs. Weinstein's parallel career as a political activist included working as a
speech writer for Fiorello H. La Guardia in his second New York mayoral campaign
in 1937 and producing a rally in Madison Square Garden in 1970 to raise funds
for the election of United States senators opposed to the war in Vietnam.

A few months ago Mrs. Weinstein was selected for the Liberty Hill Award in honor
of her artistic and political accomplishments. The award was made by the
philanthropic foundation of the same name in Santa Monica, Calif.

'She Does Believe'


In a letter that is to be read at the award dinner on April 12 in Santa Monica,
Mrs. Weinstein's friend, Lillian Hellman, the playwright, says that ''one of the
most remarkable things about Hannah is that in this shabby time when either
nobody believes in anything or has long given up hope, she does believe and she
does carry out what she believes in.''

Mrs. Weinstein also received the Women in Film Life Achievement Award from the
Hollywood-based Women in Film organization in 1982.

Mrs. Weinstein began her film career in Paris in 1950 and continued it in London
two years later. She made a number of feature films and several popular
television series in England, including ''Robin Hood,'' ''The Four Just Men''
and ''Colonel March of Scotland Yard,'' before returning to this country in
1962.

Along with Ossie Davis, Rita Moreno and James Earl Jones, Mrs. Weinstein founded
the Third World Cinema Corporation in 1971 to make films about and with members
of minority groups. ''Claudine'' was Third World's first film.

Trained as a Journalist


Mrs. Weinstein was born in New York on June 23, 1911. She studied journalism at
New York University. After her graduation, she went to work for The New York
Herald Tribune in 1927. Ten years later she left The Tribune to join the La
Guardia mayoral campaign. She married Pete Weinstein, a reporter for The
Brooklyn Eagle, in 1938. They were divorced in 1955.

Mrs. Weinstein is survived by three daughters - Dina, of New York City, and Lisa
and Paula, of Los Angeles - and a granddaughter, Jennifer.

The funeral will be at 10 A.M. tomorrow at the Riverside Memorial Chapel at 76th
Street and Amsterdam Avenue.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CENTER AIDS VETERANS WHOSE PROBLEMS OUTLASTED WAR

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 44, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words


For the men who crowd into the counseling center in the Bronx, normal life more
or less ended in the rice paddies and jungles of Vietnam.

They are in their mid-30's. Some wear weathered fatigue jackets and combat
boots, suggesting a past that will not fade.

One man, Bernardino, a plumber, carries a knife he carried for 13 months in the
Mekong Delta.

It was in the delta, he said at a recent session, that his best friend died in
his arms. That was 15 years ago - but not a night goes by, he said, that he does
not relive that moment in an agonizing nightmare.

Violence Against His Family


Four times, he said, he tried to kill his wife, his children and himself. He
said he tried to throw his wife from a 24th-story terrace last Christmas.

''One of my kids called the cops,'' he said. ''They see me act up and they run
for the phone. I lose all control over my mind and body. I've been in jail three
times because of trying to kill her.''

Bernardino is a newcomer to the Vietnam veterans outreach center at 226 East
Fordham Road, one of 135 centers nationwide. This was Bernardino's third visit.
Some of the dozen or so who were there that evening had been coming for years.

Everyday life, they said, is a struggle rooted in a war they fought more than a
decade ago. And so they come regularly to share their thoughts and fears with
people who, like themselves, never entirely got over Vietnam.

Help for 200,000


According to the Veterans Administration, which finances the program, more than
200,000 Vietnam-era veterans have made use of such storefront-type outreach
centers since they began opening in 1979. About 3,000 people have been served by
the Fordham Road center since it opened in 1980.

The outreach centers provide a variety of services, including crisis hot lines,
information about Agent Orange and other concerns of veterans, job advice and
counseling for veterans' wives and children. The centers are situated in
neighborhoods to attract the sorts of clients who would be suspicious of a more
formal setting.

Although studies of Vietnam veterans are often contradictory, Vietnam Veterans
of America, a lobbying group, contends that they suffer from abnormally high
rates of suicide, unemployment, alcohol and drug abuse, divorce and
imprisonment.

Veterans' groups say many suffer from a psychological problem known as
post-traumatic stress disorder, the effects of which may range from alienation,
anger and depression to flashbacks of combat.

Counselor's Experience


John Laguna, a counselor at the center, served a year in Vietnam. He said
counseling came naturally to him because he, too, spent years readjusting to
life back home.

He said that the bitterness about having seen death never left one, that it was
a hazard of going through combat.

Mr. Laguna remembered the time a World War II veteran came to the center and
told him: ''I know that you never got your parade. I know that you can't sleep
at night cause you're afraid you'll have nightmares. I still get nightmares. I
know what you're going through, because I've been there - I'm still going
through it.''

Differences in Wars


Still, Vietnam was a different war.

According to Veterans Administration studies, the average age of a combat
soldier during World War II was 26; in Vietnam it was 19. In World War II, the
average soldier was exposed to six weeks of hostile fire; in Vietnam, many were
exposed to 12 months.

Vietnam was a war fought by individuals. The cohesive units of World War II that
trained, fought and came home together were largely nonexistent in Vietnam. The
World War II veteran returned on a troop ship with others and had weeks to shake
off the stress of war. There were parades.

A Vietnam veteran generally was home within 48 hours of combat duty. Usually he
returned alone on a commercial flight. Most felt unwelcomed upon arrival.

But at the outreach center the other day, the men seemed glad to see each other.
They called each other ''brother.'' They grabbed chairs, placing them in a
circle.

'He Blew Himself Up'


''I saw a 5-year-old boy reach inside his shirt one time,'' said Thomas, who is
unemployed. ''The boy was wired. He blew himself up and took some soldiers with
him.''

He recalled a Vietnamese family that he said he and his friends shot in a
revenge killing. Thomas faltered between words as he spoke, his voice knotting
up.

''I see those people just as clearly every night as I did that day,'' he said.
''They're just as real as I am. If I live to be a thousand years old, I'll never
forget that day, and I'll never forget their faces. Now, when it rains, I can
smell death.''

Another veteran, Jose, said that for years he thought he was the only Vietnam
veteran who came back feeling unsettled.

Unfriendly Welcome


''When I got off the plane in San Francisco, I got spit in the face,'' he said.
''I thought there was going to be a band. But they were throwing bottles and
papers at me. They were spitting and calling me names.

''Something came over me in 1975. It told me to kill my family. I stayed away
from my wife and kids. I was afraid to be around them. I'd see things out of the
corner of my eye - a guy running. I used to punch myself to knock the devil out
of me.''

Another veteran, Jim, said he had lost his last chance to straighten out his
marriage.

''My wife left me because she felt like she was walking on eggs whenever she was
around me,'' he said.

Drafted Out of Law School


Another, Bruce, was with the Army Signal Corps, stationed in Saigon. He said
that when he was drafted at age 22 he was in law school and addicted to drugs.

''I welcomed the draft as a vacation,'' he said. ''I was wounded twice. My body
got back, but my mind stayed in outer space.'' Somebody said that one of most
frightening things about Vietnam was the leeches, and Bernardino and Mr. Laguna
began laughing.

Two hours went by and the men appeared in good spirits. Suddenly, there was a
lull. And then, this exchange took place between Bernardino and Mr. Laguna.

Telling of Fears


''I'm afraid to go home,'' Bernardino said.

''Why are you afraid?'' Mr. Laguna asked.

''He died in my arms,'' Bernardino said. ''Seven days a week I still dream about
it.''

''You got guilt written all over you, but it's not yours, partner,'' Mr. Laguna
said.

''I sleep two hours every night,'' Bernardino said. ''I've seen every 'Star
Trek,' every Groucho Marx, everything that ever played on TV. I slept at noon,
on the job. I had that dream.''

''You can't control your dreams,'' Mr. Laguna said.

''I fell asleep in a boiler room,'' Bernardino said. ''People were laughing
because I was screaming.''

''You got to be tolerant of other people's ignorance,'' Mr. Laguna said. ''All
that time you were out in the bush. And every day Charlie was trying to get you
and you didn't let him. You can stop the little guy that's running around in
your head. You got to combat it. You got to come home sometime.''

Bernardino looked around the room. He then repeated that he was afraid to go
home because he was afraid he would dream. Here, at least, Bernardino could say
he was afraid.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW BREED OF DIRECTOR CHANGES THE FACE OF OPERA

BYLINE: By EDWARD ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3013 words


A bout a century ago George Bernard Shaw noted with some vexation that stagings
of Italian opera tended to be set in only one period - ''the past''- and two
places - ''an exterior'' and ''an interior.'' He found in those performances
''sheer carelessness, lack of artistic conscience'' and the ''cynical conviction
that nothing particularly matters in an opera so long as the singers draw good
houses.'' Wagner, writing about the German Imperial Opera House, noted the same
problems, referring to the ''piebald medley'' on stage, with virtuoso singers
treating the rest of the opera as a ''superfluous adjunct.''

Well, matters have changed some since Wagner and Shaw were in opera houses.
Attention is now lavished on sets, costumes, characters and staging. Opera
directors have taken on starring roles, even getting top billing; we speak of
Franco Zeffirelli's ''Boh eme,'' Patrice Chereau's ''Ring,'' Jean-Pierre
Ponnelle's ''Dutchman.'' Moreover, directors are not just interpreting the
repertory, but radically revising it, bending settings and characters to their
wills or imaginations, in what could be the most significant and provocative
movement in opera today.

Such reinterpretation of standard operatic repertory is not a marginal
transformation, worked on the fringes of some ''avant-garde.'' Rather, it is at
the center of our operatic life, evident in the announcements made for next
season by our major houses. The City Opera will be replacing its crusty,
clicheed production of ''Carmen'' with Frank Corsaro's setting of the work
during the Spanish Civil War. The Met will present Mozart's ''La Clemenza di
Tito'' with a production by Jean-Pierre Ponnelle, who has often before engaged
in dramatic experimentation. In June, the English National Opera will be coming
to the Met with a production of ''Rigoletto'' by Jonathan Miller, which is set
in Little Italy of the 1950's. (It is a sign of the passions such experiments
can provoke that the production has been denounced in advance by
Italian-American organizations). This season, there has been Peter Brook's
rewritten ''Carmen,'' renamed ''La Tragedie de Carmen,'' which cuts Bizet's
music, gives Carmen a husband, and turns the work into what some feel is closer
to theater than opera. Last fall, Andrei Serban presented Handel's ''Alcina'' at
the New York City Opera, in which he dressed the drama's animals in dinner
clothes, and presented tableaux Handel could not have imagined.

Still more radically, Peter Sellars, the 26-year-old and highly controversial
director of the Boston Shakespeare Company, has, in the last three years,
presented Handel's ''Orlando'' as a drama taking place at Cape Canaveral and on
Mars, and Haydn's ''Arminda'' set in Vietnam. At last year's Spoleto Festival in
South Carolina, Ken Russell, the film director, presented a ''Madame Butterfly''
set in Nagasaki during World War II, with props including a Mickey Mouse mask
and an atomic bomb blast. Europe is host to still more radical productions.

Such directorial efforts have, to put it mildly, not been universally welcomed.
Echoing Shaw and Wagner, there have been accusations of a new kind of ''piebald
medley,'' a new ''lack of artistic conscience'' in the opera house. And indeed
there are serious - and obvious - questions that must be raised about such
efforts. Doesn't a setting of Vietnam turn Haydn into a contemporary political
cartoon? What happens to Verdi's music when the Duke of Mantua is turned into a
member of the Mafia? Isn't this stagecraft gimmickry distracting, even
patronizing? Doesn't it suggest a fashionable quest for ''relevance,'' which
ignores the powers of the greatest works of the high art tradition?

These questions deserve consideration, for whatever can be said about the merits
and demerits of

 their individual productions, the new breed of experimental directors represent
a movement which marks a shift in our experience of opera. Given the absence of
a vital contemporary operatic repertory, given the ingrained performing
traditions of the few dozen 19th-century works that comprise our operatic
universe, given the unimaginative literalness with which operas have been
treated, given the poor acting of most singers - given all that, these
productions are a form of imaginative dissent. They are attempts to revitalize a
form which is often stifled by the weight of convention and traditional cliches
- the tenor singing with hand dramatically held upturned (''Is it raining?''
Toscanini used to ask), or the Wagnerian soprano predictably gilded and
helmeted, athletically belting out her aria without making a dent on our
consciousness.


But what are these new, radical productions, with the stage director at their
heart, up to? In conversations, some directors, curiously, stressed the
conservative aspect of their project, an attempt to restore the form's original
impact, to offer an experience which they feel is more authentic than the
orthodox, habit- riddled productions. Mr. Sellars, for example, says that he
aims to ''recreate the impact the first night performance had on an audience.''
Mr. Serban says his goal is to make opera ''not a cultural experience cut off
from life, in a dream somewhere, but a natural experience, close to what life
is, very immediate.'' Patrice Chereau, whose by now famous 1976 Bayreuth
''Ring'' presented the gods as 19th-century capitalists and Mime as a court Jew,
commented on his Wagner productions: ''There was never just a goal to shock.
Never.''


Of course, there have been, earlier in this century, many attempts to
reinterpret the repertory. One of the most famous operatic productions remains
Wieland Wagner's 1951 iconic restaging of his grandfather's work at Bayreuth.
Also during the 1950's Sir Rudolf Bing invited a number of important stage
directors to the Met; even Mr. Brook came, bringing ''Eugene Onegin'' and
''Faust.'' And John Dexter's tenure at the Met led to an emphasis on dramatic
values.

But there has been a change during the last decade, first in the emphasis placed
upon directorial activity. Elizabeth Crittenden who manages about 50 stage
directors for Columbia Artists Management, noted that ''When I came to CAMI
about three years ago, there wasn't an operatic or stage direction division.''
Opera directors themselves, such as Sir Peter Hall, also point to the increasing
dramatic sophistication of singers and operatic companies. Last fall, responding
to this change in focus, the Central Opera Service presented a National
Conference in New York on the subject of ''Style in Opera Production.''

This dramatic concern has even been evident even in the smallest of companies,
such as the adventurous Chamber Opera Theater of New York, directed by Thaddeus
Motyka, or the production of Rossini's ''Barber of Seville,'' at St. Ann's
Church in Brooklyn Heights, with Amy Trompetter directing a remarkable
performance of Rossini's ''Barber of Seville'' (to be repeated next month). In
the latter, each character was represented by a variety of different sized
puppets.

But this interest in the dramatic content of opera has gone along with a
questioning of its premises. When Louis Veron was appointed director of the
Paris Opera in 1831, for example, he set out to enshrine opera as the high
temple of the middle classes. He wrote in his memoirs that after the July
Revolution, ''The victorious middle class will be anxious to reign and to amuse
itself. The Opera will become its Versailles, and (the middle class) will rush
there to take the place of the great lords of the exiled court.'' The themes of
operas were also tied to its new bourgeois audience; these themes touched on the
immediate social and political issues of the day - the rights of rulers, the
bonds of family, the dangers and promises of ambition and desire.

The particular settings of works were actually less important than these themes,
and could be shifted around without changing the work. ''Rigoletto,'' for
example, was based on Victor Hugo's drama of the ''Le roi s'amuse.'' But that
treatment of Francois I of France was politically too incendiary for the censors
of the time, so the King was turned into a 16th- century Duke of Mantua. But
whatever the period or setting, the contemporary implications were clear enough
for any opera- goer. And at the same time, music lifted the drama out of its
particular setting, giving skeletal libretti resonance of grand passions and
mythic conflicts, elevating the struggles of the bourgeoisie into matters of
universal importance.

Opera, that is, had, in its origins, what the German critic Walter Benjamin
called an ''aura'' - it had power and mystery, a link to a great tradition, the
feeling of something both timely and timeless. But as the 20th century
approached and the operatic repertory began to center obsessively on the same
few dozen works, the sense of dramatic immediacy faded; stage manners began to
fossilize. Opera conceptions became standard, and the singer alone became the
central object of fantasy and worship; the ''fan'' of the later 19th and early
20th century became a peculiar opera attendant, treating the ''star'' as
literally a stellar visitation, distant and sacrosanct, whose every gesture was
a gift from a more perfect world.



But now, even the singer has fallen on hard times; stars are enterprisingly
created with marketing techniques, while opera itself has lost much of its
genuine power. Not surprisingly, many of the new directors trying to shake the
dust of habit off the standard operatic repertory have come from the theater
world - Peter Brook, Andrei Serban, Patrice Chereau - or from film - Hans
J"urgen Syberberg, Ken Russell - where there is less a sense of canon and
orthodoxy. Mr. Chereau went so far as to say, ''I don't believe that a director
who is only directing opera can be a good director.'' Mr. Serban, best known as
a theater director, but who has also directed ''Eugene Onegin'' and ''I
Puritani'' for the Welsh National Opera, ''Traviata'' for Juilliard and
''Turandot'' at Covent Garden, spoke of ''abominable'' and ''dead'' operatic
performing traditions which would never be tolerated in the theater.

Indeed, what some see as the fossilization of opera, the loss of its mystique
and the accumulation of genuflective manners, has become a point of departure,
an impetus for the modern opera director that distinguishes him even from his
colleagues of the 1950's and 60's. Mr. Syberberg's film of ''Parsifal,'' which
was released last year, even makes the ossification of the operatic tradition
one of the explicit themes. His film takes place in a setting shaped like
Wagner's death mask, full of operatic and kitschy images - a crown of thorns, a
deathmask, stagnant pools, outrageous makeup, grotesque gestures, icons and
invocations of earlier Wagner performances. Among other things, this is a film
about the tradition of ''Parsifal'' itself, about the accumulation of operatic
detritus, and about the decay of opera's ''aura.''



One response to this situation has been an anxious attempt to revive the
mystique that was lost, to artificially restore to opera a grandeur through
ever-more spectacular productions. This was the effect, for example, of Mr.
Zeffirelli's 1981 ''Boh eme'' at the Met, which loses the tavern's lovers in the
midst of a crowd of 280 extras - all the while creating an ersatz cinematic
Romanticism. Similarly, Fabrizio Melano's and Peter Wexler's ''Les Troyens'' at
the Met, which will be broadcast on WNET on March 28, attempts to create an
abstract mythical setting. But it is all cold machinery and bizarre costume -
the male attendants to Dido, for example, flashing their buttocks as they serve
her.

There are also attempts to rejuvenate operas by attending to their historical
origins - the period in which the work was created. Such was the approach Sir
Peter Hall tried to do in his staging of Verdi's ''Macbeth,'' which had its
premiere at the Met last year. He created a production that invoked the
conventions of Verdi's era, including Dore-style backdrops, flat stage sets,
witches with broomsticks and a stylized 19th-century ballet.  The other, perhaps
more prevalent approach to reestablishing the immediacy of the opera work is
through creating a contemporary ''conception'' which puts the scenario in a new,
sometimes jolting, perspective. In an interview, Mr. Sellars compared the
hackneyed plots of most operas to a tamed tiger ''who doesn't know how to live
in the wild again.'' Mr. Sellars attempts to free those animals by reviving the
currency of opera, not through authentic historical recreation, but through
taking into account the vastly different awareness of a contemporary listener.
Mr. Sellars attempts to translate the entire universe of the earlier work into
the present, much in the way a line of foreign poetry would be translated, not
using literal word for word replacements, but finding words with similar roles
in the poem's structure and meaning.

In defense, for example, of his ''space'' version of ''Orlando,'' Mr. Sellars
points out that the work was, in the 18th century, part of a genre of 'magic
opera.' Its source material - the great Renaissance epic ''Orlando Furioso'' -
was widely known. ''That story,'' Mr. Sellars says, ''was about the exploration
at the edges of the known world, the struggle between man and nature.'' In order
to recreate for a contemporary audience similar magic and similar familiarity,
Mr. Sellars used the genre of comic book science fiction, the ''Star Wars
cliche.'' ''The 18th century,'' he explains, ''depended on a whole rhetoric of
gesture. I recreate that language in 20th-century terms.''

Mr. Serban also spoke of a performance so immediately apprehended by the
audience that all artifice would fade. Mr. Chereau said about his interpretation
of the ''Ring'' that his interest was in ''human emotions,'' which ''are more
important than myths.'' And Mr. Brook has commented that ''the biggest challenge
now, at this point in the 20th century, is to replace - in the minds of
performers and audiences - the idea that opera is artificial with the idea that
opera is natural.''

Mr. Brook is one of the rare directors who went so far as to alter the score in
quest of his dramatic goals. Many of the experimental directors speak of the
opera's music with respect, even as their seeming subordination of music to
stage business has been criticized. The Baroque specialist Raymond Leppard
accompanied Mr. Serban's ''Alcina'' at the City Opera. Mr. Sellars said he was
''slavishly dependent on the score,'' as did Mr. Chereau. Judging by the variety
of their interpretations, however, the score provides only the general outlines
of feelings and gestures, which can accommodate the widest variety of settings,
characters and images.



But even as these radical projects revivify the operatic experience, they also
flirt with dangers. The revisionist ''movement'' in opera direction seeks to
make opera populist, graspable, eliminating the nimbus of ritual and tradition,
and at times attempts to undercut opera's position as ''high art.'' But the
contemporary references - atomic warfare or Communist battles against Fascists,
or the war in Vietnam - can turn the opera into political tract (often grounded
in the Left, because of the directors' underlying criticism of the bourgeois
audiences and traditions.)

Operas, after all, have other concerns than speaking directly to us. Mr. Brook
was was so intent on creating a ''natural'' Carmen, that he had to turn her from
an archetype, as she is for Bizet, into a self-conscious, almost modern heroine.


 And efforts to create contemporary drama out of highly romantic or melodramatic
stories may turn artificial in the very attempt to cut through artifice. Mr.
Sellars's argument, for example, about the connection between ''Orlando
Furioso'' and ''Star Wars'' is not entirely valid; after all, the conceptions of
popular culture and myth during the 18th and 20th centuries are quite different.
The nature of the shock in such a contemporary production is not the surprise
the work would have when new, but the shock of an established convention and
form being ''violated.''

Sir Peter Hall, the director of the National Theater of London, who created a
strong traditional ''Ring'' at Bayreuth last summer, suggests that an
extravagant directorial fantasy is as doomed to failure as an ''authentic''
performance. Indeed, he dissents from the view that opera has become fossilized,
insisting only that there is too much ''routine'' opera. ''I am a classicist,
but a classicist who believes that the meaning of a classic must be represented
in terms modern enough for an audience to understand - not so modern as to
betray the work, and not so subjective that I am doing something the author
never meant to express,'' he says.

At the heart of the challenges being raised by these contemporary directors is
the most serious problem facing opera today - that contemporary works are not
being written, and so the repertory is obsessively mined for novelty. Mr.
Sellars, noting this difficulty, presented Peter Maxwell Davies's ''The
Lighthouse'' last fall; his company may also be commissioning new works from
other composers. And the City Opera will be presenting Philip Glass's
''Akhnaton'' - a work which, if it is at all similar to the composer's
''Satyagraha,'' will attempt to create a new ''aura,'' a mythic power that will
have contemporary political and spiritual ''relevance.''

Sir Peter pointed out that ''We live in the most historically conscious age in
history. We turn over every page of old art in a search for new meaning.'' This
quest, he argues, can be desperate, a ''ransacking'' undertaken in the hope of
finding something ''that will help our own bewildered and confused century.''
The new opera directors may not succeed in that project, but they do offer a
challenge to the stultifying presentations of the standard repertory, which
mitigate boredom only by means of spectacle.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of various operatic works

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE RAINBOW COALITION'S HAZY FUTURE

BYLINE: By FAY S. JOYCE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH, Fla.


Any of the other candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination could
wind up with nothing more to show for the effort than a fistful of hotel bills.

But for the Rev. Jesse Jackson, long something of a maverick civil rights
leader, the stakes have always been different. Many analysts say he could still
walk away from this political season as the nation's premier black leader.

To a large extent, Mr. Jackson's future is likely to be shaped by decisions made
by black voters in the run of primaries and caucuses that begin Tuesday, from
the rolling hills of the South to the industrial cities of the North. In Georgia
and Alabama, 21 and 23 percent of the registered voters respectively are black.
If they turn out in large numbers this Tuesday and cast a large proportion of
their ballots for Mr. Jackson, he will gain in stature. And that will be doubly
true if blacks in Mississippi, South Carolina, Michigan and Arkansas follow suit
in caucuses on Saturday.

If they do not turn out in large numbers for Mr. Jackson, however, he will have
a harder time convincing party leaders and the eventual Democratic nominee that
his demands must be addressed. Moreover, the personal stakes seem especially
high now because of Mr. Jackson's belated admission that he had used derogatory
terms in referring to Jews, an important bloc in the Democratic Party. Some
black politicians say the remarks - he called Jews ''Hymies'' and referred to
New York City as ''Hymietown'' - may even have damaged his standing among
Southern blacks, who were long the targets of prejudice and are reluctant to
identify with such expressions themselves.  Mr. Jackson is a bold man and he has
set high expectations for himself in Alabama, where he continues to predict
victory, and where the other candidates, with the exception of George McGovern,
are contesting vigorously as well. Public opinion polls have not supported Mr.
Jackson's optimism; a Birmingham newspaper survey showed him in third place with
15 percent, behind Walter F. Mondale and Colorado Senator Gary Hart. Political
observers say Mr. Hart's sprint is affecting Alabama and other states, however,
and it is difficult to tell what will happen.  A Pitch to the PoorMany members
of the black political and religious establishment in Alabama and Georgia have
endorsed Mr. Mondale. Mr. Jackson is bucking them and their argument that a vote
for him is a vote thrown away, as he appeals to black pride. Many believe that
Mr. Jackson may do well among students but that older, middle-class blacks are
believed likely to give a higher priority to selecting a candidate who could
defeat President Reagan.  Mr. Jackson's campaign has been coupled with a
concerted voter registration drive in the South. While it is impossible to say
how many people he has inspired to sign up, the Voter Education Project reports
that 200,000 blacks in 11 southern states were added to the rolls in 1983, an
extraordinary number for an off-election year.  He will need as many of those
votes as he can get in the coming primaries, and not just for reasons of
prestige. His campaign has spent almost all of the $960,000 it has raised, and
Mr. Jackson himself is the chief fund-raiser when white- gloved ushers pass the
hat at his speeches. Federal matching funds have provided him with a cushion; he
has been certified to receive $388,355 so far. But because he has failed to draw
10 percent of the vote in two successive primaries, he will lose his eligibility
for assistance on April 6 unless he wins at least 20 percent of the vote in a
primary before then. In Vermont last week, he finished third, with only 8
percent of the vote.

Mindful of the importance of Tuesday's outcome, Mr. Jackson has become unusually
harsh in his attacks on President Reagan, Mr. Mondale and a new target, the
surging Mr. Hart.

At the same time, his campaign, never known for being well organized to start
with, has been plagued by even more breakdowns than usual. Mr. Jackson had to
cancel four appearances in the Middle West last week because of logistical
difficulties. Then his new chartered airplane broke down in Anniston, Ala.,
leaving candidate and entourage temporarily stranded. When he finally reached
Montgomery, Ala., on Thursday night, Mr. Jackson accused Mr. Mondale of ''hiding
behind'' Hubert Humphrey rather than opposing the Vietnam War. He also
criticized Mr. Reagan for advocating prayer in the schools when ''he's not even
a regular churchgoer.''

Although he is a Baptist minister, Mr. Jackson himself does not attend church on
Sundays except to appear in the pulpit, and he campaigns just as hard on the
Sabbath as on weekdays. ''I'm in church all week,'' Mr. Jackson explained with a
laugh, referring to his campaign appearances. ''I'm always preaching.''

Regardless of how far he gets on the campaign trail, Mr. Jackson appears to have
helped himself. Even black officeholders who are supporting Mr. Mondale concede
that Mr. Jackson has enhanced his status as a black spokesman, especially by
holding his own in the Presidential debates. The question is, how much of a
constituency can he marshal?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rev. Jackson leadng supporters to courthouse

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN BAGHDAD, NO NEWS IS PROBABLY BAD NEWS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 990 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq


Posters and slogans, as well as omnipresent portraits of President Saddam
Hussein in a variety of uniforms, are not enough to give the Iraqi capital a
bellicose air. The principal impression is of drabness enhanced, not relieved,
by the garish personality cult. Underneath, diplomats sense a morose weariness
and a growing belief that the war with Iran, now well into its fourth year,
cannot be won by either side.

A visitor notes above all a pervasive reticence on the part of Iraqis, except
for Information Ministry officials and generals who purvey obligatory confidence
in ultimate victory. The tight-lipped citizens of Baghdad or Basra make the
citizens of the Soviet Union or of other restrictive countries seem garrulous by
comparison. Iraq recently allowed foreign journalists in to report its recent
battlefield victories, but they have not succeeded in penetrating the nation's
state of mind.

Even diplomats of long residence who understand Arabic admit that they base
their conclusions less on what the Iraqis say than on the people's increased
unwillingness to talk about the war. Official optimism finds no popular echo.
The people know that life has become harder, that expansive development programs
based on the Middle East's second largest petroleum reserves have faltered, and
that on the border, it is the Iranian Army, not theirs, that retains the
initiative.

In this atmosphere, President Hussein last week angrily rejected accusations by
the United States and other Western countries, the International Red Cross and
physicians in Sweden and Austria that Iraq has used chemical weapons - a
euphemism for poison gas - against Iranian troops. The American criticism cast
the first serious shadow on a relationship that has been showing quiet but
dramatic improvement.

Propelled largely by shared hostility to Iran and concern about the consequences
of Teheran's policies, Washington and Baghdad have drawn closer than they had
been since the 1950's, when John Foster Dulles made the then-conservative Iraqi
regime a linchpin of American policy in the region. This quiet flourishing of
relations has taken place despite the rupture of diplomatic ties by Iraq when
Washington supported Israel in the 1967 war. Before last week's condemnation,
officials of the American Interest Section in the Belgian Embassy were saying
that relations had become normal in all but name, with easy American access to
senior Iraqi leaders.  President Reagan's statement that an Iraqi defeat would
not be in American interest and his suggestion that the United States would take
military action if Iran attempted to close the Strait of Hormuz made clear a
diplomatic ''tilt'' toward Iraq. Commodity credits totaling $840 million over
two years were a significant mark of American sympathy for Iraq, a
food-importing nation with severe foreign exchange problems.  Soviet Help
ResumesIn view of this developing relationship, Western diplomats were surprised
when the United States took the lead in condemning Iraq. Some diplomats believe
that Washington, having accused the Soviet Union of using prohibited weapons in
Afghanistan, and Vietnam of doing so in Laos, wanted to prove its
evenhandedness. Others believe that the Reagan Administration, in an election
year, condemned Iraq's conduct of warfare to head off criticism by voters who
have noted no relenting in Iraq's extreme hostility to Israel, which Iraqi
officials always refer to as ''the Zionist entity.'' Israel and ''Zionist
agents'' throughout the world are repeatedly accused of strategic and diplomatic
collusion with Iran's Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

Diplomats emphasized that rapprochement with Washington has not meant any
cooling in Iraq's close ties with the Soviet Union, which continues to supply 70
percent of Baghdad's military needs. In an effort to preserve minimal relations
with Iran, the Soviet Union cut off these sales in 1980 when Iraq began the war
and carried it deeply into Iran. Soviet sales resumed in 1982 after Iran drove
the invaders out and went onto the offensive.

Last week, Tass, the Soviet press agency, accused the United States of
''creating a grave threat to peace and international security'' in the Persian
Gulf. The Soviet Union, Tass said, rejected the Pentagon's warning that ships
coming within five miles of Navy ships in the Gulf or planes approaching below
2,000 feet ''may be held at risk.''

When the Soviet leader, Yuri V. Andropov, died, President Hussein proclaimed
three days of national mourning, a tribute not accorded to his predecessor,
Leonid I. Brezhnev. But Iraq remains anti-Communist, not ideologically
influenced by Moscow. Its drawing closer to the United States and continuing
good relations with Western Europe, the major supplier for economic development,
has for the first time given reality to Iraq's professed policy of active
neutrality between East and West.  The new friendliness toward the United States
has a parallel in Baghdad's significant shift from sharp- tongued radicalism to
moderation in the Arab world. Iraq led the movement to ostracize Egypt after the
Camp David agreement with Israel in 1978; it now leads the campaign to bring
Cairo back. ''Don't look for principle,'' a European diplomat cautioned.  Egypt
has given Iraq strong support - 15,000 volunteers serving in military
capacities, and arms and intelligence cooperation. Jordan, too, is believed to
be providing some military assistance. Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the Persian Gulf
emirates, which lived in apprehension of Iraq in its radical days, provide
generous financial support, perhaps $10 billion a year. Clearly they fear
today's Iran more than today's Iraq. But diplomats in Baghdad, by and large, are
not yet ready to join those, including some Americans, who believe that Iraq's
moderation will last longer than its war with Teheran. And no one will speculate
on how long that war will continue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of young Iranian soldiers captured near Basra

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOTED WITH PLEASURE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 946 words


Some passages from current and recently published books that we find
particularly appealing.

At Castle Garden


What it was like to arrive in America as a poor immigrant in the 1860's - a
passage from J. F. Federspiel's novel ''The Ballad of Typhoid Mary'' (Dutton).


Among the first sights to welcome the immigrants was the inside of a fortress,
rebuilt to serve as an opera house, though it had served for dogfights as well.
Hard-bitten wrestlers and boxers with bare fists had given performances there,
along with fire-eaters and screeching singers who had been chased off the stage
in Vienna or Berlin. Castle Garden - the new name given Castle Clinton - had
been an opera house for a short time. . . . Its doors were sealed, and in 1855
the New York Immigration Authority decided to rebuild the place as a processing
center for immigrants. Needless to say, there was little reconstruction. The
trashy decor was stripped off, the chandeliers were auctioned, and with all the
hammering, the stucco fell from the ceiling. The once luxurious lounges were
turned into showers. No immigrant was permitted to set foot on the clean new
land without taking a shower, and his clothes had to be disinfected in a steam
oven before he was allowed to put them back on. Only then did the painful
questions begin.

Wherefrom? Whereto? Howcome? Howmuch?  Journeys Never Made


The late Richard Rovere looks back, half ruefully, on his literary career in
''Final Reports'' (Doubleday), his ''personal reflections on politics and
history in our time.''

My past is strewn with abandoned projects and plans for journeys never made. The
books I have started and put aside far outnumber those I have completed. This is
true of many writers, perhaps of most. Visions that take radiant shape in the
darkness have a way of fading in daylight. It is almost in the nature of
enthusiasms that they become wasting assets. But I think that this has happened
with me more often than with most. For one thing, working journalists regularly
chase wild geese. Like firemen, they answer alarms, many of them false; not
their own passions but those of others determine much of what they do. Self-pity
is an occupational disease, sometimes disabling, and I have spent God knows how
many hours asking myself if I was really put on this earth to write about the
likes of Richard Nixon and Joe McCarthy, to spend years chronicling the madness
of our war in Vietnam. To feel thus ill-used is, of course, unworthy, but though
eight books bear my name I cannot deny that I have wasted much time thinking
about how much time I was wasting, and I have explored many a mare's nest in
search of a solid structure. I have consoled myself with the thought that some
runners, I among them, are sprinters, and that some run the marathon, and that
both are valued in their own contests. And with the saying - I think it comes
from the Reverend Sydney Smith - ''Give me a short book on an inescapable
subject.'' Center and Circumference


Margaret Atwood discusses Canada and Canadian-American relations in her new
collection of essays, ''Second Words'' (Beacon Press).

Finally, in the very last year of high school, by which time many future
citizens had dropped out anyway, we got a blue book called ''Canada in the World
Today.'' It was about who grew the wheat, how happy the French were, how well
the parliamentary system worked for everybody and how nice it was that the
Indians had given us all their land in exchange for the amenities of
civilization. The country we lived in was presented to us in our schools as
colorless, dull and without much historical conflict to speak of, except for a
few massacres, and nobody did that any more. Even the British war of conquest
was a dud, since both of the generals died. It was like a hockey game in which
both teams lost. . . .

I remember ''Canada in the World Today'' with modified loathing - ''Canada comes
of age,'' it trumpeted, not bothering that what happened to you when you came of
age was that you got pimples or a job or both - and still not a year passes
without some politician announcing that Canada has finally grown up. Still, the
title is significant. Canada sees itself as part of the world; a small sinking
Titanic squashed between two icebergs, perhaps, but still inevitably a part. The
States, on the other hand, has always had a little trouble with games like
chess. Situational strategy is difficult if all you can see is your own borders,
and beyond that some wispy brownish fuzz that is barely worth considering. The
Canadian experience was a circumference with no center, the American one a
center which was mistaken for the real thing.  Against Self-Sufficiency


One of Wendell Berry's notes on ''Unspecializing Poetry'' in his collection of
essays ''Standing by Words'' (North Point Press).

The notion that a poem is autonomous seems to appropriate the divine character
of self-sufficiency - which theology and biology deny to creatures - to apply it
to the creature of a creature.  On the Subject of Satyrs


''The Clown's Report on Satyrs,'' from ''Maximum Security Ward amd Other Poems''
(Persea Books), a substantial new selection from the work of the late Ramon
Guthrie, edited by Sally M. Gall. On the hoof or dead, a satyr weighs about the
single same. They mingle with goddesses and singe themselves in flame that they
ignite with steady gaze while they recite the name of One who in the olden days
slept on Naxos' shingle, and they are golden ruddy in the sun and hold
themselves aloof. A satyr on the hoof is fleet. Slaughtered, their dark red meat
is strong.B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawings

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3534 words


FICTION

FREE FIRE ZONE By Rob Riggan. (Norton, $15.95.) The circumstances of men in
battle - gratuitous violence, ambivalence, frustration and anger, divided
loyalties - are all to be found in Rob Riggan's first novel, ''Free Fire Zone.''
They are handled remarkably well once Mr. Riggan gets a hold on his material.
The characters are medics at an evacuation site, or free fire zone, in Vietnam,
caught between the war itself and the hospitals several hours away. It's hard to
think what would be worse - being on the battlefront or within the medical unit,
mopping up the gore. On a visceral level, this novel horrifies, though not
simply because of the blood and guts. As the story progresses, it moves away
from the medics themselves to the effect of our presence upon individual
Vietnamese. In one of the many powerful scenes in the second half of the novel,
the pregnant Vietnamese wife of one of the medics comes to the evacuation unit
to claim the body of her husband, only to learn that it has been shipped to
America to his ''family.'' Back in the States, Jon O'Neill, the narrator,
reflects upon all these events as he sleeps next to a girl he has picked up for
the night. He realizes that his inability to feel for anyone or anything is an
extension of his drugged-out state during the war. (''They sent them home in
hermetically sealed steel boxes, and the living smuggled dope inside the same
boxes; that was the reality - the dope, the callousness, the refusal to grasp
what we were confronting, had in fact created.'') ''Free Fire Zone'' cuts close,
slicing our nerve endings in the process. - Charles R. Larson

* SNOW. By Jenifer Levin. (Poseidon Press, $15.95.) Jenifer Levin, whose first
novel, ''Water Dancer,'' received wide critical attention, is indebted to Herman
Melville for the central metaphor in her new novel. On one level ''snow'' is the
name of the chemical defoliant produced by an American chemical company to
subdue rebel uprisings in the fictional island nation of Bellagua. Its
allegorical significance, as presaged by an epigraph from ''Moby Dick,'' is
identical to that of Melville's white whale, and in case we don't get the point,
there is even a reference to ''chasing whales'' by a minor character in the
story. ''Snow'' is never subtle; neither is its main character, Raina Scott, a
female Captain Ahab, whose pursuit of the ''white whale'' takes the form of
climbing mountains, spear-fishing Great White Sharks, bow-hunting big game and
leading a party of explorers into the jungle interior of Bellagua. After two
years in the jungle, it appears that Raina has vanished, and numerous people set
out to find the famous adventuress. Among them is her female lover, Kaz, whose
quest becomes a spiritual journey toward ''something final, larger than the rest
of it, something dark. Or white.'' Meanwhile, the growing movement against the
puppet regime in Bellagua is headed by a mysterious White Goddess who practices
ancient rituals from matriarchal cultures long suppressed by masculine forces -
forces all too obviously exemplified by the exploits of the Zachary Chemical
Company. Finally, however, the clash between the male-oriented corporation and
the natural order of the White Goddess is too facile to be enlightening, and the
White Goddess is more a cliche than the powerful symbol she is intended to be.
- Carol Verderese

* THE SHADOW CABINET. By W. T.  Tyler. (Harper & Row, $15.50.) W. T. Tyler's
fourth novel is set in the first year of Ronald Reagan's Presidency. It depicts
a Washington scrambling with graft-happy lawyers, bomb- happy militarists,
intellectual charlatans, White House bumblers and senatorial bigots. In this
melancholy anatomy of politics, the Administration is portrayed as self-seeking
and self-serving, while the opposition lies dazed in a limbo of cynicism and
apathy. Mr. Tyler, a veteran of two decades in the Foreign Service, obviously
cares passionately, and he portrays the capital scene in dismaying detail. His
heroes, who'd predicted that the American people would never elect ''a celluloid
cowboy dashboard ornament'' to the Presidency, are now outsiders. Haven Wilson,
an ex-Justice Department lawyer, is caught between an urge to retreat to a farm
and a relentless need to war on the ideology by which (in his view and that of
his friends) ''Reaganites were trashing the country.'' His most distraught and
brightest friend, Nick Strauss, is a former Soviet analyst for the C.I.A. whose
career has been blocked by his vocal insistence that officials in the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency and the Pentagon are working to dump detente.
Strauss discovers that our 32,000 nuclear warheads, having long ago run out of
legitimate targets, are aimed at such sites as a Russian herring cannery. Chance
tangles Wilson in a congested plot that brings together not only his old
associates but a Moral Majority Senator with buried Ku Klux Klan ties, a former
F.B.I. agent, retired officials now peddling military contracts and unsavory
millionaires after political appointments. As perhaps fits a polemical novel
about the maze-like world of government, the tempo is slow, the plotting
convoluted and sometimes digressive, and among the huge cast of characters, a
few are pontificating bores. Still, ''The Shadow Cabinet'' is an intricate,
intelligent and painful fictional tale of a city whose inhabitants happen to be
running the country.  - Michael Malone

* THE GULF SCENARIO. By Richard Bulliet, (St. Martin's, $12.95.) At a cocktail
party in Cambridge, Mass., the C.I.A. Chief of Field Operations tosses out an
apparently implausible idea. What if India and Pakistan set aside their enmity
and joined forces to take over the Persian Gulf with all its oil wealth? Ha ha
ha, says every guest but one - Carl Webster, a brilliant foreign policy
strategist. He secretly spins the idea into a detailed scheme, ostensibly for a
crisis simulation game at the Harvard-M.I.T. Strategic Research Group where he
works, but in fact with more grandiose visions in mind. He contrives to leak the
outlines of the plan to Pakistan and India, and to get himself kidnapped and
transported to Pakistan in order to supervise the execution of his scenario. But
he begins to suspect that the Pakistanis are altering the script in a way that
could lead to a global nuclear disaster. Accompanied by a two- fisted woman
C.I.A. agent, Webster makes his way to Abu Dhabi, where the final phase of the
operation is in progress, to avert the coming crisis. In another writer's hands,
every premise of ''The Gulf Scenario'' might seem silly. But Richard Bulliet
pulls it off with tremendous aplomb. Each character is sharply etched and
quirky; the settings - Cambridge academia, Washington investigatory committees,
Afghan guerrilla hide- outs, the homes of rich Westerners in Gulf nations - are
all vivid and convincing, and the plot twists like a corkscrew, all the way to a
sharp jab at the end. The prose is tough and tight and often very funny. And the
reader, besides being royally entertained, is forced to speculate seriously
about the behind-the-scenes manipulation of world political events that most of
us never catch a glimpse of. - Richard Smith

* ELLEANDER MORNING. By Jerry Yulsman. (St. Martin's/Marek, $13.95.) Taking his
clue from a few extremist historians and bunco artists who claim the Holocaust
never happened, Jerry Yulsman, photographer turned novelist, has imagined a
world in which Nazi Germany, World War II, the death camps, Pearl Harbor and
Hiroshima are prevented from entering history. To accomplish this, he has
invented a willful London prostitute and ''madam'' born late in Victoria's reign
and christened Elleander Morning. ''No flowers or saints or people are called by
that name,'' her mother says. ''That's why I gave it to you, a new name for the
new century that's coming.'' Elleander is singled out for more than a unique
name. Equipped with an advance copy of the Time-Life ''History of the Second
World War,'' the 30-year-old Elleander travels alone to Vienna in 1913, searches
out a chronically indigent young art student named Adolf Hitler and shoots him
dead as he sits reading the Arbeiter Zeitung in a coffeehouse. ''If they knew
what she'd done, they would have awarded her the bleeding Victoria Cross!'' an
aged former prostitute tells Elleander's granddaughter 70 years later. The
granddaughter - an American named Lesley Morning - discovers Elleander's copy of
the Time-Life ''History of the Second World War'' and arranges for a facsimile
edition to be published as a ''warning'' in the mid-1980's. In Germany the book
is taken for something else. The country's leaders, uncomfortable with the
Weimar constitution and unsatisfied with sole possession of the atomic bomb,
turn to the ''History'' as a fantastic blueprint for winning back the Saar,
Alsace-Lorraine, the Sudentenland, Upper Silesia, the Polish Corridor and more.
It isn't clear if Mr. Yulsman also intended his first novel to be a cautionary
tale. But in ''Elleander Morning'' historical reality succeeds fantasy with a
jarring return. -David Myers

NONFICTION

THE RISE OF INDUSTRIAL AMERICA: A People's History of the Post-Reconstruction
Era. By Page Smith. (McGraw-Hill, $29.95.) This sixth volume of Page Smith's
monumental ''People's History'' series is itself monumental - 965 pages (plus
introduction), covering the years 1879-1906. But then, a lot happened. And
narrative history, the grand old practice that is Mr. Smith's trade, is a good
way to tell a lot, particularly about Mr. Smith's subject - ''the basic American
schizophrenia.'' In the case of the Civil War, the stress produced by ''slavery
in the land of the free'' was acute. During the postbellum war between capital
and labor and the advance of Darwinian principle on Protestant belief, the
psychic costs of the ''association of poverty with progress'' were more like
high anxiety. But the battles were no less bloody than those of the War between
the States. This is a substantial sourcebook of the voices of that anxious time.
It would also make a great movie. Throughout, official politics is rightly
labeled irrelevant. The taming of the Indian West; the lure and the trap of the
city; the misery of the farmer, that rural capitalist whose increased
productivity lowers his profits; the despair of the great industrial strikes of
1877; the birth of market imperialism in the 1890's; the neurasthenia of New
England; the robber barons and the paternalists, the spiritualists and the
Christian Socialists - all this powers the tale. And despite its walk on the
dark side, this people's history is a celebration. ''I don't care so much for a
fortune as I do for getting ahead of the other fellow,'' said Thomas Alva
Edison. ''That was the American spirit!'' says Page Smith. - Caroline Rand
Herron

* A DEFENSE THAT DEFENDS: Blocking Nuclear Attack.  By Daniel O. Graham and
Gregory A. Fossedal. (Devin-Adair, $17.50.) Last year, when President Reagan
urged the development of futuristic space-based defenses, his ideas met with an
avalanche of criticism from experts who charged that the plan was technically
impossible, exhorbitant in cost and destabilizing to the strategic balance. In
this rejoinder, the authors develop a rationale for the new program, restating
at length the conservative critique of America's perceived military weaknesses
but ultimately shedding little new light on the technical and strategic issues
raised by the prospect of a ''Star Wars'' defense. The book's central, if
forgivable, weakness is its inability to resolve the most basic uncertainty of
''Star Wars'' technologies - will they work? The answer, of course, is that no
one knows and it will take billions to find out. Although the concept of a
space-based global defense lies at the heart of their analysis, the authors
support it only with the optimistic assertion that ''there is no doubt that such
technologies will be developed someday.'' Perhaps the most distressing gap in
their rationale is their implicit assumption regarding the utility of nuclear
weapons. Although presented as purely defensive, the new weapons the authors
promote can also have offensive applications, enhancing American nuclear
strength by blunting the Soviet Union's capacity to retaliate. And, indeed, the
authors' analysis is shot through with visions of a resurgent America able to
exert its power on behalf of ''a new foreign policy'' aimed at containing the
Soviet Union. How a marginal nuclear advantage might be translated into such a
utopia is left unexplained. But such extravagant goals imply a far different and
far less modest agenda than this short book can either illuminate or justify. -
Mark A. Uhlig

* IN MY MIND'S I: An Actor's Autobiography. By Michael Redgrave. (Viking,
$17.95.) Of all the legendary British actor knights, Michael Redgrave is the
most elusive. Laurence Olivier is the first among equals - tragedian, romantic
hero and character actor rolled into one. John Gielgud is the most musical of
actors. Ralph Richardson was the great eccentric. And Mr. Redgrave? This
autobiography does not help much to bring him into focus. He reminds us that he
had a reputation as an intellectual actor, but there is little here about his
views on the art of acting. For that, we must read his shrewd and lucid essays
collected in two previous books. Nor does the new book tell us much about how he
conceived of and worked on his famous roles. Nor is there a very profound
portrait of Michael Redgrave the man. Judging from ''In My Mind's I,'' his
predominant trait seems to be gentlemanly reserve - scarcely an ideal quality
for an autobiographer. Mr. Redgrave's writing is graceful and smooth, and he has
a nice self-deprecatory wit. He has pleasant stories to tell about Olivier,
Gieguld and especially Edith Evans, with whom, it turns out, he had an affair.
His three actor children - Vanessa, Corin and Lynn - also make appearances. ''In
My Mind's I'' will entertain those who care about the aristocracy of English
acting. But if Mr. Redgrave had searched and tested and extended himself as
little in his acting as he has in writing this book, he would never have been
knighted, and there would have been no call for his autobiography in the first
place. - Julius Novick

* SPIRES OF FORM: Glimpses of Evolution. By Victor B. Scheffer. (University of
Washington, $13.95.) In the fir trees that grow along the coast of Oregon lives
a species of mouse strikingly well adapted to its environment. It's a fine
acrobat, dresses in the colors of fir cones and doesn't mind resin in its diet
of sprigs and needles. The remarkable adaptations of the natural world are the
theme of this pleasantly written and undemanding book. Victor B. Scheffer's aim
is to whet the appetite, not sate it. His technique is to describe in detail
some facet of natural history, then allude lightly to the underlying theories
that explain it. He recounts how the bombardier beetle has mastered the complex
art of chemical warfare, then quickly outlines the problem of explaining how
such an accomplishment could have evolved when no intermediate step has evident
survival value. Through a patter of sketches and anecdotes, the book thus
conveys a general impression of the broad themes that modern biology seeks to
address. A chapter on evolution stresses that progress is not always toward
greater complexity. Snakes have lost their left lungs, whales their rear limbs
and river porpoises their eyes. The horseshoe crab, on the other hand, seems
just to have been marking time for the last 300 million years. As for humankind,
Mr. Scheffer - the first chairman of the United States Marine Mammal Commission
and the author of eight books, including ''The Year of the Whale'' - seems
uncertain about which way we are headed, and a section on the direction of human
evolution meanders into platitudes. - Nicholas Wade

* A ROOM CALLED REMEMBER: Uncollected Pieces. By Frederick Buechner. (Harper &
Row, $12.95.) Sermons are intended to inspire, instruct and remind one of great
truths. In this collection of sermons, the Presbyterian minister and novelist
Frederick Buechner is interested mostly in the last function - reminding. He
goes about it by describing moments of revelation in his own life, hoping these
will open up similar moments in his readers' lives. They are homely
illustrations of what it means to have faith - to wait, hope, remember. One of
the best of these pieces, ''Delay,'' likens waiting for a loved one to return
home - the quickening of expectation at every pair of headlights, the fear and
disappointment as they pass - to the vigil for God to show Himself, whether as
Jesus, burning bush or moment of grace. Other felicitous instances involve a
dream in the title piece and the skepticism of a Jewish boy in a New Testament
class. Mr. Buechner reminds us that sermons are the spoken word, and he likes to
mock-shock by throwing in ''hells'' and ''damns.'' But for all the
colloquialism, there is something, well, preachy and a little unctuous about
making yourself an exemplar of faith. Insights that would do for a paragraph are
dragged out with a doggedness that will presumably bring the idea home to even
the most resistant and inattentive. What reads best is Mr. Buechner's finale,
which is more of an essay and less of a sermon. It is the most nakedly
autobiographical piece, incorporating passages from the author's superior
fiction and managing finally to embody faith rather than advertise it.  - Anna
Shapiro

* MIDDLE EAST MISSION: The Story of a Major Bid for Peace in the Time of Nasser
and Ben-Gurion. By Elmore Jackson. (Norton, $12.95.) Elmore Jackson's ''Middle
East Mission'' is melancholy evidence that in diplomacy, good intentions are not
enough. Representing the Quakers, Mr. Jackson went to the Middle East in 1955 in
an effort to resolve the long impasse between Egypt and Israel. He did so at the
request of Egyptian officials, with the encouragement of the United States State
Department and the approval of the Israeli Prime Minister, Moshe Sharett. He
shuttled between the two countries for six weeks before the Egyptian Prime
Minister, Gamal Abdel Nasser, rang down the curtain on the peace mission by
announcing a major arms deal with Czechoslovakia, thus ending negotiations Mr.
Jackson acknowledges ''were already reaching an impasse.'' There may have been
no reason not to try private-sector diplomacy where all else had failed, but Mr.
Jackson does not seem to have been well placed to play the honest broker. The
Quakers' responsibility for Palestinian refugee programs in the
Egyptian-controlled Gaza Strip had brought them close to the Egyptians. In
''Middle East Mission'' there is no one on the Israeli side so appealing as the
''tall, youthful, broad-shouldered'' Nasser, whom Mr. Jackson found ''direct,
personally engaging and disarming in his candor.'' Mr. Jackson sees Nasser as
having been driven reluctantly into the Czechoslovak deal by the failure to
reach a settlement with Israel, which, Mr. Jackson says, was attributable
largely to the Israelis' ''disproportionate'' violence in retaliating against
terrorist attacks and to the ineptitude of American policy. Given Mr. Jackson's
perspective, it is hardly surprising that he should see continuity between
Nasser's policy toward Israel and Anwar el- Sadat's. But Sadat did not pick up
where Nasser left off. His trip to Jerusalem marked a radical departure from the
earlier policy of nonrecognition. In the tortuous history of the search for a
solution in the Middle East, the Jackson mission is a footnote, not a chapter. -
Judith K. Davison Comic-Book Genetics DNA is the most important substance in the
world, but to many the initials are a sure prescription for a glazing over of
the eyes. All life depends on the fact that the double helix of DNA splits apart
and re-forms, copying the blueprints of heredity for each new generation of
every living thing. The story of how this all probably started and how DNA's
role was discovered is full of wonder, suspense, humor and even romance.
Furthermore, now that man has learned how to splice and transplant genes and to
write synthetic messages of heredity into the code of DNA, we all need to know
what DNA is all about.

DNA FOR BEGINNERS by Israel Rosenfield, Edward Ziff and Borin Van Loon (Writers
and Readers/ Norton, paper, $6.95), is a 223-page comic book that offers a
painless way of catching up on the basics. All the main points are here - the
discoveries, the competition among scientists, the great debate over where
genetic engineering may lead us. The humor is sharp, the cartoons imaginative,
often outrageous - a sort of Monty Python treatment of molecular biology. The
text, some of it in comic- strip balloons, is wry, terse and easy to understand.
And it conveys a remarkable amount of information. For anyone who knows
something about of the subject, ''DNA'' is fun. For those whose ignorance is
total, it offers a good first step toward literacy in the world's most important
language. - Harold M. Schmeck Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawings

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COUNTY'S FOREIGN-STUDENT 'AMBASSADORS'

BYLINE: By TOM CALLAHAN

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 11, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words


''M Y education in America has been the most important part of my life,'' says
Edward Agbamu of Nigeria, referring to his three years at Mercy College. ''I've
come in contact with so many different people. International education enables
you to appreciate the whole picture, and the narrowness of your background falls
away.''

Mr. Agbamu is one of the hundreds of foreign students in undergraduate and
graduate levels of college studying in the county. The latest survey by the
Institute of International Education, in 1982, counted 710 foreign students in
11 local colleges and universities.

In a series of interviews, college and university officials expressed enthusiasm
about international education. Suggesting that it benefits both foreign students
and the schools, the officials said they also hoped foreign students could reach
out into the community and teach Americans about other people and cultures,
which might contribute to world peace.

''We have a lot of first-generation American college students here,'' said Dr.
Peter French, provost of Mercy College, ''and by exposing them to international
students and their perspectives, it contributes to their education. For students
whose horizons have never been beyond Westchester, it is important to interact
with foreign students.''

Mercy College, with 332 students from 62 countries, has the largest contingent
of foreigners studying in the county. Pace University, with 149 students from 74
countries on its two campuses in the county, is second.

''We feel that international education is a great benefit for American
students,'' said Dr. Jonathan Lambert, director of International Education at
Pace. ''To receive a modern education, a student must be made aware of
international interconnections.''

Nationwide, the number of international students coming to the United States
rose by 3.3 percent in 1983 to a total of 336,985. This was far less than the 10
percent yearly growth rate of the 1970's. The reasons given for the decline
include the world recession, a tightening of visa requirements after the Iranian
crisis and an effort by schools to avoid letting foreign enrollment outpace the
services available for foreign students.

In the county, schools with a large number of foreign students report that their
programs are growing but that they do not actively recruit overseas for
students, preferring to allow the enrollment to keep pace with such services as
classes in English as a second language.

Among the reasons why foreign students choose schools in the county is the
proximity to New York City, with its consulates and the United Nations. Dr. Mano
Sivasankar, foreign student adviser at Mercy College, reported that although
foreign students in the suburbs want to be close to New York City, they often do
not want to live there.

''Many students are afraid to live in New York because of what they have heard
about crime,'' Dr. Sivasankar said. ''So they like the small town atmosphere of
Westchester.''

Ramzi Zuraikat, a Jordanian who is president of the International Student's
Association at Mercy College, said that the international students in the county
help attract others.

''Westchester has an excellent environment of support for iternational students
because there are so many living here,'' he explained. ''A lot of these students
write to family and friends at home, telling them about schools like Mercy. This
word-of- mouth contact brings many more over.''

Manhattanville College, with 117 students from 45 countries, has been involved
in international education since the 1800's, when the school was run by the
religious order of the Sacred Heart.

Carmi Schumacher, director of international student services at Manhattanville,
said that a tradition among foreign families of sending their daughters abroad
to Manhattanville continued after the school went co-ed in 1971, with the only
change being that now they also send their sons.

''We find,'' she said, ''that people abroad look at the tradition of a school
and its commitment over the years to providing individual attention before
sending their children over.''

In recent years, Manhattanville has also seen an influx of foreign students
whose fathers have been transferred to jobs at the multinational corporations in
the area, such as Hitachi, Ciba-Geigy and International Business Machines.

For foreign students, an education in the United States can help in obtaining a
well-paying and prestigious jobs when they return home. For the college, it
means an increase in enrollment at a time when the traditional pool of 18- to
24-year-old students is decreasing. But college officials say that they see
international education serving greater goals.

''You can define education as commitment to community,'' Dr. Lambert said of
Pace, ''but now the community is a global community.''

To underline this commitment, Pace is starting a program in which foreign
students will be available to visit elementary and secondary schools in the
area. The idea is to use Pace students as cultural ambassadors to foster
international understanding.

''For American students who cannot afford to go abroad - and that is most of
them - at least they can sit across the table from someone from Uganda and see
that they can laugh, love and feel things the same way as anybody else,'' Dr.
Lambert said. ''We want students to understand that this is another human being,
and when this awareness is fostered, everybody wins.''

The State University of New York at Purchase tries to help its 99 foreign
students adjust by using a four-building on-campus apartment complex called
International House. Recent foreign arrivals are roomed with American students
who have traveled abroad.

At Mercy College, which has no dormitories, a list of local families who are
willing to take in a foreign student is used. The Mercy College president, Dr.
Donald Grunewald, has two foreign students living in his home, one from Vietnam
and another from Malaysia.

''Living with a family is an important educational experience,'' Dr. Sivasankar
noted.  For Mr. Agbamu, his three years of living in the county while attending
Mercy College has dispelled some myths. ''For someone coming from Africa,'' he
said, ''you expect hostility when you arrive in America. You read about how
blacks were lynched in the South, and you're on your guard. But when I came to
Westchester I didn't find any of that hostility. I have always been received
warmly. This is a great place.''

When he leaves Mercy this spring, he plans to continue his education in
government and politics at St. Johns University in Queens before going home to
spend one year in required government service. Then he hopes to put his
experience as editor of Mercy College's student newspaper to use in a journalism
career.

''American students are eager to learn about foreign students,'' he said. ''You
find yourself becoming a kind of teacher. They want to know what kind of food
you eat, whether there is a McDonald's in Nigeria and if we have snow.''

Mr. Agbamu added, ''There is a saying in my country: 'Those who have traveled
see more than those who live 100 years.' ''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VOLUNTEER AGENCIES PLAYING LARGER ROLE IN U.S. FOREIGN AID

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2267 words


A host of private and voluntary assistance agencies are playing an increasingly
active role in foreign aid.

They are serving as channels for government money in countries where
distributing aid might face problems, and they are filling in gaps where there
is no official aid, as in Nicaragua and Ethiopia.

A group of volunteer doctors from Iowa, for instance, has set up field clinics
for villagers in Yucatan, Mexico. People from Massachusetts have helped 3,000
small dairy farmers in Colombia increase milk production through modern
techniques. A group in Michigan has introduced Japanese quail to the Dominican
Republic because the birds require less feed than chickens.



Seek Personal Ties

All these volunteers belong to a private grass-roots organization, Partners of
the Americas, which is establishing strong personal ties between citizen groups
in the United States and Latin America while helping to improve the quality of
life in many Latin communities.

''The main value of private agencies is that they can survive and provide
continuing people-to-people relations, independent of strains at the government
level,'' says Gary J. Neeleman, national chairman of the Partners organization.
''Partners have survived 20 changes of government in Bolivia, both left and
right.''

Other private agencies active in international development assistance and relief
include Catholic Relief Services, Church World Service, CARE, Save the Children
Federation, World Vision Relief Organization, American Jewish Joint
Distribution, American Friends Service Committee, World Neighbors. Codel,
Africare, Mennonite Economic Development Associates, Oxfam America, Salvation
Army World Service Office, Technoserve and Meals for Millions/Freedom from
Hunger Foundation.

Despite criticism of some of their activities, the private groups have a long
list of successes to their credit, from getting food to famine-ridden Africa to
introducing community development in Latin America.

The United States Government's aid organization, the Agency for International
Development, often comes under criticism for a variety of reputed shortcomings.
Among the criticisms, merited or not, are that A.I.D. puts too much emphasis on
security and is guilty of political favoritism, mismanagement and inefficient
bureaucracy.

John W. Sewell, president of the Overseas Development Council, an independent
research group, said recently that the two major criticisms generally leveled
against United States foreign assistance are that it is not enough, falling way
below levels of aid from European countries, and that it is not focused on the
poorer countries.

U.S. Is Next to Last

Charts published by the council show that the United States is second to last
among the 17 members of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development.

According to the charts, it has contributed a yearly average of only two-tenths
of 1 percent of the gross national product since 1978. The poorest countries
received 64 cents per person in official United States economic aid in 1980,
while middle-level countries such as Egypt received $2.12 per person, and the
richest aid recipients, including Israel, got $11.18. These figures were on the
total $3.533 billion in bilateral economic assistance.

Private agencies, even those that are heavily financed by A.I.D., are also
unhappy about the direction of United States foreign aid and would like to have
more of a voice on policy, according to leaders of many voluntary organizations.

Conversations with leaders of many voluntary organizations showed a deep concern
in particular over the results of the report by the Preident's Bipartisan
Commission on Central America, which called for extensive aid for the region,
and the recent report by the Commission on Security and Economic Assistance,
headed by Frank Carlucci, a former Foreign Service official and president of
Sears, which concluded that ''economic and military assistance must be closely
integrated.'' These reports will be the main agenda items at a meeting between
Administration officials and the Advisory Committee on Private Voluntary Aid in
Washington on Thursday and Friday.

Private Agencies Also Criticized

The private and voluntary organizations, often referred to as P.V.O.'s, have
also been criticized. The National Council of Churches in particular was accused
last year by right-wing figures in the United States of supporting armed
revolutions and other political activity by contributing to a literacy campaign
in Nicaragua and giving economic aid to Vietnam.

The council, in its response, said that it had consistently opposed violence and
that overseas aid was used ''only for humanitarian purposes'' and sent in
consultation with churches there.

''There's always some tension between A.I.D. and the P.V.O.'s because we have
different objectives,'' said Thomas McKay, director of private and voluntary
cooperation for A.I.D. ''The P.V.O.'s do serve as a very important delivery
mechanism, particularly for disaster relief, and are getting better at providing
long-term development assistance, with U.S. Government help.''

In fact, Congress recently decided that for certain countries such as Haiti and
Zaire, Government money should go through the private agencies because of
concern that otherwise it would not get to the people, according to Mr. McKay.
He stressed that private agencies were also used to distribute Government aid
among the many islands of the South Pacific, where A.I.D. does not have
bilateral programs.

Partners of the Americas, which celebrates its 20th birthday this year, was
started as a self-help program under President Kennedy's Alliance for Progress,
but by 1970 it became a private organization. There are partnerships between
citizen groups in 46 American states and 27 Latin and Caribbean countries as
well as 19 states in Brazil.

Funds Raised by Utah Children

Mr. Neeleman, who is from Utah, is particularly proud of the Utah-Bolivia
partnership. Starting in 1969, the Partners have built a total of 117 village
schools in the Altiplano, a high plateau in the Andes that is situated mostly in
western Bolivia, mainly through a fund-raising campaign by 5th and 6th graders
in Utah and the labor of the Bolivian villagers. They also introduced a
community education program, which was so effective that other Andean countries
became interested in doing the same thing. The Bolivian peasants identified
their own needs and set up the projects for building outhouses, beautifying
villages, bringing water from a distant spring or starting a weaving workshop.

Now the Partners have started a ''project for 1,000 wells'' to help Bolivia
through what has been described as the worst drought in its history. In the
Altiplano 1.5 million subsistence farmers have lost much of their livestock and
crops.

''We just tell the people of Utah that El Nino, that freak wind which has
changed weather patterns everywhere, brought us all the water that should go to
Bolivia and so they must finance well-drilling equipment,'' said Mr. Neeleman,
who is also vice president of United Press International for Latin America and
the Caribbean.

Other Partners were engaged in a total of 1,300 projects last year, most
operating on grants of $5,000 or less. The Alabama-Guatemala Partners have built
a five-mile artificial reef with wrecked cars, cement blocks and other debris to
make a new breeding ground for fish in the Bay of Amatique.

The Vermont-Honduras Partners started a three-year program last year to help
hillside farmers upgrade subsistence farming with simple technologies such as
contouring, crop rotation, the use of organic fertilizers, gravity irrigation
and rotating and diversifying crops. The program began with 15 Honduran farmers,
and each farmer has promised to train four of his neighbors.

Aid Sent to Nicaraguans

Although the United States has cut off aid to the leftist regime in Nicaragua,
the Partners in Wisconsin are sending regular shipments of medical supplies to
the Nicaraguan people and working on a long-range project of food preservation
through low-cost solar dryers for the Nicaraguans.

World Neighbors, based in Oklahoma City, also promotes self-help development in
third world countries. Operating in 21 countries, mainly in Latin America and
Africa, the group helps set up farm cooperatives and savings and loan
associations, offers training in developing cottage industries and marketing,
and assists in agricultural extension, public health and family planning.

Unlike the main voluntary agencies, however, World Neighbors is supported solely
by private contributions and grants and does not accept any United States
Government financing. It is critical of official food distribution programs,
except in emergencies.

Private organizations are still active in Lebanon, among them the Catholic
Relief Services. According to Joseph Curtin, program director for Lebanon, the
country's most urgent need after years of warfare is the reconstruction of
hospitals, schools, old age homes, schools for the deaf and blind and mental
asylums.

Mr. Curtin, in an interview at the voluntary agency's New York City office,
said, ''It's very important that relief agencies remain in Lebanon, regardless
of how hopeless the situation may seem.''

''As a foreign private organization, Catholic Relief Services can be completely
neutral, serving everyone, both Christians and Moslems, and accepted by all,''
he said. ''Furthermore, we can provide an American face other than that of the
U.S. military and political presence.''

Catholic Relief Services has put $16 million into relief and reconstruction for
Lebanon since 1977, with one half the total coming from United States Government
grants.

As of Sept. 30, 1983, there were 167 private and voluntary agenices registered
with A.I.D. and thereby eligible to apply for Government cash, food and other
support. At that time, the voluntary agencies reported receiving private
contributions totaling $1.062 billion, a slight increase over the end of 1981.
Government support to the agencies in the form of grants, contracts, food,
freight and excess property totaled $731 million, a slight drop.

Many Agencies Unregistered

There are other private agencies not registered with A.I.D. The
Government-supported Technical Assistance Information Clearing House publishes a
directory listing 497 nonprofit organizations involved in development assistance
abroad and is said to have a mailing list of 900 agencies.

The main private organizations are grouped under two umbrella associations that
are expected to merge to form a new entity by July. The American Council of
Voluntary Agencies forForeign Service, with 48 members, was founded in 1943 as a
forum for cooperation by agencies dealing with relief and refugee services. In
the late 1970's a group of small agencies, more concerned with economic
development than relief, split off to set up Private Agencies in International
Development, which now has 100 members.

''I believe the P.V.O.'s, in all their diversity, can play a far greater role if
they speak with one voice,'' says David L. Guyer, President of Save the Children
Federation, which has been a leader in the move toward merger.

Fight Drought in Africa

Several of the larger, better-known agencies are working against the drought
that has hit many parts of Africa. Although all the agencies are increasingly
development-oriented and wary about the negative effects of food programs, they
agree on the urgent need for food relief in Africa. The United States has
approved an $84 million emergency food program for Africa and is working with
the private agencies to carry it out.

''The drought disaster which hit Ethiopia four years ago has spread to most of
the continent in the past 18 months,'' Dr. Philip Johnston, Executive Director
of CARE, said recently. He warned that starvation ''is just around the corner in
Ghana'' and other countries.

CARE, founded in 1945 to help postwar Europe, has been working with refugees and
development aid in the third world since 1949. Experienced in handling food
relief, it has received requests from the Governments of Somalia, Chad and most
recently Mozambique and Mauritania, to coordinate international relief
assistance.

Interchurch Effort in Somalia

Another source of aid comes from the Interchurch Relief Operation for Refugees
in Somalia. Church World Service, a Protestant and Eastern Orthodox group,
Catholic Relief Services and Lutheran World Relief pooled resources for the
first time, not only in food aid but also in development projects such as
irrigation and reforestation.

''Three years ago, the death rate at birth among the refugees was one in four
because of malnutrition in the camps, but now the problem has been resolved,''
Willis Logan, director of the Africa office of the Church World Service, said
recently.

Church World Service issued a special appeal last summer for $6.5 million to
face the global food crisis, with emphasis on the droughts in Mozambique,
Mauritania, southern India, Bolivia and Peru, floods in Brazil and Argentina and
famine in Sind province in Pakistan. The response has been swift, according to a
Church Service spokesman, Larry Hollon, who said the churches already have $2
million. At the same time, the group has called on A.I.D. to provide larger
amounts of Food for Peace commodities for areas of greatest need.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Alicia del Villar de Blanco (page A8)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Rebels Cut Vietnam Supply Route

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 61 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 11


Thai Army officers said today that the Vietnamese had been forced to airlift
supplies to their army outposts in western Cambodia because guerrillas had cut
their main supply routes on the ground.

The Thai Army officers said the Vietnamese flew supply missions near the Thai
border Friday and Saturday in Soviet-built T-28 planes and MI-4 and MI-8
helicopters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DEFENSE STRATEGIES TAKE SHAPE AT BRINK'S TRIAL

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS, March 11


As jury selection continued here in the Brink's trial of Kathy Boudin and Samuel
Brown, defense attorneys have begun to reveal the initial outlines of their
cases.

Miss Boudin's lawyer says he plans to call to the stand two political activists,
the Rev. Daniel Berrigan and Dr. Benjamin Spock. The lawyer, Leonard I.
Weinglass, acknowledged that the two had not been ''observers'' of the 1981
robbery of an armored truck and the killing of a guard and two police officers.

Judge David S. Ritter of Orange County Court waited at one point last week until
a panel of potential jurors had left the courtroom to ask, ''What roles will
they play in this case?''

Mr. Weinglass said, ''Father Berrigan will be called for the generalized purpose
of expert opinion and Dr. Spock will be more of a character witness.''

Links to Defendant's Father

Father Berrigan, a 62-year-old Jesuit, and Dr. Spock, 80, the pediatrician and
author, actively opposed the Vietnam War. During that time, they met Leonard
Boudin, the defendant's father and a constitutional lawyer who represented some
of the activists who opposed the war.  Miss Boudin, 40, a former political
radical and member of the Weather Underground, was arrested fleeing a police
roadblock where two officers were shot after the holdup in Nyack, N.Y. She is
standing trial with Samuel Brown, 43, who was seized following the same incident
after the car he was in crashed while being chased by the police. The two are
charged with second-degree murder and first-degree robbery.

Three others involved in the Nyack incident have been sentenced to 75 years to
life in a separate trial, and four other defendants, convicted of Federal
conspiracy and racketeering charges, have received prison terms of 12 1/2 to 40
years.

Those trials were marked by the use of revolutionary slogans, with the
defendants identifying themselves as ''political prisoners'' and ''freedom
fighters.''

Standard Approaches Expected


By contrast, Miss Boudin and Mr. Brown, who is represented by Robert Isseks, a
court-appointed lawyer, have opted for standard legal defenses.

These have included requests for pretrial hearings and other legal actions that
Judge Ritter called ''the most extensive motion practice I've ever witnessed.''
The close screening of potential jurors, especially by defense lawyers looking
for possible bias, has led court observers to estimate that the trial will take
six months.

The activity seems to indicate that Miss Boudin's lawyers will seek to portray
her as a secondary participant in the crimes. That possibility was raised last
week when Judge Ritter was asked to expand his preliminary definition of the
laws involved in the case.

The judge had been describing felony murder to potential jurors, explaining that
someone can be guilty of murder without firing the fatal shot if he or she
participated in a crime that resulted in death. The prosecution is saying that
applies to Miss Boudin.

Judge Agrees to Request


Mr. Weinglass asked Judge Ritter to tell the jurors that there is also an
''affirmative defense'' to felony murder. The judge did so, noting simply that
it applied to defendants who were ''not armed and did not fire the fatal shot.''

As Mr. Weinglass noted later, an affirmative defense must show not only that
Miss Boudin was unarmed, but also that she did not ''cause or aid'' the shooting
and ''had no reason to believe any other participant was armed'' or ''intended
to engage in conduct likely to result in death.''

Kenneth Gribetz, the Rockland County District Attorney who is prosecuting the
case, said outside of court, ''There is no basis for the affirmative defense
because we have physical as well as circumstantial evidence linking her to the
crimes.''

Mr. Gribetz said that, similarly, he saw no role for Father Berrigan or Dr.
Spock in the case ''because we never mentioned radical, or terrorist, or the
Weather Underground or anything political in the first Brink's trial and we
don't intend to in this one.''

'To Rebut Prosecution Evidence'


Mr. Weinglass, nevertheless, asserted that the witnesses would be needed ''to
rebut prosecution evidence.'' He said ''there are instances where the
prosecution will ask the jury to draw certain inferences from actions that Kathy
Boudin took.''

He declined to elaborate, except to say that ''we may need an expert to say that
a person with political principles would behave in a certain way not because of
guilt, but because of lack of confidence in the system.'' Judge Ritter has asked
the lawyers not to discuss evidence in the trial.

Mr. Isseks, for his part, has found that potential jurors generally are not
familiar with Mr. Brown's name. One prospective juror said, ''What I know about
Mr. Brown I learned in this courtroom,'' presumably from questioning by Miss
Boudin's lawyers.

Mr. Isseks has complained to the judge that Mr. Brown is ''at a disadvantage,
being tried with a public figure.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

20 YEARS AFTER THE MURDER OF KITTY GENOVESE, THE QUESTION REMAINS: WHY?

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1824 words


When Catherine Genovese's cry in the night went unanswered by 38 of her
neighbors, experts in human behavior were as hard put as anyone else to explain
the inaction of the witnesses to her savage murder. ''Nonrational behavior,''
one sociologist called it.

But, in the two decades since, a whole body of work has been done on the
''Genovese syndrome.'' The experts have struggled to figure out why so many
people listened or watched but failed to call the police that night of March 13,
1964, as the 28-year-old bar manager was stalked and stabbed in her Queens
neighborhood.

Even as her name became a symbol of public apathy, her case captured the public
imagination and galvanized action in psychological, sociological and legal
circles.

Bad Samaritanism


This weekend, 20 years after the slaying, experts from those fields and
government officials gathered at Fordham University for a three-day Catherine
Genovese Memorial Conference on Bad Samaritanism to share what they have
learned. The university sponsored the conference with the National Institute of
Mental Health, the National Institute of Justice and the Center for Responsive
Psychology.

''It's held the imagination because looking at those 38 people, we were really
looking at ourselves,'' said Peter J. O'Connor, a Fordham law professor. ''We
might not have done anything either. That's the ugly side of human nature.''

R. Lance Shotland, an associate professor of psychology at Pennsylvania State
University, said that over the last 20 years, more than 1,000 articles and books
attempting to explain the behavior of bystanders in crises had been written.
Only 50 such studies, he said, have been done on the Holocaust.

''Probably no single incident has caused social psychologists to pay as much
attention to an aspect of social behavior as Kitty Genovese's murder,'' Dr.
Shotland said.

The case had such a remarkable impact for many reasons, the experts say. It
occurred, they say, in a more innocent era, before the cynicism of Vietnam and
Watergate and before the national crime statistics began to mushroom.

To those in the nation's small towns, it seemed to sum up the worst of big
cities. ''New York is not just a city, it is the focus of the anti-urban
sentiment that exists in our society,'' said Stanley Milgram, a professor of
psychology at the City University of New York.

But New Yorkers were traumatized as well. It crystallized what people were only
beginning to feel about urban life in America: the anonymity, the lack of human
contact, the feeling of not being able to control one's environment.

''The case touched on a fundamental issue of the human condition, our primordial
nightmare,'' Dr. Milgram said. ''If we need help, will those around us stand
around and let us be destroyed or will they come to our aid? Are those other
creatures out there to help us sustain our life and values or are we individual
flecks of dust just floating around in a vacuum?''

Morton Bard, professor of psychology at the City University's Graduate Center,
and others agreed that the Genovese case focused attention on the needs of the
victim. ''It occurred at the very beginning of what has turned out to be the
longest and most sustained crime wave in this country's history,'' Professor
Bard said. Crime has gone up 300 percent in the last 20 years, according to
Justice Department officials attending the conference.

''It mobilized people's thinking around the need for society to respond to the
victimization of people,'' Professor Bard said. ''The victim had become a person
without a voice in criminal proceedings.''

In the years since, neighborhood watch committees and private security patrols
have become common. Many places now have a central 911 emergency telephone
number. Many states have passed ''Good Samaritan'' laws that relieve a person of
liability when he helps in emergencies.

Victim Compensation Laws


Thirty-seven states now have victim compensation laws, and three have
duty-to-intervene statutes. Lobbying groups have sprung up to protect the rights
of the victim, and crime-stoppers units with payment for anonymous tips are
common in big city police departments.

Two weeks after the Genovese murder had passed nearly unnoticed, The New York
Times reported its discovery that ''for more than half an hour, 38 respectable,
law-abiding citizens in Queens watched a killer stalk and stab a woman'' and did
not call the police. The story, retracing the investigation with detectives,
said witnesses offered several reasons for their inaction:

''We thought it was a lovers' quarrel.''

''Frankly, we were afraid.''

''I was tired.''

The police called it apathy. Dr. Harold Takooshian, an assistant professor of
psychology at Fordham, said that through voluminous studies, social scentists
now believed that apathy was a factor in the Genovese case but was probably too
simple a term for what happened.

''We realize now that the reasons were more complex,'' he said. ''Some people
were probably apathetic, but some were afraid of the killer. Some misinterpreted
what was happening and thought it was a lover's quarrel. Some might have wanted
to get involved but didn't know what to do.''

At the time of the Genovese case, the large number of witnesses involved was
part of the shock. But Dr. Shotland quoted a study showing that a person's
probability of helping someone in trouble declines when there are other
bystanders present. ''They take cues from others,'' he said. ''An alone
bystander may help 70 percent of the time. As a member of a group, that same
bystander may help 40 percent of the time.''

Bystanders who see a man and a woman fighting, he said, are likely to assume
that they know each other, and research shows that bystanders behave very
differently if they assume a quarreling man and woman are related rather than
strangers.

Bystanders who witnessed a violent staged fight between a man and a woman and
heard the woman shout, ''Get away from me, I don't know you,'' helped 65 percent
of the time. In comparison, those bystanders who heard the woman scream, ''Get
away from me, I don't know why I ever married you,'' helped only 19 percent of
the time.

Specialized Training


Although there were disagreements among the experts about what personality types
were likely to be helpful, bystanders who directly intervene tend to be a very
different type of person than the ordinary citizen - very self-assured and
usually with some specialized training in first aid or lifesaving, Dr. Shotland
said. They are nearly always men, he said.

Robert Panzarella, a professor at John Jay College, said that in dealing with
emergencies, people experienced a mixture of uncertainty about whether what they
saw was a crime or a dispute between people who knew each other; fear that the
criminal might be able to identify them later, even if their tip was anonymous,
and futility with the criminal-justice system.

''Our studies show that in serious crimes, people waited an average of 20
minutes before calling the police, even when they were the victim,'' he said.
''Typically, by then it's too late.''

At one point during reports on sociological findings on ''diffusion of
responsibility,'' one young woman in the audience spoke up impatiently.

''All these statistics,'' said Lori Harris, 21, of Kearny, N.J., a student in
Fordham's adult education program. ''It's all just human nature. People don't
respond because they're afraid. I told a hoodlum to put out a cigarette in the
PATH train the other day and I could see people around me wished they had the
courage to do it. People should just react, instead of sitting around debating
all the factors involved.''

One member of the panel, District Attorney Mario Merola of the Bronx, said he
agreed with Miss Harris. ''All of us should start looking in the mirror,'' he
said. ''We're not going to change human nature unless each of us decides to
change each other so we can get over the weaknesses in our characters and make a
contribution.''

Most of the experts at the conference, which was held at Fordham's Lincoln
Center campus, agreed that a case like the Genovese case could happen again at
any time. They cited the gang rape of a woman in a bar in New Bedford, Mass.,
that was witnessed by a number of bystanders who did not intervene. A trial in
that case is now going on.

''The conduct by the witnesses in the Genovese case was a natural, normal
reaction,'' Mr. Merola said. ''It happens day in and day out. The average person
is fearful, apprehensive and doesn't want to get involved. They want George to
do it. The effect on the criminal-justice system every day of people who witness
crimes and don't want to get involved is horrible.''

Legally, doing nothing is still not a crime in New York and most states.

Professor O'Connor said the New York Legislature should pass two laws making it
both a criminal and a civil offense for a bystander to fail to come to the aid
of a victim of a crime.

James K. Stewart, the director of the National Institute of Justice, the
research arm of the Justice Department, says he thinks that we are beginning to
come out the ''era of apathy'' that began with the Genovese case.

For years, he said, the public had a ''Great Society'' attitude that
professionals - law-enforcement, medical, political - would take care of
everything. ''It was an age of dropping out and withdrawing,'' he said. ''People
felt they couldn't make a difference. The emphasis was on retreating behind our
locks and bars and windows.'' Now, he said, ''they're realizing their own
competence once again. We are realizing that we are accountable for our own
lives and our neighbors' lives.''

Decline in Crime Rate


He pointed out that crime went down 4 percent nationwide in 1982 and is expected
to continue to drop. ''Through things like these neighborhood watch groups,
we're building a better sense of community.''

Hubert Williams, the director of police in Newark, agreed. ''The people and the
police must be one,'' he said. ''Law enforcement is ineffectual without citizen
participation.''

Summing up, Jay S. Sexter, an associate vice president at Fordham, said the
success of the conference was a sign that the experts and the government
agencies were starting to work together to change the public's attitude. ''Kitty
Genovese died because we didn't have a sense of community,'' he said. ''We're
finally coming out of it now because people are tired of being afraid to walk on
the streets or go in the subways.''

C. Everett Koop, the Surgeon General of the United States and a speaker at the
conference, said he believed the problem would be solved ''when people learn to
care, when they accept the fact that there may be risks to caring, and when they
agree to take those risks in order to preserve their place in the community.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Hubert Williams (page B4); photo of Mario Merola; photo of
Lori Harris

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

11-YEAR-OLD MINISTERS TO NEEDS OF HOMELESS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, March 11


At home, Trevor Ferrell is a quiet 11-year- old who studies enough to get
average grades, sometimes squabbles with his brother and sisters, swims in
season in the family pool and rides his minibike around the cul-de-sac on their
quiet suburban street.

But each night as he moves among his people, Trevor becomes something more. An
inner glow seems to light his face. He moves with a confidence that also fills
his voice.

Trevor's people are Tommy, a bearded figure in grimy clothes huddled on a steam
vent beside mounds of snow in bitter cold; Betty and John, hugging themselves
for warmth under a storefront awning; Scape, who sleeps on a boxboard-layered
fire escape; Static, so called for the way his hair stands out, living from
street to street, and Vince and Marcella Williams, who sleep on a secluded
corner.

He Has Adopted Street People


Trevor's people are the street people of Philadelphia. Aided by his father,
Frank, his mother, Janet, his neighbors and his and several other churches,
Trevor has adopted them. And as word has spread about the family's ministry,
more and more help has poured in.

Friday night he spread a blanket over Tommy's shoulders, handed soup, ladled by
his father, and sandwiches to John and Betty and many others, and lifted the
edge of a blanket to touch Scape, gently nudging a shoulder.

''Scape?'' he said. ''Scape? Are you all right? Want some coffee? How about some
hot soup?''

Trevor touches a shoulder or a hand, but Friday night, it was clear, he had
touched something deeper. Pale and weary at the end of the night after a
stressful week that capped three months of a nightly ministry, suffering a
headache and perhaps fever, Trevor sat, confined by a worried father to the
front seat, when their station wagon reached 11th and Winter Streets, where a
crowd had gathered.

''Where's Trevor?'' asked Michael Mines, wearing a warm soldier's coat the boy
had given him. ''Where's Little Buddy?'' asked one. ''Where's Little Jesus?''
asked another.

''Take him home and give him some hot tea,'' advised a man named Eugene. ''Have
you given him Tylenol?'' asked Rasheem, an epileptic veteran of the Vietnam War.

''We're going to pray for Trevor and your whole family,'' Eugene told Mr.
Farrell.

Friday night came a day after a visit by Trevor to City Hall to meet Mayor W.
Wilson Goode and receive a commendation from the City Council for his ministry
to the street people.

Mission Began in December


His mission began, Trevor recalled, on a cold night last December when he saw on
television the street people huddled over their steam vents.

''I asked my father if people really lived like that,'' Trevor said. ''He said,
'Sure, they are right here in Philadelphia,' and he said, 'If you want to see
for yourself I'll take you down there.' ''

Trevor asked if he could take a blanket and one of his pillows along. Both of
those went on the first block past City Hall, to a man on a grate near the
brownstone front of one of the city's most exclusive clubs, the Union League.

''You should have seen his face light up,'' said Trevor.

Almost every night since then, Trevor and Mr. Ferrell, usually accompanied by
Mrs. Ferrell, have returned, sometimes with Trevor's 14- year-old brother,
Allen, or his 16-year- old sister, Liza, or Jody, 8, his youngest sister.

Now, as word has spread, they return with more. Contributions pile up in their
yard as the Ferrells, a Presbyterian family, visit churches where Trevor tells
of the street people's needs and as he distributes leaflets to stores. When
checks began coming in, Mr. Ferrell, the owner of a television shop, arranged
for Trevor to incorporate and seek tax exemption.

The family's goal now is to get a building for a downtown shelter.

Trevor, a sixth-grader, finishes his homework in the afternoon before the
nightly missions, he said. ''To tell the truth, Trevor is not exactly great at
studies,'' Mr. Ferrell said, though ''he has a high I.Q.''

How long will they continue the nightly missions? both father and son were
asked.

''As long as we can,'' each said.

As Friday night began, telephone calls interrupted preparations. One call, the
father said, was from a film- studio executive seeking a meeting to discuss a
possible motion picture.

What would he do, Trevor was asked, if the result would be a lot of money?

Trevor responded, ''Get a building.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Trevor Ferrell

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM TRANSCRIPT OF 5 CANDIDATES' DEBATE IN ATLANTA

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 5074 words


Following are key sections of a transcript of a debate yesterday among the five
major candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination in the Fox Theater
in Atlanta, Ga., as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of the
Cable News Network.

The participants were Senator John Glenn of Ohio, Senator Gary Hart of Colorado,
the Rev. Jesse Jackson, former Vice President Walter F. Mondale and former
Senator George McGovern of South Dakota. The moderator was John Chancellor of
NBC News.


Panel Discussion

Military Spending




MR. CHANCELLOR: Aren't most of you for an increase in defense spending?

JESSE JACKSON: Well, I'm not.

GEORGE McGOVERN: I'm not, I'm for a 25 percent cut in the President's budget and
I think it can be done without touching anything that's important to our
national defense. I'm a bomber pilot in the Second World War. I would not
advocate anything that I thought touched the essential defense of this country,
but some of the most thoughtful people that have looked at that military budget
say that it's just loaded with waste and cost overruns and noncompetitive
bidding.

MR. CHANCELLOR: I sense that Jesse Jackson is not out of phase with that
sentiment.

MR. JACKSON: No doubt about it. The point is that cost overruns is a factor that
requires that we at this point have some kind of Congressional oversight
committee of some force that allows it to become managed. Right now it is
unmanageable - the no-bid contracts. The second dimension is I support the need
of some conventional troops in Europe or Japan, but 300,000 troops in Europe,
50,000 in Japan - they're better able to help share some of that burden now.
That can be cut, similar unnecessary assistance. Whether we can cut the defense
by at least 20 to 25 percent of the budget without cutting out defense, that is
the money to implement some new ideas.

GARY HART: I am for reducing the Reagan military buildup by $140 to $150
billions of dollars in the next four to five years, and I've spelled out in
great detail where those cuts must come. But I'll tell you why I disagree with
both George and Jesse. One is that we have to increase even over and above
Ronald Reagan what we are paying our military personnel to retain the most
skilled personnel among other things to avoid going back to a very divisive
Vietnam-style draft and second even after spending $650 billions of dollars in
the last three years under this Administration, the Pentagon itself admits we
have fewer combat-ready divisions than we had in 1980 under the Carter-Mondale
Administration. And that means even Ronald Reagan is plundering the readiness
accounts of our conventional forces for a procurement build-up which is going to
make us weaker.

Percentages of Increase

MR. CHANCELLOR: Maybe we can find a way to make this more understandable. Isn't
it true that the President has asked for a 13 percent increase this year in the
allocations for defense, allowing for inflation? That's a 13 percent increase.

MR. HART: What about real terms, that's 17 isn't it?

MR. CHANCELLOR: All right, you want to say 17 then.

MR. HART: It is 17.

MR. CHANCELLOR: What would your figure be in that context - 4 or 5 percent
increase?

MR. HART: Mine is about 3 1/2 to 4 percent. Over the base line that was
established in '80.

WALTER MONDALE: Not to argue with Senator Hart, about a year and a half ago, he
wrote a dissenting opinion in which he seemed to say he wanted as much or more
military spending as Mr. Reagan. But, let me make my point. I think one of the
realities of modern Presidential leadership is that as much as we want to bring
that defense budget down - and I do - as much as we want to get rid of weapons
systems that don't buy us defense - and I will - as much as we need a tough new
system of bidding, of testing, of warranties, as much as we need arms control to
help also bring down pressure, the inescapable fact is that the Soviet Union is
a powerful military nation using its power irresponsibly in Poland, and
Cambodia, and Afghanistan and Syria and elsewhere. And the President of the
United States has to do everything he can to manage that budget sensibly and
wisely, but he cannot fail to effectively discharge the national security
interests of our country. That's a tough balance but a President must do it.

MR. CHANCELLOR: Will you give me a percentage figure? What are you, 3, 4, 5
percent increase?

MR. MONDALE: Yes, I would be at about 4 percent.

JOHN GLENN: I'm at about 6 percent. My two colleagues on the right here, I feel
would cut our defense establishment beyond all reality as far as keeping the
security of this country.

Now I have proposed cutting about $15 billion out; I've specified where that
would be, it'd be on the MX, it'd be on the division air defense, the Bradley
Fighting Vehicle, and the Rapid Deployment Force, certain parts of that. The
build-up of the Soviets has been relentless since those Cuban missile crisis
days.

The former Vice President would cut the B-1, the Nimitz carrier, the Trident,
the cruise missile, the foreign troops he would cut back, he would cut the M-1
tank, funds for the volunteer army, kill the shuttle, oppose procurement of the
F-14, the Harrier and AWACs.

I propose that would leave this country emasculated. The only two of those that
he's pulled back from has been the Trident missile - the Trident submarine and
cruise missile.

Mr. Hart opposed the F-15, the F-18, the B-1, the big - the Nimitz carrier, the
Minuteman 3, the AWACs add-on, the Patriot Hellfire MLRS missiles, and has gone
to a program of leadership in Washington of smaller and simpler is better rather
than stressing our technology. And that's a fundamental difference between us.
And I'm saying that every single thing we put out there has to work and work
properly.

But we cannot go back to a smaller, simpler day or we wind up matching our
numbers for numbers of troops vs. the Soviets as opposed to using what we've
done in every war and that is use our technology to keep from using so many
people out there; keep a distance between you and the enemy with our technology.

I fought in those wars, I know what it's like to be up there and want the best
technology because my life depended on it. And so I do not agree with this
smaller is simpler is better is cheaper approach that Mr. Hart has used, and I
don't think most people across the South do either.

MR. HART: What Senator Glenn doesn't address is the need for more units of all
these things. We cannot afford more aircraft carriers when they, each one, cost
three and a half to four billion dollars. We are behind the Soviets in
submarines by a ratio of 3 to 1. We are falling behind in almost every category
of weapons system in numbers because we're worshipping technology. I want to use
our technological superiority to produce conventional weapons that work in
combat in sufficient numbers to defend this country's interests.

MR. JACKSON: Gary's argument now is still preparing to kill and be killed by the
Russians. I think the point is that we've began to use more of our energy on
talking and negotiating and engaging in trade and technology and agriculture and
less upon preparing to fight we can prepare to live. The fact is we can just
wipe out the Soviet Union with 300 warheads. We've got 10,000. The only reason
we're alive now is they decided not to kill us last night. They're alive because
we decided not to kill them. We're beyond now talking about who can overkill
each other the most. That's uncivilized behavior. We need to begin to use our
minds rather than our missiles and reduce this tension and go another way. We
will still be wasting money killing people in the Caribbean or in Central
America or in Lebanon and we should save the money we're using killing people
there and save the money from cost overruns, we can cut the budget without
cutting defense, begin to use our minds and go another way.

MR. MCGOVERN: What we've got is this same old argument ''the Russians are
coming, the Russians are about to jump on us.'' You can be very sure that that
same argument's being made over there in the Kremlin ''the Americans are gaining
on us.'' Both of these super-powers are literally scaring each other to death -
each side arming in the name of defense, each side piling up more and more of
these weapons of destruction at a time when our societies are deteriorating.

President Eisenhower, who probably knew more about these military matters than
any other President since World War II, put it this way: if the military spends
too much, it actually weakens the country by depriving us of other sources of
national power - education, housing, transportation, a balanced economy. These
are things that also have to do with our national strength. And I think we need
a leadership that instead of trying to get the Russians to the bargaining table
by a $1.5 trillion military build-up has the common sense to say, ''We're ready
to bargain right now.''

Reagan's undertaken this totally unjustified build-up on the theory that the
Russians would then be more humble, and they've walked out on the arms
negotiations.

MR. MONDALE: I agree that the idea of just building up arms to scare the
Russians so then they will agree to whatever we want, as Reagan is
demonstrating, will fail. I want to be understood as being totally committed to
annual summit conferences, to arms control negotiations, efforts to reduce
tensions. I couldn't agree with you more.

On the other hand, and I don't want to misinterpret what you've said, but the
Soviets are using their power in Poland, in Cambodia, in Afghanistan, in Syria
in ways that are irresponsible and dangerous.

MR. McGOVERN: Fritz, how are you going to stop that with another 4 percent of
military spending or another 40 percent? That's not going to change their
relation to Poland or Afghanistan or these other areas.

MR. MONDALE: I think we need to have a sensible and a strong defense, and I had
really intended to respond to John Glenn. It's a question of balance and of
sense in arms control. But the point I wanted to respond to John Glenn is I am
for a strong defense and a sensible defense.

Let me give you one example. The B-1, which I opposed. I support the Stealth
because it's a modern, advanced bomber that'll take us into the next century.

I am against the MX, but I'm for the Midgetman. I think the Navy has to be
scaled to proper proportions and I would be for strengthening NATO. Those are
all strong and responsible positions, coupled with an arms control position,
that reflect the realities of the world as I see them.

MR. GLENN: I'm the only one here who's put forth a five-point arms control
program trying to scale arms down so that we don't have to have such big defense
expenditures: Limitation, reduction, in the nuclear area, enforcing the nuclear
nonproliferation act so we prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to more and
more countries around this world. Involve the other nuclear weapons states in
the negotiations and overall arms control.

Gary mentioned the carriers. He and I had a debate, which I'm sure he'll recall,
on the Senate floor two years ago on that. He talks about the cheaper carrier as
a smaller one. But it shows such a lack of fundamental understanding of how sea
power works because you have to have a whole task force that goes with any
carrier that gets out there.

MR. JACKSON: You know, the thing about this argument pro and con, all of us are
basically for a strong defense. Obviously, the more that we talk in terms of
engaging in real trade, the less we're going to have these tensions.

President Reagan is vulnerable, and we keep talking in ways I think that kind of
confuse the people; that he's cut breakfast programs out from children, he's cut
lunch programs out, he's cut back on food stamps, hurting the rural farmer and
the urban consumer. And while he cuts away food from children, he's got us
arguing about prayer, premeditated prayer. Here's a man doesn't go to church has
got us arguing about prayer!

And what that says about that is that he hasn't prayed in so long apparently
he's forgotten the structure of a prayer. You don't pray for the food that just
left, you pray for the food that you're about to receive!

So let's talk about a strong defense, but our domestic tranquility and internal
stability has to do with saving our nation from the inside out.



Role of Government




MR. CHANCELLOR: Half a century ago when Mr. Roosevelt became President, the
United States began to change, and the Federal Government took over many of the
responsibilities of the states and of the cities. We've had half a century of
continued Federal involvement with people's lives, and it seems to some of us
that as though it's grown much in those years. The election of 1980 may have
changed that, at least many Republicans think so. Now if one of you wins the
election will there be less involvement, or will it be a return to the way
things were before Reagan.

MR. MONDALE: I think it's essential that the President lead us with a strong
Federal Government to solve those problems that are essential to our future. No.
1, to get those deficits down dramatically, because if we don't do that we can't
have a healthy economy. No. 2, to have a strong new assertive American trade
policy. This is the worst trade year in American history. All through Georgia
and Alabama and Florida farmers, industrialists - Alabama's got 13 1/2 percent
unemployment today, there's a lot of people left behind, a lot of that is
principally because of the trade disaster. We need a renaissance of learning and
education and science and training.

If this next generation is going to be able to defend themselves and compete,
they simply must have the support. And finally, we need a President who leads us
toward justice, and I mean enforcing those civil rights acts, I mean ratifying
that equal rights amendment, I mean standing up for Social Security and
Medicare. This country must be fair, and the history of America is that when a
President leads us toward fairness and toward our future, it can be done.

MR. HART: I've made quite an issue out of the need for a new generation of
leadership. I mean primarily those who have come into political life and
leadership in the past decade and that's because there is a strong
anti-government feeling out there. Now I fundamentally disagree with Ronald
Reagan when he says he loves his country and yet he hates our Government. I
don't hate our Government. I think we ought to have leaders that ask people what
they can do for their country using the best instruments of our Government.  But
I think there is a fundamental difference, for example, between Vice President
Mondale and myself. That is I think we can meet the basic human needs and
commitments of the people of this country by restoring entrepreneurship. Ninety
percent of the new jobs in this society have come from small businesses, and I
think the dedication of the Democratic party to minority people in the South and
elsewhere shouldn't just be jobs, it should be the opportunity to own and
operate businesses that create jobs.

MR: MONDALE: When I hear your new ideas, I'm reminded of that ad: ''Where's the
beef?''

MR. HART: Fritz, if you'd listen just a minute I think you'd hear. One of the
other differences, by the way, is if a President goes back into office - and one
of us must, I think, to save this country - you cannot go back so committed to a
handful of constituency groups that you cannot make this economy grow again. And
that's again a major difference, I think, between myself and Walter Mondale.

MR. MONDALE: Wait a minute! Wait a minute! I told you what I was going to do,
get those deficits down, educate the next generation. Those aren't special
interest groups. I said I'm going to stand up for special - uh, against special
interests and for - and I'm going to support Social Security and Medicare.
What's wrong with that?

MR. HART: Nothing wrong with that.

MR. MONDALE: Isn't that right?

MR. JACKSON: Critical to your question, the role of the government is to be a
balancing wheel between big labor and big management. The Government must assume
basic responsibility to enforce the laws. Right now, the Voting Rights law, for
example, is not being enforced. Democrats are reluctant because we want to
reconcile the interets of the boll weevil and the cotton - you can't have both.

Georgia, for example, right now, 30 percent black, 18 years after the Voting
Rights Act, 10 Congresspersons, 0 black; Supreme Court, 0, Appeals Court, 0; 159
sheriffs, 0. The Government must enforce the law and not equivocate in the face
of local considerations.

On the other hand, we keep focusing on what the Government should do. The
private economy is $3 trillion. Five or every six jobs is in the private
economy. For that $700 billion tax break to corporations, they must be obligated
to reinvest in this economy, retrain our work force, and not export our jobs to
slave-labor markets abroad. We can no longer allow these corporations to take
this money, replace people with robots, without any sense of an adequate
transition.

MR. GLENN: Back when I was a boy in New Concord, Ohio, in the Great Depression,
we estimate we had about 51 percent of the people at or below poverty level.
F.D.R. came in. My dad went to work on W.P.A. We had a lot of programs at that
time. It helped a lot of people. We estimated just a few years ago only 9
percent of the people of this country were at or near poverty level. That's a
record of social revolution in this country. It didn't happen with Socialism or
Fascism or Communism. It happened with good solid Democratic programs, and we
can be very proud of those programs. Now, along with that, we went a little too
far in some of those programs, and we have to correct those. And now you're
talking about intrusion of government. And there are some areas where I think we
have some very major differences. I spelled them out between myself and Mr.
Hart. Just a couple of days ago. E.R.A. - He has said that he would use that,
and I'm for E.R.A., proud that Ohio led the way with that. But he said that
E.R.A., he would use the power of the Federal Government to withhold projects.

MR. HART: No, I didn't.

MR. GLENN: Yes you did, Gary, I'll read it to you.

MR. HART: No I didn't.

MR. GLENN: And he, yes you did, He said he'd withhold Federal projects. Now
that's an intrusion as far as I'm concerned. I think that is flat wrong. When
you're going to intrude into people's lives on that basis, with Federal
projects.

MR. McGOVERN: I think there are two types of concentration of power we have to
worry about in the United States. One is the danger of too much Federal
concentration and the other is too much corporate concentration of power. On the
Federal side, to my surprise, President Reagan has increased the percentage of
G.N.P. now being taken up by the Federal Government. The reason for that is
obviously the dramatic increase in military spending. He has cut nutrition and
education, the environment and things like that, but those cuts are less than
the increase in the interest rate on the Federal debt since he took office
because of this escalating deficit that he's brought on. On the corporate side,
we've had more huge corporate mergers in the last three years than at any
previous time in American history. Enormous oil companies taking over others to
the point where I think it's a real call on all of us to see what we can do to
strengthen our antitrust laws.

MR. MONDALE: I think that a private healthy economy is indispensable to
everybody. If you don't have a growing, healthy economy with entrepreneurship
and small businesses, the key here is to make certain that the prosperity and
the entrepreneurship is found in minority communities as well. There's a lot we
can do through the Small Business Administration, through tax incentives,
through Federal licensing laws to make certain that more blacks, Hispanics,
women and other minorities can participate in the fullness of profit-making.
Thirdly, through training and education and the rest, make certain that people
who are not being left behind are made a part of this process. All of that
depends on a private healthy economy. That's why you've got to get those
deficits down and get going with an environment where we can prosper.

MR. JACKSON: When I was in Operation PUSH we began to challenge corporate
America. When Reagan cut down on aid, we began to move toward trade. Burger
King, for example, has made the judgment to build a plant in the middle of
Eutaw, Ala., as part of our agreement. Then they will hire 200 people. They will
stop small farms from going out of business by guaranteeing a market of 5
million pounds of cucumbers a year. If a company does that, they ought to get a
tax incentive.

If a company gets a tax investment and then uses that money to reinvest in this
economy and retrain our work force, rather than closing plants on workers
outmoded to go on the draw, the use of tax incentives as leverage for urban
development is a creative use of tax incentives and leverage.

Hart-Mondale Exchange

MR. HART: In the almost 10 years in the Senate I've cast 5,000 or 6,000 votes.
Vice President Mondale in his campaign has pulled out about half a dozen of
those to attack me showing that I'm not for this and not for that. I'll give you
one example. One of those was a vote on O.S.H.A. Now Vice President Mondale
knows full well that I am absolutely as committed to a safe workplace as he is.
The vote was this, and it illustrates the point and the difference. It was to
exempt from certain paperwork requirements small businesses in this country who
had 10 or fewer employees and farmers who employed fewer than five people. It
was that burdensome bureaucracy and paperwork that drove the Democrats out of
office in the 70's.

Now I think we can have a safe workplace for people on farms and in factories
without driving small business people and family farmers off their land or out
of their businesses.

 MR. MONDALE: I saw that vote, but I've never mentioned it. The one I talked
about is where, unlike Senator Nunn and Senator Chiles and others, you refused
to vote a windfall profits tax, which, if you'd been successful would have given
big oil $250 billion.

MR. HART: There you go again.

MR. MONDALE: I am going straight ahead here. Secondly, I've talked about your
$10-a-barrel tax. That is the worst idea in this campaign.

MR. HART: It was a Carter-Mondale initiative.

MR. MONDALE: Oh no. I have nothing to do with that. That's the worst idea.
Carter's not for it. Nobody except you are for it, and you're not talking about
it anymore, it's so bad.

MR. HART: Oh yes I am.

MR. MONDALE: A half a million people . . .

MR. HART: Right away.

MR. MONDALE: A half a million lose their jobs. America will become the highest
cost producing area in the country. Talk about intrusion and destruction of jobs
and entrepreneurship and position in international trade, this is a disaster,
and I don't think you thought it through.

MR. HART: Well, Mr. Mondale . . .

MR. MONDALE: I don't believe you really . . .

MR. HART: Let me respond. Let me respond.

MR. CHANCELLOR: You either have a choice, it seems to me, and I'm sorry but the
clock is inexorable, . . . of having a chance to say what you want to say at the
end or squeezing it there at the very end and so Senator could you just say it
in 25 words or less than that.

MR. HART: Less than that. I voted for a Carter-Mondale tariff on imported oil
and I was only one of about 15 Senators that had the courage to support this
Administration. And the second thing is, I proposed a windfall profits tax of
100 percent on old oil owned by the big oil companies in this country and that
goes beyond the Carter-Mondale . . .

MR. MONDALE: This is a complete distortion of what he did.

MR. HART: It is not a distortion.

MR. MONDALE: When we needed you, you were wrong.

MR. HART: No, that's not right.

MR. MONDALE: That is correct.


Closing Statements



MR. CHANCELLOR: We're going to get your reasoned closing statements now.

MR. HART: I have no idea how the primaries and caucuses are going to come out
next Tuesday or beyond; I obviously hope that I will be successful. I hope so
for several reasons: George McGovern talked about the great leaders of our past,
Democratic and otherwise, and my values are as deeply rooted in those leaders
and that past and those ideals as any person on this platform, indeed in this
country.

But it's interesting that the leaders he mentioned represented something else
than just ideals and principles; they represented change. When this country has
had to change, it came to this party for those who had a policy and a set of
ideas and a vision for this country's future. That is what this campaign is all
about and I think that's why people are responding to it all across this
country. We cannot go back. To achieve the highest ideals, values and goals of
this country we must have new leadership and a new approach and a fresh start
for this country.

MR. JACKSON: If we in fact have new leadership that replaces old leadership
basically going in the same direction not sharing parity with farmers, not
sharing the ticket with a woman, increasing the military budget, resisting a
real commitment to enforce the Voting Rights Act, that's a new face, or new name
of an old game. We need to go in another direction. Our party must be the party
of conscience. The fact is that under Reagan there are five million more people
who are poor, three million more children, now up to 34 million, 15 percent of
our nation, it will be 41 million by the end of this year. There must be a
commitment to lift those boats that are in fact stuck at the bottom. We must
reduce the military budget without reducing our military defense, use that money
to in fact create a future for our children, that they might be able to lay
bricks and not throw them. If we give our children a chance, they will give our
nation a chance. I remain convinced that we will suffer, that suffering breeds
character, character breeds faith and in the end faith will not disappoint. We
must pursue those values.

MR. MCGOVERN: I hope that since Gary and Fritz have both objected to being
called the front-runner that they'll let me be the peacemaker and take that
label with me back to Boston when I go tonight. Franklin Roosevelt once said
that the Presidency is pre-eminently a place of moral leadership. I think that's
true, and I think it means the next President is going to have to seek above all
else our salvation from nuclear anihilation, but second only to that, we've got
to learn in this great country to quit intervening in these third world
revolutions whether it's El Salvador or Nicaragua or Lebanon or wherever it is.
Unfortunately in the name of fighting Communism we've embraced virtually every
scoundrel around the world who is willing to wave an anti-Communist banner, and
I think the time has come for the United States once again to assert in foreign
policy not so much what we hate and fear but what this great country is for, and
that ought to be the goal of the next President.

MR. GLENN: I do regret something George just brought up here, that we have not
had more of an opportunity to talk a little bit more about foreign policy
because I think that's so important, what happens around the world, nuclear
armswise that I mentioned earlier, but I do not agree with Gary that this is a
generation gap of some kind. We go ahead as a nation and always have in the past
as we've had the best interests of all of our people, of the young, of the
middle-aged, of the elderly and as we had concern for everyone within our
society. The South has a unique opportunity to set that course next Tuesday.
It's a unique opportunity for leadership in the Democratic Party and for
leadership for our nation. I see myself as the moderate, the only moderate left
here. I don't believe in this politics of momentum that seems to be abroad.
Politics of stampede, whatever you want to call it. I hope the people of the
South will slow down, think about the issues and think about the position we've
taken on the economy and foreign policy and education and research and these
things and then vote on what you know about what we actually have proposed. We
can control the destiny of this country. We can be No. 1 in this nation of ours
again. George McGovern, a few weeks ago, said he didn't want people to throw
away their conscience. Don't throw away your common sense either. Give me your
vote next week, and I will guarantee you I'll give you a Presidency you can be
proud of once again.

MR. MONDALE: Here in the South and throughout our country, we're about to
participate in Super Tuesday. The most important single question is whether the
President you want is someone who will insure our national security and will
work for peace. That takes someone who knows what he's doing. This may well now
be a two-man race between myself and Senator Hart.

MR. GLENN: I'd like to disagree with that.

MR. MONDALE: If you look at the records, I think something is disclosed. A few
days ago, Senator Hart said that if Persian Gulf oil were interrupted, that the
allies would be on their own and they couldn't look to us for help. In my
opinion, that is naive. All history teaches us that we must stand together as an
alliance and work together for the security of the Western world. Some time back
he was asked whether Cuba was a totalitarian state. And he said, no. That is
wrong. It is a Communist dictatorship and a President must know the difference.
He has had a record on arms control which is weak, and we need a President who
will push forward and provide the leadership that this country needs for our
national security and to achieve the peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Democratics candidates

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HART SURGE SAID TO RIDE ON GENERATIONAL APPEAL

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 12


Senator Gary Hart initially rejected the advice of strategists who suggested
last fall that he build his election campaign primarily around a generational
theme, for fear it would be divisive. But eventually he agreed, and now foes as
well as supporters say his surge of popularity rides strongly on generational
appeal.

Surveys with voters leaving the polls and interviews with politicians, poll-
takers and sociologists disclose that so far the core of support for the
Colorado Senator comes from what demographic specialists call ''the baby boom
generation'' or ''the Vietnam generation,'' the group that falls between 30 and
45 years of age, and primarily those in their mid-30's.

Scholars, who studied this group long before the 1984 election campaign, say Mr.
Hart's political message is well pitched to appeal to the significant portion of
the American electorate that came of age challenging its elders, rejecting
traditional politics, opposing established institutions and leaders, and valuing
political independence.

Whether Senator Hart can sustain and broaden this generational appeal will be
tested in nine states Tuesday. But even if he is unable to maintain the pace of
four conscecutive victories in the last fortnight, other politicians are now
trying to understand the sources of his sudden popularity.

Group Has Favored Outsiders


His strongest support comes from a segment of the population that has worked in
the past for political outsiders like Senator Eugene J. McCarthy of Minnesota in
1968 and Jimmy Carter in 1976. So far this year it has shown an inclination to
heed the call of Senator Hart's campaign advertisements, which offer ''a
fiercely independent'' Westerner with ''new ideas'' against a candidate picked
by ''the Washington insiders and special interests.''

In the New Hampshire primary, The New York Times/CBS News Poll of voters who had
just cast their ballots showed that this age group, from 30 through 44 years
old, constituted 40 percent of the electorate and chose Senator Hart over former
Vice President Walter F. Mondale by 41 to 19 percent. In a nationwide CBS News
survey taken among likely Democratic primary voters March 5-8, Mr. Hart's margin
over Mr. Mondale was 38 percent to 31 percent, but in the 30- through-44 age
bracket, he was preferred over Mr. Mondale by 47 percent to 26 percent.

Some sociologists contend that because this ''age cohort,'' in the language of
demographers, had powerful formative experiences in common and because it
represents a population bulge that reflects the post-World War II baby boom,
this group has larger than normal influence on American society and politics.

''These are the people who either fought in the Vietnam War or opposed it,''
said Jay Ogilvy, a sociological researcher and writer affiliated with the
Stanford Research Institute of Palo Alto, Calif. ''They flexed a lot of muscle
in the 1960's. The confluences of that period - the affluence, the Kennedy
assassination, the civil rights movement, the Vietnam War, Woodstock, that
feeling that 'our fathers messed up the world' - forged their anti-authoritarian
attitudes and a generation gap.

Different Approach Sought


''They are maturing now and reaching for power, and they want a different
approach,'' Mr. Ogilvy added. ''What a lot of people in this generation want to
hear is something about a politics that relies less on bureaucracy and more on
people, less on group power and more on finesse and trust. They want a more
horizontal society, where there is more decentralization and less authority.''

Some critics accuse Mr. Hart of vague sloganeering with his themes of ''new
ideas'' and ''a new generation of leadership.'' Many politicians attribute his
surge of popularity to the momentum of his surprise victory in New Hampshire,
reinforced by the free publicity it generated. Others say he benefited primarily
from the weakness of Senator John Glenn of Ohio and the lack of passion for Mr.
Mondale.

But another school, including some of Mr. Hart's opponents, say the Senator has
begun to exploit deeper moods in the body politic by kindling the Vietnam
generation's instinctive rejection of the hierachical politics of the Democratic
Party in the past and coupling that with an idealism about the future that
appeals across generational lines.

No 'Pied Piper' Appeal


''The baby-boomers in New Hampshire went against Mondale not so much as an
individual as against the idea of a closed-shop nomination set by labor,'' said
Horace Busby, an aide to President Johnson and now a political analyst. ''Hart
is a chosen agent not because of some Pied Piper appeal.''

Chester Atkins, the Massachusetts Democratic chairman, who is neutral in the
Presidential race, said Mr. Hart had moved into a political vacuum by tapping
''the struggle of a particular generation for its identity.''

Opponents say the Hart difference is hard to define. Indeed, rather
deliberately, they say, the Coloradan eschews ideological labels, courting the
spectrum from liberal to conservative and fashioning an eclectic and pragmatic
approach to policy issues that, according to scholars like Mr. Ogilvy, fit the
mood of the Vietnam generation particularly well.

Some Hart supporters, like John Marttila, a Boston public relations specialist,
assert that their man fits a new generation of Senate Democrats like Joseph R.
Biden Jr. of Delaware, Bill Bradley of New Jersey and Paul E. Tsongas of
Massachusetts, who have broken with the past and are trying develop new tax
schemes, military strategies and social programs.

''They are much more entrepreneurial on the economy,'' said Mr. Marttila. ''They
look at the global economy. The talk about competing in the world marketplace
whereas Mondale talks in more traditional terms, labor versus management. There
is a big divide on that issue.''

Vietnam-Era Messages


Moreover there are some concrete messages with an intentional Vietnam- era ring
to them. Repeatedly, for example, Senator Hart draws strong applause by
declaring that it was not in American interest to send Marines into Lebanon or
it would not be in American interest to let American soldiers become
''bodyguards to right-wing dictators in Latin America.''

Rejecting preoccupation with an East-West struggle in Africa, Asia or Latin
America, he says that ''in the third world, the threat is not Communism, but
poverty.''

Advisers like his poll-taker, Dotty Lynch, assert that on several issues Mr.
Hart is sending specific symbolic messages to the younger half of the electorate
about the future, such as promoting pay equity for women, rejecting
protectionist measures to fight foreign imports, opposing the American invasion
of Grenada and talking constantly of ''new ideas.''

''When he talks about bringing in new ideas, he means more a new approach to
Government, and bringing in new people different from the traditional network
that a Mondale administration would draw,'' Miss Lynch asserted.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of candidates

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TUESDAY, MARCH 13, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 848 words


Amin Gemayel opened the second Lebanese reconciliation conference in five
months, appealing for an end to ''nine years of insane and continuous war.''
Lebanon's eight senior Moslem and Christian leaders gathered in a conference
room in Lausanne, Switzerland, to hear President Gemayel deliver an opening
address in subdued and almost sad tones. (Page A1, Columns 3-4.)

The commander of Lebanon's Army has offered his resignation to President Gemayel
as a concession to anti- Government factions, according to military officials in
Beirut. They said the move could ultimately lead to a Lebanese Army closely
aligned with Syria's foreign policy and security objectives. (A8:1-3.)

El Salvador needs ammunition, according to President Reagan. He warned Congress
that the Salvadoran Government was running out of ammunition and other military
supplies and would be unable to hold secure elections on March 25 unless his
request for emergency arms was approved quickly. (A1:5.) National

Four Democratic aspirants for President campaigned in the South as nine states
across the nation prepared for a potential crucial set of primary elections and
caucuses today. While Senator Gary Hart answered new criticism of his campaign
from Sunday's debate, former Vice President Walter F. Mondale said that ''this
incredible momentum'' for Mr. Hart was ebbing. (A1:6.)

Local televison newscasts have helped to fuel a momentum building behind Gary
Hart. The Colorado Senator adopted the strategy of local television because he
lacked the money and organization available to Walter F. Mondale. (B9:1-2.)

Senator Hart's surge of popularity rides strongly on generational appeal,
according to backers and opponents. Specialists say the core of his support
comes from ''the baby boom generation'' or ''the Vietnam generation'' of people
between 30 and 45 years of age. (B8:1-2.)

Walter F. Mondale said, ''I'm fine, I'm at peace, I'm sort of liberated.'' In an
interview, he said, ''I got rid of all that front-runner stuff. It's lousy to be
a front-runner because people think you don't need them. Now they know I need
them.'' (B8:3-5.)

William French Smith widened a Cabinet-level split. The Attorney General issued
a strong statement supporting the Justice Department's position on a proposed
steel industry merger. On Sunday, Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige called the
department's opposition to a merger of the LTV Corporation and the Republic
Steel Corporation ''a world class mistake.'' (A1:2.)

Increasing traffic congestion has prompted referendums on mass- transit plans in
both Houston and Dallas. Residents of Houston, where freeway congestion is
viewed as a problem of facilities rather than as a crisis of vision, rejected a
transit plan. Residents of Dallas who believe in concerted civic activism and a
specific approach to city planning approved a transit plan. (A16:2-5.)

Profound trauma can be overcome by many children, according to new research
data. The evidence shows that many wounded children - the emotionally disturbed,
the abused, the unloved - are remarkably resilient in the face of deep pain and
suffering. Life often seems to offer them a healing capacity. (C1:1.)

Many animals think and plan, in the opinion of some researchers. Wildlife
experts have recently seen behavior patterns that suggest that some animals can
anticipate, make choices, coordinate their actions with those of their
companions and adapt to changing situations. (C1:2-5.) Metropolitan

An accord on foster care was reached by New York City and the American Civil
Liberties Union after 11 years of legal arguments. Under the settlement,
children will be placed in foster-care agencies on a first come, first served
basis, regardless of their race or religion. The agreement requires approval by
a court. (A1:1.)

Colleges will increase tuition and other fees by a smaller percentage this fall
than they have in recent years. But the cost of a year at a college or
university in the region continues to rise at nearly twice the general rate of
inflation. Yale University has set tuition, room and board charges for the
1984-85 academic year at $13,950, up 7.9 percent. (A1:2-4.)

A former top organized-crime figure will testify at a public hearing in
Manhattan tomorrow on how the underworld is believed to have laundered billions
of dollars through American banks, according to officials of the President's
Commission on Organized Crime. (B1:1-6.)

Three new episodes of phone fraud totaling more than $114,000 came to light. Two
instances of fraudulent billing were discovered in Westchester County and a
third one was reported in Manhattan. (B1:5-6.)

The Met has agreed to withdraw from sale the libretto of a forthcoming version
of ''Rigoletto'' because Italian- American groups protested that the book
contained material that was ''offensive and prejucial.'' The libretto updates
the Renaissance tale to a Mafia world in New York's Little Italy in the 1950's.
(B3:1.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'This Hellish Poison'

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 417 words


All war dehumanizes, but chemical warfare dehumanizes completely. What Churchill
called ''this hellish poison'' has excited loathing since the first yellow-green
cloud of mustard gas was loosed at Ypres by the Germans in 1915. But the
infernal became routine during World War I. In 1925, former belligerents adopted
a Geneva protocol outlawing gas weapons as ''justly condemned by the general
opinion of the civilized world.''

Iraq signed in 1931, with a reservation that its restraint applied only to
nations that also ratified. Iran had done so, in 1929. If Iraq has now used
mustard gas against Iran, it has broken its word and deeply offended a standard
of civilization. It has also made the most urgent case for improving the old
accord, as 40 nations are trying to do in Geneva.

The protocol's main flaw is that it forbids using chemical and biological
weapons but not producing, stockpiling or selling them. Larger nations have
therefore kept the weapons ready, as a deterrent.

Thus the demon has not always been kept in the canister. Italy used mustard gas
against Ethiopia in 1936. Egypt is suspected of having gas-bombed villages in
Yemen in 1963. And the Soviet Union and Vietnam have been accused by the United
States, albeit with disputed evidence, of using toxic chemicals in both
Indochina and Afghanistan in recent years.  Iraq apparently turned to home-made
mustard gas and perhaps other toxic weapons when Iran organized fanatic
teen-agers to clear a path for tanks. The usually cautious International Red
Cross says Iranians were wounded in ways that could be attributed to mustard
gas. The State Department's proper and prompt condemnation is all the more
credible because Washington hopes that Iraq can repel Iran's invasion.  The
protests may have some effect. No further use of chemical weapons has been
reported. But the whiff of gas from the gulf may finally persuade the
superpowers to improve the Geneva protocol.  A new draft that would also outlaw
production and stockpiling has been stalled by disagreements about verification.
The Soviet Union recently offered to exchange regular inspection visits as a
''voluntary'' concession to American fears. The United States wants verification
''by challenge.'' If the superpowers can bridge that disagreement, the promise
of the 1925 accord might finally be realized. Their example might persuade the
world finally to rid itself of this grisly weapon. That is a prize worthy of
determined diplomacy.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: MODERN 'CAESAR'

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 579 words


AN American flag flies in the background. Police sirens begin to whine, clearing
the way for the political ruler of the hour. The badges on the burly men in blue
read ''Metropolitan Police, District of Columbia.'' Caesar enters, wearing a
double-breasted pinstripe suit and a red, white and blue tie; a
soothsayer-journalist, with a camera dangling from his chest, says, ''Beware the
Ides of March.''

Cunningly, it works. The Riverside Shakespeare Company's production of
''Caesar'' is a daring adaptation of Shakespeare's ''Julius Caesar'' in modern
dress that begins not in Rome but in Washington. The five acts have been changed
to two by W. Stuart McDowell, the company's artistic director, who also directs
the play, without harming the central theme of military conquests and glories
shrunk to such small measure, betrayal and insolence of office.

In bringing Rome to Washington, anachronisms inevitably abound, but they are
part of the evening's enjoyment. Watching to see what parallels the company of
15 professionals on the stage will draw in language and looks to modern
personalities and events, a theatergoer is engaged in a guessing game.

Nothing is added to Shakespeare's language though much is omitted. For example,
instead of ''Friends, Romans, countrymen,'' Antony leaves out ''Romans'' in his
tribute after the assassination of the dictator who would be crowned emperor.
The theatergoer is invited to use his own imagination to identify the Caesar.

There are imaginative touches throughout. Instead of daggers, the plotters kill
Caesar (played by Herman Petras) with blunt-nosed Saturday-night specials. The
guards carry M-16's that look as if they had been dragged through the rice
paddies of Vietnam. Antony (Robert Walsh) is first seen wearing running shoes.
Brutus (Harold Scott) wears a Burberry trenchcoat, and Cassius (Alexander Cook),
that cynical villian, wears a velvet-collared Chesterfield. And the two wives,
Portia (Mary Lowry) and Calphurnia (Sonja Lanzener), appear in designer
housecoats. The original background music composed and performed by Michael
Canick underscores the action.

Some of the play's phrases leap out with current relevance: ''Security gives way
to conspiracy.'' ''Escalation in the air.'' ''He thinks too much. Such men are
dangerous.''

The famous Mercury Theater production of ''Julius Caesar'' in modern dress
staged by Orson Welles in 1937 was designed to make audiences think of
Mussolini's Blackshirts - and it did. The Riverside Shakespeare Company's lively
production makes you think of timeless ambition and antilibertarians anywhere.


Palace Intrigue

CAESAR, adapted and directed by W. Stuart McDowell; music composed by Michael
Canick; scenic design by Kevin Lee Allen; costume design by David Pearson;
lighting design by Jayne Dutra. Presented by the Riverside Shakespeare Company,
Mr. McDowell, artistic director. At 165 West 86th Street. Flavius, Trebonius and
TitiniusDan Johnson Carpenter, Cinna and OctaviusAndrew Achsen Marullus,
Metellus, Messala and Messenger Paul Hebron Cobbler, Cinna the Poet, Popilius
and Clitus Ronald Lew Harris Caesar and VolumniusHerman Petras Casca and
PindarusJoe Meek CalphurniaSonja Lanzener AntonyRobert Walsh Soothsayer,
Messenger and Claudio James Maxson BrutusHarold Scott CassiusAlexander Cook
Decius and LucilliusJeff Shoemaker Publius, Lepidus, Cicero and Artimedorus
Warren Sweeney LuciusMichael Golding PortiaMary Lowry


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 15, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MCGOVERN GRATIFIED WITH RESPECT WON AS HE LEAVES RACE

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 812 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


George McGovern's quixotic quest for the Democratic Presidential nomination,
which began in a sea of ridicule and ended with about 20 delegates won, has
nevertheless restored the 1972 nominee to a respectable position inside the
Democratic Party, he and other aides said today.

''It's been one of the very constructive byproducts of the campaign,'' Mr.
McGovern said in a telephone interview today after formally withdrawing from the
race. ''I've found my own standing in the party and in the country dramatically
elevated.''

Mr. McGovern said he was ''not inclined to endorse'' any of those remaining in
the contest, choosing instead ''to stand clear and let the voters make the
decision.'' He is expected to announce his plans for the future at a news
conference Thursday.

The decision to withdraw was made Tuesday night as Mr. McGovern finished third
in the Massachusetts primary, behind his former campaign manager, Senator Gary
Hart of Colorado, and Walter F. Mondale. He had vowed to quit if he failed to
finish first or second in the state, which along with the District of Columbia
provided him the 17 electoral votes he received when he sought the Presidency in
1972.

Aides Gather at Headquarters


Late in the day, some aides wandered into the McGovern campaign headquarters
here. Many were still arriving from Boston where they had gone for what they had
hoped would be a victory celebration.

''One of the most gratifying things has been the turn around in all of the
ridicule that was heaped on him when he announced,'' said the McGovern campaign
manager, Mark Kaminsky. ''Even though they had scorned him, they are now saying
that he has been the most class act in the campaign.''

Mr. Kaminsky recalled how at a precinct caucus in Iowa, the captain had made a
remark that suggested few of the participants would be for Mr. McGovern. But
when they clustered into groups that reflected the candidate they supported,
about a third in the room were for the former Senator, who had represented the
neighboring South Dakota.

It was in the debates that Mr. McGovern often attracted the most attention, such
as one in Des Moines where he pleaded with voters not to ''throw away their
conscience.''

Statesman and Peacemaker


In others, he had emerged as a statesman and peacemaker among the hopefuls,
urging them not attack the front-runner to the point that they would make it
difficult for him to defeat President Reagan this November.

''We were just ecstatic at how he performed in the debates,'' Mr. Kaminsky said.
''It was so inspiring to watch McGovern outclass the other candidates and a
tremendous boost to the campaign.''

But it was also Mr. McGovern's style that distinguished him as he tramped
through towns and cities in Iowa and New Hampshire, with his familiar trench
coat and his Irish hat, absent the trappings of the other candidates. Through
most of the campaign, he flew commercially and declined Secret Service
protection.

The relaxed pace won him admiration from many who had supported him in 1972 and
some who had not. As Mr. McGovern said frequently, reflecting the vindication he
felt:

''Many said in 1972, I was ahead of my time. Well I'm back.''

Mr. McGovern also gained points by unwaveringly demanding the withdrawal of
American troops from Lebanon, a stridency that echoed his opposition to American
military action in Vietnam.

A Meeting With Nixon


In January, he held an hourlong foreign policy meeting with Richard M. Nixon, a
sign that both had mellowed and a reinforcement of Mr. McGovern's
''statesman-like'' posture.

Many in the McGovern camp defended the meeting as the same type of gutsy move
that made him different from others seeking the nomination.

One factor, however, that hindered Mr. McGovern was a lack of funds. Mr.
Kaminsky said that the former Senator had spent about $500,000 on the campaign,
a paltry amount when compared with what Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale have spent.

Mr. McGovern said today that, even so, he had been able to ''raise some issues
that would not have been brought into the campaign'' had he chosen not to run.
They include an end to United States military involvement in Central America,
the withdrawal of troops from Lebanon and a 25 percent reduction in military
spending, issues that he said he would continue to address.

''In no previous political campaign have I ever had more peace of mind and
warmth of soul than I have experienced in this uphill, but deeply satisfying
campaign,'' he said. ''What greater lasting victory than to emerge with the
title of conscience and statesman and peacemaker?''

Mr. McGovern, 61 years old, said he was considering several options that include
a position in business, writing a book and becoming a university president. He
would not rule out a possible return to government.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George McGovern

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 15, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

$6.1 BILLION PACKAGE OF TAX CUTS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FUERBRINGER

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


The Senate Finance Committee, shifting from its effort to raise taxes and cut
spending to trim the Government's budget deficits, approved tax cuts today that
would total $6.1 billion over four years.

The package includes the phasing- in over six years of President Reagan's
proposed increase in Individual Retirement Accounts for nonworking spouses, the
Administration's jobs credit proposal and its enterprise zone plan to encourage
investment in cities. In addition, the committee approved new tax benefits for
research and development, some energy tax credits and an increase in the tax
break for alcohol used in motor fuels.

''We're losing about as fast as we are taking in today,'' said Senator Bob Dole,
the Kansas Republican who heads the committee.

All the proposals were approved on condition that the committee approve other
tax increases that would offset the tax cuts. Before today's action, the
committee had raised taxes by about $47.6 billion.

It was not clear whether the committee could finish its work by the end of the
week, which is Senator Dole's goal.

The committee also approved an exchange of tax data between the Internal Revenue
Service and the City of New York. This proposal was made by Senator Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York.



Better Enforcement Sought

The idea is to stiffen enforcement against taxpayers who may not be paying as
much as they should to either or both governmental entities. The Senator's staff
estimated that the plan would raise about $100 million over two years for the
Federal Government and about $25 million for the city.

Leading Senate Republicans conferred for an hour and a half with President
Reagan today, but they failed to reach agreement on a budget for the fiscal year
1985, beginning next Oct. 1. White House officials said the stumbling block
continued to be military spending.

Senator Pete V. Domenici, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, has proposed
a 5 percent increase in military spending for the next year, while the
Administration has proposed 13 percent.

A White House official said the disagreement related to what next year's
spending level would imply for spending in the subsequent two years.
Specifically, the Administration favors cuts in operations and maintenance,
while Mr. Domenici favors cuts in weapons procurement, the official said.



Baker Expresses Optimism

After the meeting, Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., the Senate majority leader, told
reporters he was ''reasonably optimistic that we'll be able to work out our
differences and have something we can support.''

Senator Baker said there might be further consultations Thursday between the
Senate Republicans and White House aides. A White House aide said no meeting was
scheduled with Mr. Reagan.

Senator Dole removed from today's Finance Committee agenda a proposal dealing
with the taxation of interest-free loans to family members. The Supreme Court,
after years of litigation, recently ruled that such loans are subject to tax.
But it appeared that the committee was leaning toward approving a proposal that
would prevent the I.R.S. from being able to collect retroactively.

Current tax law provides that $250 a year can be contributed to an I.R.A. for a
nonworking spouse, while the working spouse can put in as much as $2,000. Both
amounts are deductible from taxable income. A two-earner couple may contribute
up to $2,000 each.



A $2,000 Maximum by 1990

President Reagan's I.R.A. proposal was approved by the Finance Committee, 12 to
5. It would increase the $250 maximum for the nonworking spouse by $500 for
1985-86, by another $500 for 1987-88 and by $500 again in 1989, followed by a
$250 increase in 1990. These increases, plus the current $250 allowance, would
bring the limit to $2,000. Over the next three years, this step would reduce the
Treasury's tax revenues by about $900 milliom.

There was some opposition from Senators who contended that the plan favored
high-income families.

The Moynihan proposal for exchanging tax information affects both individuals
and corporations. Other cities with a population of more than two million and a
local income tax could also exchange information with the I.R.S. The exchange is
subject to a veto by the service if it decides it cannot protect the
confidentiality of the data.

The Internal Revenue Service already exchanges tax information with state tax
departments. The proposal made by Mr. Moynihan was requested by New York City,
his staff said.



Tax Credit for Research

After long debate, the committee voted a permanent extension of the tax credit
for research and experimentation, which would reduce revenue by $2.1 billion
over four years. The tax credit is 25 percent of the amount spent on new
research each year above a set base.

Another major tax cut was a two- year extension of the targeted jobs credit,
which is for employers who hire disadvantaged youths between ages 18 and 24 and
Vietnam War veterans.

The enterprise zone proposal, which Congress has repeatedly failed to pass,
would give extra tax credits to businesses that open production and distribution
facilities in designated high-unemployment areas.

Near the end of the session this evening, the committee approved a proposal that
would allow taxpayers to check off on their tax form a contribution to send
American atheletes to the Olympics. The contribution would come from the
taxpayer's earnings, not from taxes owed, so there would be no loss of revenue.
There is already such a checkoff for funds to finance Presidential elections.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A Tear for St. Patrick

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 526 words


Garret FitzGerald, Ireland's Prime Minister, deserves better. On the eve of St.
Patrick's Day he came to America to offer a vision of Irish nationalism very
different from the one that usually dominates the headlines. Yet before he
reached the rostrum of a joint meeting of Congress, Protestant gunmen in
Northern Ireland did their best to drag the argument to its primitive worst.

Their target was Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the
Irish Republican Army. The Belfast ambush was as contemptible as the I.R.A.'s
many murderous assaults on Protestant leaders or on crowded dance halls and
department stores.

These diehards are more than ever warring twins. The North's hard-shell
Unionists obdurately refuse to share power with a Catholic minority. ''No
surrender!'' is their cry. And though professing a fierce loyalty to Britain,
they threatened mutiny in 1914 and 1974 rather than yield to British decisions.

''Brits out!'' retorts the I.R.A., playing upon Catholic memories of rebellion
against British rule. Yet while clamoring for self-determination, the I.R.A.
itself refuses to concede any such right to the 60 percent Protestant majority
of the North.

The bitter-enders have so far wholly prevailed over diplomacy and reason. And
that makes all the more admirable Mr. FitzGerald's new tack. For he has come to
talk about the New Ireland Forum he has created to put forward sensible
proposals for easing the situation by lowering the barriers between the two
Irelands.

The Protestant parties are afraid of the idea, but leaders of every nonviolent
party representing Catholics have joined the effort. Mr. FitzGerald hopes that
the panel's proposals next month will identify common ground for a genuine
political settlement ''that will render totally irrelevant those who are seeking
to impose their tyranny of violence on this island.'' In America, Mr. FitzGerald
is getting what he needs most: encouragement from the White House and Congress
and leading politicians of Irish descent, like Speaker O'Neill and Senators
Kennedy and Moynihan. Yet against all reason, some Americans go on thinking they
advance Ireland's cause by sending dollars to the I.R.A. More blarney about that
will flow during tomorrow's parades; the honorary grand marshal of New York's
march is an imprisoned I.R.A. bomb expert.  So it needs to be said again: The
I.R.A. is committed to destroying the present Irish Republic. Its platform,
updated in 1979, proclaims a ''desire to see capitalism abolished and a
democratic system of common ownership established.'' Its handbook was revised
last year to make up ''for the obvious omission of Karl Marx,'' and offers
exhortations from Algeria's Frantz Fanon, Vietnam's General Giap and Cuba's
Fidel Castro.  The I.R.A. is thus doubly committed: to violence and to
''Socialist revolution,'' complete with street committees, people's councils,
people's tribunals and a Socialist central government. That such a movement can
tap the hearts and pocketbooks of Irish-Americans is one of the stranger
curiosities of modern politics. It's enough to make a saint cry.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 17, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ENVOY SEIZED IN WEST BEIRUT, 3RD AMERICAN TO VANISH IN 6 WEEKS

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, March 16


An American diplomat was kidnapped at gunpoint here today by a carload of
unidentified gunmen outside his apartment building as he was leaving for work.

No group immediately claimed responsibility.

Witnesses and American officials said the diplomat, William F. Buckley, first
secretary in the United States Embassy's political section, was forced out of
his car, a beige Honda, at gunpoint at about 7:30 this morning and was bundled
into the abductors' white Renault.

''The whole thing took three minutes,'' said Mohammed Moussa, the superintendent
of the apartment building where Mr. Buckley lived. American officials later
received reports that the Renault had been seen speeding south down the coastal
highway.

Mr. Buckley was the third American to disappear from West Beirut since Moslem
militiamen seized control of that part of the Lebanese capital from President
Amin Gemayel's Government on Feb. 6.

Asked if the disappearances were connected, Robert Pugh, the embassy's deputy
chief of mission, replied, ''Not that we can discern.'' Another American
official said that he did not believe the events were related and that little
information was available on the possible motives for the kidnapping.

But Arab diplomats said Mr. Buckley might have been seized to gain the release
of Moslem militants being held in Kuwait for a bombing last December that killed
seven people and damaged the American and French embassies there. A group
calling itself Islamic Holy War claimed responsibility for the attack.  The
diplomats said this was believed to be the motive for the kidnapping of the
Saudi Arabian consul in Beirut, Hussein Farrash, on Jan. 17. Islamic Holy War
claimed responsibility for that abduction.

The Buckley kidnapping was one in a number of attacks here on Americans and
American installations, the most devastating of which were the suicide bomb
attacks on the Marine compound last October, which killed 241 American
servicemen, and on the United States Embassy last April, which killed 63 people,
including 17 Americans.

The other two Americans who disappeared recently from West Beirut were Frank
Regier, a professor of electrical engineering at the American University of
Beirut, who was seized at gunpoint Feb. 10 on a street behind the university,
and Jeremy Levin, the bureau chief here for Cable News Network, who disappeared
nine days ago and is also believed to have been kidnapped.

Meantime, fighting flared today in Beirut and the mountains overlooking it,
endangering a fragile cease-fire that went into effect at the beginning of the
week. Fighting along the Green Line dividing East and West Beirut was reported
heavy at times tonight. The Beirut state radio said shells had fallen on both
Moslem and Christian areas.

Officials here have repeatedly warned that in the absense of a political
agreement in the talks in Lausanne, Switzerland, and a move to separate the
fighters along the Green Line, the cease-fire would eventually collapse.

A committee of representatives of the Lebanese Army and the various militias was
scheduled to meet Saturday to discuss ways to prevent the resumption of all-out
warfare and the heavy shelling of civilian areas.

'There's No One in Charge'

At a news conference, Mr. Pugh expressed frustration over security in West
Beirut, which he described as ''a precariously balanced anarchy.''

''There's no one in charge,'' he said. He added, however, that the two main
militias, that of the Shiites' Amal movement and the Druse Progressive Socialist
Party, ''have been very cooperative'' and were ''trying hard to discover where
Mr. Buckley was taken and to recover him.''

American officials, concerned about the safety of diplomats here, say they try
to restrict their movements at night. About half of the embassy staff was
evacuated shortly after the militias took over West Beirut.

Mr. Pugh said the embassy was ''considering'' moving its remaining staff of
about 50 people back to the embassy compound, which includes offices shared with
the British Embassy. The main American Embassy building was blown up in the
attack last April.

Neighbors Tell of Seizure

Mr. Buckley's neighbors said he was driving down the dead-end street where his
apartment building is situated when a carload of gunmen blocked his way. Mr.
Buckley tried to back up, witnesses said, but his kidnappers rammed their car
into his.

Mr. Moussa, the superintendant, said one of the gunmen jumped out, put a gun to
Mr. Buckley's head and forced him to leave his car. Several neighbors said Mr.
Buckley, who did not have a bodyguard, was grabbed by the back of the neck but
was apparently not struck. They said he did not struggle.  In Washington, John
Hughes, the State Department spokesman, said Mr. Buckley was born in Medford,
Mass., and was 55 years old. He said Mr. Buckley had been an Army captain, a
self- employed building contractor and a librarian in Massachusetts before being
hired by the Army as a civilian in 1965. He served in Vietnam. Mr. Hughes said
Mr. Buckley joined the State Department last year.

Mr. Pugh said he believed Mr. Buckley was a bachelor. Asked if Mr. Buckley had
been involved in sensitive work, Mr. Pugh replied, ''No, I am sure he wasn't.''

He said Mr. Buckley did ''what every other political officer does: He was in
contact with various political elements in this society, to ascertain what was
happening and to report it.''

Officials in Washington said Mr. Buckley was not related to the family that
includes former Senator James L. Buckley of New York and William F. Buckley Jr.,
publisher of The National Review.



Amal Leader Offers Help


LAUSANNE, Switzerland, March 16 - The Shiite Amal militia leader, Nabih Berri,
told reporters here at the Lebanese reconciliation talks today that he had no
information on the fate of Mr. Buckley.

''I have made many contacts by telephone,'' he said. ''I have no information
yet. I will try to help if I can.''

The eight faction leaders here for the talks took the day off to commemorate the
anniversary of the death of the Druse leader Kamal Jumblat and to allow
committees of their aides time to work on a common declaration of principles on
political changes.

Conference officials said Vice President Abdel Halim Khaddam of Syria would
probably present his own working paper on Saturday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William F. Buckley and apt. where he was seized

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RECORD SHOWS HART FOCUSING ON ARMS, ENERGY AND DEFICIT

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 3047 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


Within three months after becoming a Senator in 1975, Gary Hart parted company
with most of his Democratic colleagues and voted against a proposal to stimulate
the economy by granting a 10 percent rebate of individual income taxes.

Hubert H. Humphrey, then a Senator, listed a half-dozen prominent economists who
supported the rebate as part of a comprehensive tax-reducing package to combat
the recession.

But Mr. Hart was skeptical. Many of those economists, he said, ''have been
wrong'' and ''many of them are responsible for the situation this country is in
today.'' What he wanted to know, Mr. Hart said, was whether Mr. Humphrey had
heard any ''testimony from new economists, new theories, people who are not
relying on past solutions, who may have some new ideas of how to stimulate this
economy.''

That exchange foreshadowed the quest for new ideas that Mr. Hart has made a
central theme of his campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination this
year. From a review of the Congressional Record, including several hundred
speeches Mr. Hart has delivered in a Senate career spanning more than nine
years, it is possible to trace his intellectual and political development.

The record shows that Mr. Hart has consistently been more concerned about
national defense and energy than any other issues; that he was speaking out
against ''big government,'' warning about the size of the deficit and trying to
cut Federal spending and taxes before President Reagan took office, and that his
interest in social welfare programs has been limited mainly to child nutrition
programs, of which he has been a staunch defender.

Mr. Hart has voted like most Democrats on most issues. His party unity score,
showing the number of times he voted with a majority of Democratic senators
against a majority of Republicans, has been higher than the average for his
party. But his scores were regularly lower than those of at least a half- dozen
Democratic senators, among them Paul S. Sarbanes of Maryland and Carl Levin of
Michigan.

Mr. Hart has tried to place himself outside ''the linear, left-right spectrum''
of American politics. He says he is trying to ''create third options between the
left and right - in defense, in the environment, in the economy,'' and his
record indicates this effort began well before he became a Presidential
candidate.  In May 1982, Mr. Hart was one of only two Democrats to vote against
a new $5.1 billion subsidy program that would have provided mortgages at below-
market interest rates for buyers of new homes. The measure, sponsored by Senator
Richard G. Lugar, an Indiana Republican, was passed by Congress but vetoed by
President Reagan, who called it a ''budget-busting bailout'' for the
home-building industry.

Mr. Hart denounced the proposal, saying it ''would increase the deficit
significantly, set an unfortunate precedent for Federal bailouts of economically
depressed industries and serve as no more than a Band-Aid for much more serious
economic problems.''

Mr. Hart has regularly supported proposals to expand protection of civil rights
and civil liberties, but he has not taken a prominent role in debates on these
issues.

He was one of only four senators to vote against the Intelligence Identities
Protection Act, a 1982 law that made it a crime to disclose the names of covert
intelligence agents and sources. Mr. Hart endorsed the purpose of the bill but
said it did not adequately protect First Amendment rights of free speech and
free press.

Other highlights of the Colorado Senator's record are these:

Reagan's Economic Program

Mr. Hart's early concern about the Federal deficit and his attitude toward
President Reagan's economic program give important insights into his politics.

He offered a comprehensive proposal to cut taxes and spending in 1978. He wanted
to reduce personal income tax rates by an average of 20 percent over four years.
But, in contrast to the 23 percent across-the-board tax cut adopted in 1981 at
Mr. Reagan's request, Mr. Hart wanted to give proportionally bigger tax cuts to
people with low incomes.

Mr. Hart also wanted to make the tax cuts contingent on cutbacks in Federal
spending. He said total spending for Government benefit programs, like food
stamps, Medicare and Social Security, was growing at a rate of 9 percent a year,
and he proposed to hold it to 8 percent.

Like most other Democratic senators, Mr. Hart helped clear the way for passage
of Mr. Reagan's economic program by voting to instruct Senate committees to cut
$37 billion from the Federal budget in April 1981. ''I support the bill,'' he
said, ''because I believe the Federal budget must be reduced by at least $40
billion.''

But he did so ''reluctantly,'' and six weeks later he voted against the first
budget resolution, which specified the amounts to be cut in various areas. ''I
have supported much of the President's economic program,'' Mr. Hart said on May
12, 1981. ''The few differences are serious differences nonetheless. They compel
my opposition to the resolution as a whole.''

Mr. Hart objected to the 1981 tax cut because, he said, it was ''severely biased
toward the wealthy'' and was not matched by equivalent cuts in spending. But he
said at the time: ''I supported budget cuts that were at the level the President
proposed. I support legitimate increases in spending for national security that
are fully as large as the President requested.''

Mr. Hart objected to the allocation of budget cutbacks because, he said, they
reduced spending for school lunch subsidies, energy conservation programs,
education, job training, health and scientific research. In July 1981 he was one
of 14 senators who voted against final passage of the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act, the main vehicle for Mr. Reagan's budget cuts, and a year
later he declared that ''Reaganomics is a total, abysmal failure.''

Tax Policy

Mr. Hart was an early, outspoken advocate of linking tax brackets to inflation.
At present, taxpayers whose wages rise with inflation are pushed into higher and
higher tax brackets. Congress approved the linkage in 1981, and it is scheduled
to take effect in 1985.

Mr. Hart introduced bills to require such linkage of tax brackets in 1978 and
again in 1979. When the idea gained support in 1981, he liked it so much that he
wanted it to take effect immediately rather than in 1985. He said it would
eliminate ''the hidden tax burden caused by inflation'' and would ''encourage
fiscal responsibility'' by forcing Congress to raise taxes or curb spending.

Senate Democrats voted against linking tax rates to inflation by more than 2 to
1. Many economists support it, but the American Federation of Labor and Congress
of Industrial Organizations opposed it on the ground that it would cause
''automatic and continuing erosion of the tax base heavily weighted in favor of
higher-income individuals.'' Mr. Hart now wants to postpone this linkage until
at least 1989, so additional revenue would be available to help cut the deficit.
The Federal Government had a deficit of $195 billion in the last fiscal year,
and President Reagan's budget, submitted to Congress last month, showed deficits
of roughly $180 billion a year through 1987.

In 1981 Mr. Hart unsuccessfully sought to have the tax cuts deferred until the
Federal budget was balanced.

Since 1976 Mr. Hart has offered several proposals to give Congress greater
control over tax deductions, exemptions, credits and other preferences. He says
Congress should scrutinize these tax items as closely and systematically as it
examines regular budget outlays each year.

Since 1982 Mr. Hart has been saying that Congress should eliminate the tax
deduction for interest paid on money borrowed to finance corporate mergers and
acquisitions. Such ''corporate takeover games,'' he says, generally do nothing
to enhance productivity.

Mr. Hart has been pushing ''tax simplification and modernization'' since 1976.
He was a co-sponsor of the sweeping tax simplification bill offered last year by
Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of
Missouri, both Democrats. The bill would reduce the top rate for the individual
income tax, now 50 percent, to 30 percent, but it would also repeal most
itemized deductions.

Mr. Hart has also expressed strong interest in the idea of a national
consumption tax, which would be imposed only on income that people spent. Such a
tax, he says, would stimulate savings and ''productive investment.'' Lane
Kirkland, president of the A.F.L.- C.I.O., has denounced the proposal, saying a
consumption tax would fall most heavily on people who spent their income for
necessities while exempting ''those who live idly off their investments.''

Energy

Mr. Hart was elected to Congress in 1974, just after the crisis caused by the
Arab oil embargo and the quadrupling of oil prices. While the crisis has faded
from the memory of many politicians, it still shapes Mr. Hart's outlook on
foreign affairs, military strategy and many domestic issues. There is, in
addition, a parochial concern because, he notes, Colorado has at least 80
percent of the nation's oil shale, as well as large coal reserves. Mr. Hart and
Walter F. Mondale clashed sharply over energy policy in a debate last Sunday.

In his first two years in the Senate, Mr. Hart sponsored legislation to break up
big oil companies. His bill would have removed Government-imposed price controls
on crude oil, but he wanted to be sure that big companies would not replace the
Government in determining prices. So his bill would have prohibited the biggest
oil producers from holding any interest in facilities used to refine, transport
or market oil. He also supported proposals to prohibit the acquisition of coal
and uranium interests by major oil and gas companies. These proposals did not
pass, but at various times they drew support from more than 40 senators.  Mr.
Hart has frequently railed against big Government and big business. ''We have
seen such an increase in the concentration of economic power, and the inevitable
expansion of Government regulatory power to control it, that the future of our
free enterprise system as we know it is beginning to suffer from slow
strangulation,'' he said in 1979 as he introduced a bill to study the extent of
competition in 12 basic industries.

Mr. Hart, like Mr. Reagan, has advocated less Government regulation, but unlike
some Republicans, he insists there should also be less concentration of
''corporate power.''

To further such goals in the energy industry, he introduced a bill in 1977 to
exempt independent producers of natural gas from Government price controls.

Mr. Hart opposed President Carter's proposal to set up an $88 billion program to
encourage development of synthetic fuels, even though Colorado would have
received large amounts of the money. Mr. Hart thought the $20 billion crash
program approved by Congress was too much. He would have preferred more modest
incentives, such as tax credits and loan guarantees, to encourage development of
synthetic fuels.

He also opposed Mr. Carter's proposal for an Energy Mobilization Board, with
power to cut red tape that delayed energy projects. He said he feared such an
agency would be unconstitutional and might evade control by Congress.

Mr. Hart strongly supported a bill to give home builders tax credits for
installing solar energy systems.

He was one of only eight Democrats who voted against President Carter's proposal
to impose a windfall profits tax on oil, and he supported efforts to exempt
small independent producers from the excise tax. He proposes to eliminate the
windfall profits tax on newly discovered oil because, he says, it discourages
domestic oil production. However, he would retain the tax on oil from wells
already in operation.

Mr. Hart has proposed a fee of $10 a barrel on imported oil, and he was one of
only 10 senators to support Mr. Carter's attempt to impose a similar fee in
1980. Mr. Hart still supports the fee, saying it would ''enhance our national
security by reducing our dependence on foreign oil.'' Mr. Mondale called this
''the worst idea'' of the campaign.

In 1981 Mr. Hart proposed that the oil import fees be deposited in the Social
Security trust fund, so the Government would not have to increase Social
Security payroll tax rates.

He opposed the sale of Awacs radar planes to Saudi Arabia in 1981. Such military
assistance to Arab nations, he said, represents a form of ''oil boat
diplomacy,'' and it would not be necessary if the United States were not so
dependent on Arab oil.

Mr. Hart has not flatly opposed the civilian use of nuclear power, and he said
in 1978 that it ''may offer a real potential'' for meeting some of the nation's
energy needs. But the next year, while leading the Senate's investigation of the
accident at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania, he
proposed a six-month moratorium on the licensing of new reactors. In that
six-month period, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission would have been required to
issue new safety standards, including rules to insure that nuclear power plants
would not be built near densely populated cities. The Senate rejected the
proposal by a vote of 57 to 35.

Military

When Mr. Hart arrived in the Senate, he was known as the manager of George
McGovern's 1972 Presidential campaign, which had promised an immediate, total
withdrawal of American troops from Vietnam. But as a Senator, Mr. Hart did not
join the small group of lawmakers who routinely criticized the Pentagon and
voted to cut the military budget. Rather, he has been a leader of the Military
Reform Caucus, a bipartisan group of lawmakers who want to change the fighting
philosophy and tactics of the armed forces.

''In general,'' he said in 1981, ''military reform is the recognition that we
cannot just spend our way to a stronger defense. We do need to spend more,
selectively, in certain areas such as military pay, readiness and naval
shipbuilding.''

Mr. Hart has shown more interest in the Navy than any other military service. He
has repeatedly tried to substitute a larger number of small aircraft carriers
for a small number of large carriers. He would equip the small carriers with
vertical takeoff jets. He contends that naval air power would be less vulnerable
to Soviet attack if it were dispersed in this manner.

Congress has provided money for the Navy to design small carriers, but no such
ships have been built.

Mr. Hart has also been a proponent of a style of warfare that emphasizes rapid
movements designed to disrupt the organization of enemy forces, instead of
trying to destroy them tank-by- tank and plane-by-plane. The German blitzkrieg
and most Israeli military campaigns illustrate this ''maneuver warfare''
approach, Mr. Hart said. Congress approved his proposal to require a Pentagon
report on maneuver warfare, and some Army and Marine units have adopted such
tactics.

He also supported efforts to establish, within the Pentagon, an independent
office to test and evaluate new weapons. Congress approved the proposal last
year. Mr. Hart and other members of the Military Reform Caucus said testing had
often been inadequate because it was done by the same people who had developed
and produced the weapons.

He has opposed the B-1 bomber, the F-18 fighter plane, the M-1 tank and chemical
weapons, and he led a filibuster last summer in an unsuccessful attempt to block
the MX, a mobile intercontinental missile that is to be armed with nuclear
warheads.

Other Domestic Issues

Mr. Hart's committee assignments have not put him in a position to have much
influence over social programs such as food stamps, Social Security, Medicare
and Medicaid. In an effort to stave off cuts in the school lunch program, he has
proposed reducing the tax deduction for business meals and entertainment to 70
percent from 100 percent of their cost. The savings would be designated for the
school lunches..

Mr. Hart voted against the Carter Administration's proposal to provide Federal
loan guarantees for the Chrysler Corporation in 1979. Supporters of the bill
said that if the company went bankrupt, it would throw hundreds of thousands of
people out of work. But Mr. Hart said that under the principles of competitive
free enterprise, ''the Federal Government cannot assume responsibility to
prevent the failure of individual firms, however large.''

The Senate passed the bill, 53 to 44, with Democrats supporting it by a margin
of 41 to 16.

In 1978 he voted to kill hospital cost- control legislation supported by the
Carter Administration. The Senate rejected the proposal, which would have
strictly limited annual increases in hospital revenue. But Mr. Hart supported,
and the Senate passed, a compromise cost-control program that relied more on
voluntary compliance. The measure died in the House.

Mr. Hart also opposed comprehensive immigration bills that passed the Senate in
1982 and 1983. He said the proposals, strongly supported by the Reagan
Administration, did not contain enough safeguards to prevent discrimination
against minority groups, particularly Hispanic Americans, who account for 12
percent of the population of Colorado. Mr. Hart made an unsuccessful attempt to
add more civil rights guarantees to the bills, which would forbid the hiring of
illegal aliens and would require employers to verify that applicants were
citizens or legal aliens.

Mr. Hart has introduced a bill to establish a compensation system for workers
with diseases caused by asbestos. Colorado is the home base of the Manville
Corporation, the nation's largest producer of asbestos. The asbestos industry
generally supported his bill, which would have set minimum Federal standards for
compensation in an effort to avoid long court battles over liability.

In 1976 and again in 1979, he offered a bill to establish a national system of
maternal and child health care, financed by the Federal Government. But Congress
showed little interest in the proposal.

In each of the last two years, Mr. Hart has introduced a bill to increase
Federal aid to education, but no action was taken on his proposal.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Army Is Returning Green Berets to Asia

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 69 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


The Army will soon return its elite Special Forces to the Far East for the first
time in a decade, the service announced Friday.

About 150 Green Berets belonging to a new company in the Special Forces will
begin moving to Okinawa from Fort Bragg, N.C., this month, with the rest of a
new battalion to follow in September, the Army said. The last Green Berets were
withdrawn from Asia after the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.N.'S RIGHTS BODY PROBLEM FOR WEST

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 598 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., March 17


When Nguyen Thuong of Vietnam took the floor in Geneva a few days ago to
complain about human rights violations around the world, he seemed to embody one
of the most difficult quandaries of the United Nations.

Mr. Thuong was speaking at the annual six-week session of the Human Rights
Commission, which finished its work last week. He praised Argentina for saying
it would respect human rights, he denounced Guatemala and El Salvador for
''crimes against humanity'' and he contended that the United States was trying
to impose ''imperialist domination'' in Central America.

The quandary for diplomats concerned about human rights is that Mr. Truong comes
from a country that has itself been accused by private human rights
organizations such as Amnesty International of gross abuses, including the
long-term imprisonment of thousands of people for political reasons and the
forcible expulsion of much of its ethnic Chinese population. Yet Vietnam has
never been mentioned in any resolution of the commission for human rights
violations within its own borders.

Criticism From the West

The commission, which is a special committee of the United Nations General
Assembly, has long been criticized in the West for what is considered a biased
and inconsistent examination of human rights problems. Diplomats, particularly
those of the United States, have contended that the 43-nation commission often
serves as a platform for self-righteous condemnations of such countries as
Israel and right-wing Latin American nations but that it rarely looks at what
are widely perceived to be serious abuses in Communist or third-world countries.

In many respects, the session that ended last week illustrated the problem. The
commission, for example, dealt a serious blow to a Western proposal to focus
attention on Poland's suppression of the Solidarity union.

For two years, in what was seen as a move toward impartiality, the commission
authorized studies of rights violations in Poland, the only time in its 39-year
history that it had done so in regard to a Communist country. But last week the
body accepted by a vote of 16 to 15, with 12 abstentions, a Cuban motion to
discontinue the Polish investigation.

Still, judging the overall performance of the commission is complicated. While
losing the vote on Poland Wednesday, the West won a victory Thursday when the
commission voted to press a formal investigation of human rights abuses in
Soviet-occupied Afghanistan. The decision was protested by the Soviet delegation
as an ''interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan.''

Resolution on Cambodia Adopted

Other third-world countries, such as Iran, have also come up on the official
commission agenda. The commission also approved a resolution calling for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from Cambodia, an allusion to the Vietnamese
occupation of that country.

Still, the record of the latest session indicated that efforts to broaden the
commission's work to include rights violations wherever they took place ran into
difficulties. Diplomats said a major element in this was the tendency for the
commission to become an arena for political conflict.

Despite these difficulties, some Western delegates contend that their
participation is worthwhile, in part because focusing attention on human rights
in at least some countries can lead to improvements.

Others argue that by focusing most intensively on such habitual targets as
Israel, South Africa and El Salvador, the commission's majority deflects
attention from abuses elsewhere.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HART TAPS A GENERATION OF YOUNG PROFESSIONALS

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, March 17


Philip Hall grew up in a small Texas town, then went off to college and law
school. The other night he stood in the lobby of a fancy Chicago hotel and
explained why he was attending a fund-raising event for Senator Gary Hart.

''I like his generational appeal,'' said Mr. Hall, who is 26 years old and works
at a large bank. ''He appeals to people who grew up with Vietnam and Watergate.
I think those events bred cynicism into a lot of young people, and Hart
represents an attempt to address that cynicism and overcome it. It's a very
Kennedyesque appeal.''

Mr. Hall is a young urban professional, or ''yuppie,'' the newest creature on
the political scene this year and one of the most important. They have provided
a key constituency for Mr. Hart in his drive toward the Democratic Presidential
nomination, and opinion surveys show the Colorado Senator consistently runs well
with younger, more affluent and better educated voters.

For example, in the Florida primary last Tuesday Mr. Hart won the support of 48
percent of voters 25 to 29 years old, 45 percent of the college graduates and 51
percent of those earning more than $50,000 a year. Of course, plenty of
''yuppies'' support other candidates, including President Reagan.

Emerging Political Force


Moreover, the ''yuppies'' belong to the baby boom generation born from 1945 to
1960. This group has been slow to develop a political identity and to join the
system, but when they do, many analysts believe they will permanently alter the
face of American politics.

Interviews with dozens of ''yuppies'' here in Illinois, which holds an important
primary on Tuesday, show these young voters see in Mr. Hart many of the
qualities they see in themselves: independence from old ideas and political
structures; a pragmatic, nonideological approach to problems and a rejection of
the cynicism that developed in the Vietnam and Watergate eras.

''We've felt a lot of frustration,'' said Michael Felz, a 27-year-old tax
accountant. ''John Anderson and Gary Hart are the two politicians of the 80's
who have brought forth a sense of optimism for people my age.''

Given their educational level, the ''yuppies'' tend to be issue-oriented, and
they focus on many of the problems that will affect the families they are just
beginning to form, from nuclear waste and acid rain to high technologies and
budget deficits.

''Gary Hart is really concerned about the future of my children,'' said Charles
James, 23, a graduate student.

Shifts in Outlook


Since ''realism'' is one of the favorite words in the ''yuppie'' lexicon, they
respond favorably to Mr. Hart's suggestion that Democrats can no longer simply
take labor's side against management, but must be concerned with long- term
economic growth. And they do not automatically believe government has the answer
to all problems.

Their sense of realism extends to the November elections, and one reason
''yuppies'' tend to favor Mr. Hart is they believe he will appeal to a broad
spectrum of voters, particularly moderates and independents.

Charlotte Mitchell, a 36-year-old lawyer, expained her support for the Coloradan
this way: ''He would be more able to beat Ronald Reagan than the other
candidates, especially Mondale, who is hindered by his association with the
Carter Administration. My primary interest is defeating Reagan.''

If there is one word to describe most ''yuppies'' it is ''independent.'' Many of
them, like Mr. Hall, grew up in traditional communities with traditional ideas,
but severed their roots when they went off to college.

Richard Toman's grandparents immigrated here from Czechoslovakia, and his
parents operated a small bakery in an ethnic neighborhood of Chicago. ''To this
day, they think the sun rises and sets on F.D.R.'' said Mr. Toman, a tax
attorney.

For his parents, loyalty to the Democratic Party organization was a fact of
life, because the party ''went through the bureaucracy of red tape'' and
connected them to a culture and a government that was still a bit strange and
confusing. But Mr. Toman's view is quite different.

Situation Has Changed


''Do I need the Democratic Party?'' the 36-year-old lawyer asked. ''Probably
not. I can make enough waves and get things done anyway.''

Michael Gillespie, an urban anthropologist, adds that 'yuppies'' like Mr. Toman
did not live through the Depression. Accordingly, they have a greater sense of
economic security than their parents had, and a greater sense that different
choices are possible.

Deborah Dreyfuss, the daughter of a businessman and Democratic Party worker in
New York, now sells national advertising for The Chicago Tribune and is running
as a Hart delegate.

''We're part of the 'me generation,' and people don't want to take on the titles
others have,'' said Miss Dreyfuss, who is 27. ''The establishment is Republican,
and the working class is Democratic, and being independent sounds a lot
cooler.''

Mr. Hart has appealed adroitly to this impulse by attacking ''special
interests'' and rejecting contributions from political action committees. In the
process, he has turned his lack of support from party leaders and prominent
organizations into a prime virtue.

''I've had this sense of helplessness,'' said Terry Jackson, 40, a teacher here.
''All the candidates seem tied to labor or the Moral Majority or somebody. Hart
represents the opposite.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Gary Hart supporters

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REFLOATING 'MISTER ROBERTS' FOR TV

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1473 words


For the past four weeks, Robert Hays - a good-looking young actor best-known as
the star of the movie ''Airplane!'' - has been rehearsing the title role in a
television version of ''Mister Roberts,'' with a company that includes Charles
Durning and Kevin Bacon.

So far, Mr. Hays reports, his own experience has been thoroughly haunted by the
ever-present shadow of the actor who originated the role. In the minds of
millions of Americans, Henry Fonda made an indelible impression as Mister
Roberts, both in the hugely successful Broadway play and then in the Academy
Award-winning film. ''It's like I'm playing Mister Fonda, not Mister Roberts,''
says Mr. Hays glumly.

Despite the passage of 35 years since ''Mister Roberts'' became a theatrical
landmark, remaking such a famous work is inevitably a risky enterprise. In this
case, however, the stature of the movie's cast has added another intimidating
dimension. With Henry Fonda, James Cagney, Jack Lemmon and William Powell as
their predecessors, Mr. Hays, Mr. Durning, Mr. Bacon and Howard Hesseman are up
against a formidable array of legends in their portrayal of life aboard a World
War II cargo ship.  ''The ghost is always looking over your shoulder,'' observes
Mr. Durning, who describes Mr. Cagney as ''my hero.''

And as if that weren't enough, the new ''Mister Roberts,'' which will be shown
tomorrow night on NBC at 9, will be telecast live from the NBC Studios in
Burbank, Calif. Their intensive rehearsals notwithstanding, the cast is
understandably apprehensive about the prospect of doing a live television play,
a phenomenon rarely seen in the last quarter of a century. ''I've never done
live television before, and it's terrifying,'' says Mr. Bacon, who plays Ensign
Pulver.



The production is the fourth in a series of live television plays staged by NBC
in the past four years. ''When it first came out that we were going to do these
things live, I got a lot of calls from people who had done live television in
1950's telling me I was crazy,'' says David Rintels, the executive producer of
the ''NBC Live Theater'' series. ''They told me stories about actors having
heart attacks on camera. About scenery falling over. About a leading man who was
in every scene racing out to go to the bathroom between scenes and getting
locked out and not being able to get back because no one heard him pounding on
the door. About an actor who showed up so blind drunk that the director had to
go on for him, with an earpiece in his ear so the control room could feed him
the lines. We have a live goat in this play,'' Mr. Rintels adds, ''so you can
use your imagination about the kinds of things that could go wrong. You just
have to be prepared to cover.''

If all goes well, the director is hoping that the live performance, which will
be done for a studio audience, will enhance the play. ''We are trying to
recapture the excitement of a theatrical event,'' says Melvin Bernhardt, whose
Broadway credits include ''Da.'' ''There's a certain electricity that happens in
playing when you know it's once. When you know you can stop and shoot that
section again, I think it takes a certain edge off the performances.''

For the actors, however, the necessity of playing to a studio audience as well
as television viewers adds yet another element of difficulty. ''What's really
frightening to me is that the medium is a very delicate thing,'' says Mr. Bacon.
''If you're acting in a play, there's a certain level you act on. There are
peaks and valleys you have to reach to communicate with your audience.

''But with videotape, it's a very intimate thing, and you have to take the
performance way down. Here you have the combination of both, and there's the
risk of looking as though you're overacting. That's what frightens me more than
anything. You have a 300-seat house, but there's also the television audience at
home, and you don't want to hit them over the head with it. I guess if I had to
make a choice, I'd rather make it work for the camera, but my instincts for
pleasing an audience are very strong, and if I think those people in the house
can't hear me, you're going to see me go through the roof.''



Whatever the challenges of such an enterprise, one person who is very happy
about the resuscitation of ''Mister Roberts'' is Joshua Logan, who co-wrote the
original play with Thomas Heggen and directed it on Broadway. The play, which
got 22 curtain calls on its opening night in 1948, won five Tony Awards and ran
for more than three years. However, Mr. Logan was decidedly less than thrilled
with the 1955 movie, whose stormy filming began under the direction of John Ford
and was completed by Mervyn LeRoy. ''It was a disaster, as far as I'm
concerned,'' says Mr. Logan. ''Even though the movie was successful, I couldn't
tell you in decent language how I felt about what John Ford did to 'Mister
Roberts.' ''

The NBC telecast is based on the play rather than on the movie, which took
considerable liberties with the Logan-Heggen book, and Mr. Logan supervised the
preparation of the NBC script. ''It's not changed at all, only shortened,'' he
says. ''I saw to it that it stayed as was originally intended.''

Indeed, this ''Mister Roberts'' is in no way meant to be a modernized or
otherwise altered version. ''I'm trying to do it faithfully,'' says Mr.
Bernhardt. ''I would like to re-create, with fresh American actors, a great
American classic.''



Set on board a Navy supply ship during the waning days of World War II, ''Mister
Roberts'' revolves around the eagerness for combat duty of Doug Roberts, an
officer beloved by his crew, and the determination of the ship's tyrannical and
much hated captain to prevent Mister Roberts from achieving a transfer.

Although the patriotic fervor and gung-ho militarism of its characters might
have made a remake of ''Mister Roberts'' difficult during the Vietnam War years,
the telecast's director is hoping that the current climate will prove more
favorable.  ''At some point in our recent history, 'Mister Roberts' might have
seemed inappropriate, but now I think it's far enough in the past that it's not
dated, it's simply a re-creation of another time,'' says Mr. Bernhardt.
''Basically the values this play dramatizes are ones that are very valuable.
There's the whole sense of understanding your relationship to other people and
finding where your contribution can come from for the community good. And I
think that's timeless. The play is about a society: the crew is a microcosm of
American society.''

Mr. Bernhardt's view of the piece has proven a challenge for such young actors
as Mr. Bacon. ''He has emphasized the fact that we're doing a period piece,''
says Mr. Bacon, who is currently starring in the movie ''Footloose.'' ''People
did have different sorts of values then. They did speak differently and relate
to each other in different ways. I'm not approaching this by mumbling and trying
to be contemporary. You have to watch out, not just for vocal or physical
things. It can be just attitude, and suddenly you realize you're doing something
that's too contemporary. For example, the way Pulver emulates Mister Roberts. I
don't think 19-year-olds today have the same kind of awe and idolization.
They're much more into being cool and distant.''



To Mr. Durning, the play's longevity is a function of the kind of themes that
never go out of style. ''It's like a love story between Mister Roberts and the
crew,'' the veteran actor observes. ''He loses them and then regains them again.
That and the tyranny of the captain, a common enemy, make it a classic story for
me. It's the story of the tyranny of small people and small minds, and the
goodness that is in the souls of certain individuals. In a basic way, it's good
against evil.''

Mr. Hays sees ''Mister Roberts'' in similar terms. ''The meat of the piece
doesn't have to do with something that's indigenous to the 1940's,'' he says.
''It's a universal theme: man's humanity to man - between Roberts and the crew -
and man's inhumanity to man - between the captain and the crew. That kind of
universal idea or message is what makes something last.''

When the cast steps out onto the stage tomorrow night, they will be hoping that
a fresh look at a tried- and-true story will succeed in transcending some very
famous memories. ''If I tried to do this the way Fonda did, all I'd be doing is
being a copycat,'' says Mr. Hays, ''and that's cheating. You just have to
approach it as an actor approaches a role, letting it develop naturally and
reacting to the situation and the other characters. If it's already heavily
imprinted in people's minds, I can't erase that. That's not my duty. It's up to
people to watch this as a wonderful play, and to me to just try to do the best I
can.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Charles Durning and Robert Hays in ''Mister Roberts''

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JOURNALISTS AND THE MILITARY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 120 words


Unlike Drew Middleton, most of the news media in Vietnam did not have the
experience of World War II or Korea to draw on or, indeed, any experience of the
military at all. They were far more familiar with the college campus and the
street protest than with the soldiers or the Army they were writing about. They
added to this lack of background the antiestablishment bias of that era and a
crusading fervor to find fault. These faults, real and perceived, were
publicized day after day without any balancing accounts of our successes. The
instinctive reaction was to distance ourselves from these self-righteous judges.


 MICHAEL D. MAHLER Colonel, United States Army (Retired) Highland Park, Ill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ONB READING 300 AMERICAN NOVELS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3169 words


This is, in essence, a defense of a judging bias.  The occasion is this year's
PEN/ Faulkner Awards, which I, along with fellow novelists Mary Gordon and David
Bradley, am in the process of selecting. The pool is some 250-300 new books of
American fiction, all published in 1983. It is our charge to choose five or six
books of particular distinction, with a first prize for one of them. An
impossible task of course and, at root, perhaps a political one.

I've never before read so many works of fiction

Robert Coover , whose most recent novel is ''Spanking the Maid,'' teaches at
Brown University.  at once, much less all new ones from a single country. It's
humbling just to see so much imaginative energy on display, even if most of it
is soon to be pulped and forgotten. What it has taught me, as if I needed such a
lesson, is a renewed appreciation of those few innovative narratives that break
the molds, challenge the conventions. It's not simply their novelty, their
declaration of personality; it runs deeper than that. And thinking about it has
given me a way of approaching this massive, sometimes painful, assignment.

Perhaps all judges of literary prizes go through this: chasing some illusive
subtext as a way of willing themselves through their mind-numbing task, hoping
for some insight into the tribe's view of itself as a reward for so bruising
their minds. That old cabalist pursuit of the hidden pattern. The encoded
message.

It's dangerous, I know, to use any art form as a kind of keyhole into
''something beyond'' - into God's privy or society's secret cancers or ''human
nature,'' whatever. In one of the crime novels in this mountain of 1983 books
now piled on my study floor, the photographer-hero ridicules those critics who
pretend to see in his photographs such things as ''a frontal attack against the
assumptions of a technological society'' or ''a compendium of humanity's defeat
at the hands of venture capital.'' When some guy, dragged to the gallery by his
wife, remarks flatly, ''I think he takes pictures to make a buck, and anything
else is fringe,'' the photographer says, ''I would've kissed the guy, but it
might've ruined his perspective.''

The author of this particular book is of course a manipulator of stereotypes out
to make a buck, but he's right: Any art object treated as mere social
documentation or inquiry is going to be misunder stood. Each art form has its
own unique internal history, its own pattern of development, projected from
within, much as DNA projects an organism. Some would even say that the great
innovative artists are those who most wholly surrender to the demands of the
evolving form - its servant, not its master. Each art form is an international
self-generating technology of sorts, like that of microchips, video, lasers and
bombs.

But that same photographer-hero, when pressed, admits, quoting a fellow artist,
a great Depression Era photographer, that what he's really looking for are
''images whose meanings exceed the local circumstances that provide their
occasion.'' He wants the world to ''show'' itself to him through his art. True,
he wants to capture it intuitively, rather than talk about it, but still he
wants revelation, interaction. It is hard to get away from this. Art lives in
the world, and the world in it. This is especially true of fiction, which can't
even speak unless the world speaks. Echoes are bound to be heard, from one to
the other.

Structuralists believe that the relationship is even more profound than this,
that art and society actually help to shape each other in their innermost
configurations, even if unconsciously, and that therefore if you can perceive
the inner structures of one, you can discover insights into the other. The
theoretician Lucien Goldmann called this mirroring of artistic and social forms
a ''homology of structures.'' For all the rebellion and inventiveness of
individual artists, their work as a whole, it is assumed, will necessarily
reflect the political forms, social patterns and ideological beliefs of the
tribe, else it will have no meaning at all.


FROM this perspective, this huge pile of books now spread all over my study
floor like chips in a board game might be seen as a single chapter in the
ongoing American mythology, processive and essentially anonymous, the individual
authors dissolving - against their will, of course - into a single communal
voice. Indeed, the very naming of all these individuals, and the attachment of
those names to monetary exchange values, reflect powerful forces in our tribal
world-view, having to do with the ideology of individualism, the icons of
commerce and how they're made, the idealized patterns of a ''significant'' life.

Because the rise of the novel is coincident with the rise of the industrial
mercantile democracies - and is itself obviously an industrial product, secular,
''prosaic,'' and mass-produced - it is easy to see the novel as Hegel saw it, as
''the epic of the middle-class world,'' a form somehow tied to the fate of that
world, each sustaining and promoting the other, each at risk if the other should
fall. If that's so, then, judging by most of the books on my floor, though
pollution, missiles, corruption, unassimilated technology and banking crises may
threaten it, the world of the industrial bourgeoisie is safe at least for
another year from the American novel. If not necessarily the other way round.

For here we have all the themes and procedures familiar to us since ''Pamela'' -
the emphasis on private lives and sentimental relationships, ''character'' as a
theater for the defense and revision of the doctrine of individualism, ''point
of view'' its metaphysical demonstration, space (or place) a kind of storage bin
for artifacts (how we love our catalogues!), or else an artifact itself - exotic
settings offered as new acquisitions for the consuming mind. Everything here
from ancient Egypt to modern Pago Pago, from the toilettes of movie stars and
duchesses to the sinkholes of bums and immigrants and the death seats of
condemned criminals, from primitive post-apocalyptic burrows to the magical land
of outer space. It's a kind of voyeurism, which remains a dominant feature of
this particular chapter of the American mythology. There seems to be a great
unappeasable craving to see what cannot ordinarily be seen. Maybe it's just that
if the whole world is privately owned, we have to sneak a peek to get a piece of
it, possession being incomplete until we're privy to the vilest corners, the
darkest secrets (incest and child- murder are big this year).

If frontal assaults on these structures are missing here, this multivolume book
on my study floor does seem to reflect a number of adjustments being made in the
tribal mythos. Family, for example, is still a central structural metaphor, but
it is more complex than it used to be: There is a scattering of relatives and
chapters like jump cuts in film, conjoined and severed at the same time.
Familial arrangements (which are often the equivalent of ''plot'') are
predictably unpredictable, as though principles from other disciplines - the
principles of randomness, say, or relativity - were seeping in, not so much to
undermine these structures as to restore their viability.

Homosexual love is finding its place in the world through the appropriation of
the conventions of erotic heterosexual literature, including lush prose as a
kind of seduction of the imagination. Traditional pornography, contrarily, now
seems ''dated,'' having lost its place perhaps to the home video cassette,
though the fascination with death and orgasm persists, the erotic imagination of
male writers increasingly beguiled, it would appear, by love's cruelty.


Women, in fiction as in life, seem to be taking hold of their lives as never
before (the world of this particular group novel is literally chockablock with
middle- aged ladies on the make), though they tend to discover, almost
ritualistically, the same angst and fevers that plagued male heroes before them,
as though the forms themselves might have them in thrall. One senses, as
throughout this composite text, an aura of diminished hopes, reflected not least
of all by the pervasive lack of formal ambition in the fictions themselves.

Vietnam, dread incubus of our communal nightmare, is being dragged forcibly,
over and over again, into the harsh but conventional light of novelistic day:
fiction as exorcism. The devil, however, usually turns out to be something more
like Fate or ''human nature'' than ordinary political or military decisions. The
enemy, with rare exception, is not so much another character as a metaphysical
condition, and mere survival, as one might expect in this system, has achieved
the status of maximum value. Vietnam literature, I should say, is coming to
constitute a whole new genre, allied in many ways to that of horror, and it is
projecting its own truth out into the world - that there are no heroes and no
victories. Our great civilizing Myth of the American West, meanwhile, goes on
being revised, celebrated, humanized, enlarged, narrowed, scorned, enshrined. It
is popular now to take the Indian's point of view. Perhaps that's one way of
absorbing and deflecting the experience of Vietnam.

But the dominant musical note in this community fiction is not yippee-ti-yi-yo
or the slapping of leather, it is the sound of urban voices: city folk talking
to each other. What there is of the pursuit of mystery in many of these books
seems to be concentrated in the devout attention being paid to this tuneful
discord. Mingled in are the sometimes embittered voices of the new waves of
immigrants, the bitterness itself perhaps a characteristic of the genre.


THERE are other elements notable for their absence. The militarization of the
world, for example, is not taking place in this group novel. You will not find
much here about the economy or foreign policy or acid rain. The third world does
not quite exist in it, except occasionally as a dangerously fractious source of
raw material or a stage for American initiation rites. There is some sense of
the impact of telecommunications and computerization (almost all writers have
gone on-line with something by now after all), but few of these fictions seem
shaped in any serious way by information or communication theory. Indeed, it is
hard to find any ideas in most of them more current than Darwinism. Organized
religions are here, but serve mainly as complications in secular plots, as
though in tacit compliance with constitutional orthodoxy on this matter. They
are still an obstacle now and then to an individual's ''growing up,'' but may be
making a comeback as a source of solace in the face of apocalypse and
existentialist gloom.

It's likely, of course, that the particular set of fictions that has been
preselected for us - only about 10 percent of the year's total - is distorting
the overview. There aren't many so-called ''genre novels'' here, for example -
westerns, romances, detective and spy novels, war stories, science fiction,
fantasy and suspense - and some of these do at least incorporate current events,
fashionable anxieties, and contemporary technology and theory, even if the forms
the authors use remain paradoxically archaic, the language simplistic.

At times, indeed, the few popular novels that we do have - many of which we have
had to ask for ourselves, publishers seemingly dubious about the literary merit
of their own successes - seem so far removed from the majority of these texts
both in ''quality'' and in subject matter as to suggest a completely different
literature. Or if not a different literature, at least a different voice. It is
as though not one but two world-views, two mythologies, one ''popular,'' the
other ''serious,'' were operating concurrently upon our communal psyche.


Perhaps this has always been true. If, for example, you take apart that
wonderfully generative fiction, The Book of Genesis, breaking it down into its
various constituent ''authors,'' as linguists have now been able to do, you will
discover these separate traditions of popular and establishment literature;
there they are found in the interlaced folkloric and ''priestly'' voices, the
one superstitious, secular, action-oriented, and open-ended, the other carefully
reasoned, authoritative, stylish, enclosed in the ''truth.'' Though they often
seem to contradict each other, it is their coexistence in this text - the
popular tradition sanctioning enlightenment, and vice versa - that gives it its
ultimate power.


IN the folk tradition, which

finds its modern incarnation

in genre fiction, well-known

formulaic tales are retold, over and over again, in new yet ever familiar shapes
with an emphasis on entertainment, frequently invoking a ''what-if'' quality,
the use of magic (read technology in some cases), exotic travel and other
narratively interesting wish-fulfillment situations. Its characters, while often
vivid, remain somehow generic, abstract, interchangeable. Invention is spent on
plot complications, amusing eccentricities, evocations of the fabulous. One is
reminded of the oral tradition, in which everything flows relentlessly forward
to its climax, focusing on conflict and certain elemental themes, avoiding
affectations of style, indeed anything ''high-minded'' that might slow it down
or lose a reader, and so seeming even more anonymous in its authorship than the
''serious'' books on my floor.

These, contrarily, while using no less familiar forms, clearly seek to transcend
mere storytelling, to reach past entertainment for its own sake into speculative
and morally perplexing realms, projecting their complex characters into ironic
and ambiguous situations. Critics praise these books for their vision, style,
commitment, sensibility, honesty, their ''intense realism.'' Hundreds of
creative writing workshops, or cells, have been established across the country
to perpetuate these ideals - a kind of literary creed - and indeed there are a
startling number of quality short story collections here, many more than I would
have expected, most of them obviously polished and in the end somewhat
homogenized by one or another of these programs. This in spite of the fact that
a characteristic peculiarity of these fictions is a conscious search for a
personal ''voice,'' a distinctive rhetorical and consistent vision.

Ultimately, of course, both of these voices are conservative. Both tend, through
formal acquiescence, to extend the reign of the cultural establishment, even
while challenging it now and then on the surface. The voice of the bourgeois
novel, of ''serious literature,'' moves its self-reflective heroes through
problematic situations toward what is basically a confirmation of the accepted
character-centered world-view, occasionally proposing or reflecting slight
modulations, reinterpretations, new modes of acceptance. A corrupt father is
embraced on his deathbed; the failure of a character is compensated for by the
author's elegant style. The folkloric voice of genre fictions moves its
exemplary heroes and heroines through a sequence of entertaining actions toward
a system of punishments and rewards, in what is ultimately a harmonious world -
or else its contrary, a disharmonious hell. What if eases the pain of what is.

The ''serious'' voice tends to be more profound, more poetic, more
intellectually and emotionally complex, almost priestly in its honed and elegant
revisions of the tribal mythos. The popular one tends to be livelier, more
playful, even subversive to the established world-view at times, though in the
way folk art is always subversive - distrustful of all change, even that which
has already taken place, nostalgic instead for a return to the old values of
that simpler and happier past that lives on in the popular imagination. Which,
of course, is the only place it has ever existed.

But occasionally - rarely - a third voice arises, radically at odds with the
priestly and folk traditions alike, though often finding its materials in the
latter and sharing with it a basic distrust of the establishment view of things.
This voice typically rejects mere modifications in the evolving group mythos,
further surface variations on sanctioned themes, and attacks instead the
supporting structures themselves, the homologous forms. Whereupon something new
enters the world - at least the world of literature, if not always the community
beyond.

Though this voice is often thought of as disruptive, eccentric, even
inaccessible ( which is how some previous PEN/Faulkner Award winners have been
viewed), it could easily be argued that it is true mainstream fiction, emerging
from the very core of the evolving form, peculiarly alert to the decay in the
social forms that embrace it, early signals of larger mutations to follow.


SOMETIMES this revolution of form seems almost accidental. Disparate elements
are somehow juxtaposed, in art or life or both, creating a kind of dissonance,
and an artist comes along who resolves that dissonance through the creation of a
new form - a Chretien de Troyes, for example, who secularized the monkish
appetite for allegory and raised fairy tale to an art form by enriching it with
metaphor, design, fortuitous mistranslation and exegetical tomfoolery, thereby
inventing the chivalric romance, a form that dominated the world for five
centuries. Something similar might be said of Cervantes as well, who brought an
end to the tradition of chivalric romance by submitting its artifices to the
realities of the picaros and conquistadors of his day. Or of that eclectic
''Redactor'' of Genesis, for that matter, who pressed the folk and priestly
voice of his tribe into a contiguous relationship so profound that I myself am
still affected by it, 20-some centuries later.

At other times - as with Ovid or Kafka or Joyce - this new form is clearly the
conscious invention of a creative artist, pursuing his own peculiar, even
mischievous, vision with the intransigence of a seer or an assassin. For these
writers, the ossified ideologies of the world, imbedded in the communal
imagination, block vision, and as artists they respond not by criticism from
without but by confrontation from within. In effect, in mythopoeic dialogue,
they challenge these old forms to change or die.

And it seems to me that it is this sort of artist - whether intuitive or
intellectual - that the PEN/ Faulkner Award in its brief life has sought to
honor. It is not surprising to me that its selections have sometimes seemed
outside the ''tradition.'' Its judges are are prepared - obliged, even - to
celebrate artistic genius wherever they find it of course, but at its writerly
heart this award belongs to the rebel, the iconoclast, the transformer. The
mainstream.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert Coover; drawings

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE BOOK-PARTY CIRCUIT- SERVING TYPHOID MARY'S SOUP

BYLINE: By Samuel G. Freedman

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1061 words


Samuel G. Freedman is a reporter for The New York Times.  HEN Simon & Schuster
threw a party for Jacqueline Susann some years ago, one chair at every table
remained vacant. The publishers weren't expecting Banquo, they wanted Miss
Susann to have a seat at every stop on her conversational rounds. It is a
telling story about the book party circuit, which exists largely for authors'
self-esteem. With a few exceptions, a book party does not generate much in the
way of sales or publicity. As for the food, the writer and eater Calvin Trillin
says, ''The tastiness varies in inverse proportion to the stature of the writer.
I think people are at least getting a little more self- conscious about giving
guests a napkin with something awful on a cracker.''

Perhaps it is not surprising, then, that the book party circuit does not hum as
it once did, when there might be two or three events an evening, when, recalls
Michael Korda, the editor in chief of Simon & Schuster, ''You never had to go
home at night - and didn't want to.''

There are fewer parties today than there were in, say, 1980. Many publishers are
choosing to put the money for a book party - anywhere from $500 to $10,000 -
into an advertising campaign. Others are forsaking the Four Seasons for intimate
(read ''less expensive'') parties in their homes. ''I can't remember the last
party I went to,'' Mr. Korda said. ''Maybe I don't get invited anymore.'' (He -
and the cream of the literary world - did attend the party Simon & Schuster
recently threw at the Four Seasons to celebrate Mr. Korda's 25th anniversary
with the publishing house.) As an institution, the book party seems friskiest in
the months of January and February. Whatever its commercial limits, a book party
still provides the chance for authors to meet the people who publish, criticize
and admire their work. There are vast variations on that theme, some determined
by the nature of the book, some by the publicist's imagination and budget.

Consider this recent sampler. For Felicia Rosshandler's ''Passing Through
Havana,'' St. Martin's Press served up mojitos and daiquiris '' a la Ernest,''
an allusion to one writer who stayed awhile in Cuba. The fare at E. P. Dutton's
party for J. P. Federspiel's ''Ballad of Typhoid Mary'' was oxtail soup, the
dish with which the real Typhoid Mary inadvertently infected a city.

But however inventive a party may be, it usually takes celebrities to get
publicity. Some writers, like Norman Mailer, Truman Capote or Gore Vidal,
qualify as celebrities. William Burroughs typifies the writer who may not hold
such status himself but attracts those who do - as he did at a party given by
his publisher, Richard Seaver of Holt, Rinehart & Winston. Then there is the
celebrity-cum-author, like Lauren Bacall, Bette Midler or Phil Donahue.

''But if the author isn't a Phil Donahue,'' Mr. Korda said, ''what you get at
the party is the editorial department, 20 of the author's family and relatives
and roughly the same number of literary critics who are free that evening and
can pick up dinner off the buffet table.''

The buffet table was the attraction at the party last spring for Mr. Trillin's
gastronomic travelogue, ''Third Helpings.'' A caterer made many of the regional
dishes Mr. Trillin extolled, including Buffalo chicken wings. And two men who
were the subjects of one chapter, Suds Kroge and Dregs Donnigan, drove in from
Reading, Pa., with two local specialties - Yuengling beer and Dieffenbach's
potato chips. James Edmunds, a newspaper editor from Lafayette, La., flew in
with boudin sausage, a Cajun delicacy.

The only problem with thematic parties is that the themes don't always lend
themselves to revelry. Mr. Trillin's latest book, ''Killings,'' for example, is
about murders. ''I don't think the medical examiner would have let us use his
office for a party,'' the author lamented.

Whatever publicity a party does or does not generate, there is little denying
how good it can make an author feel, especially a first-time author. Random
House brought Louise Shivers from Augusta, Ga., to Manhattan for a party last
March to celebrate the publication of ''Here to Get My Baby Out of Jail,'' her
first novel. ''One of the reasons I came to writing late,'' said, Mrs. Shivers,
who wrote the book when she was 53, ''was that I thought to be a writer you had
to be a sophisticated New Yorker. So I was at the party with my three grown
children, and we were all pinching ourselves. When John Irving walked through
the door, I saw my two daughters go off the floor about two feet. Not only do
they like his books, but he looks so dreamy. That's when they said, 'Mama's got
out of the kitchen.' ''

For every book party that goes right, however, there is likely to be one that
goes wrong. There was the party for Miss Susann's ''The Love Machine'' at which
one reveler fell into a huge cake made to resemble the book's cover. There was
the party at the Tavern on the Green in 1982 for a tome entitled ''Pigs in
Love.'' Nancy Kahan, a vice president of Crown Publishing Co., hired a hog
caller, paid two actors to wear pig costumes and - the pi ece de resistance -
convinced a pig farmer from New Jersey to bring his herd, only to learn, as a
television crew was about to do a live report from the party, that the city does
not allow live swine in restaurants.

One publishing executive recalled the party in 1980 for Charles Gaines's
''Dangler.'' The affair took place on a barge afloat in the Hudson, with the
guests ferried to and from Manhattan in small motorboats. But several of the
those boats broke down on the return trip, and the black-tie elegance of the
crowd gave way to a frenzied rush for the few boats that still ran. ''It
reminded me,'' the executive said, ''of the fall of Saigon.''

On the subject of Vietnam, John Baker, the editor in chief of Publishers Weekly
and thus a book party habitue, recalled the fete in 1982 for Henry A. Kissinger
on the publication of his memoirs. ''I think his politics kept some people
away,'' Mr. Baker said, ''and a lot of the people at the party seemed a bit cool
toward him, or intimidated. They stood awkwardly in the corners of the room
looking at him. You just can't go up to Henry Kissinger the way you could to
Kurt Vonnegut and say, 'I like your work.' '' B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRAFTS;
'AN ANGRY FIST' AT STATE MUSEUM

BYLINE: By PATRICIA MALARCHER

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 14, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words


TRENTON HOT GLASS coaxed into shape by Leonard Di Nardo typically has been
transformed into wares with the signature of classic elegance.

Now, in a solo exhibition at the State Museum here, works that represent ''the
shaking of an angry fist'' set a note of dissonance against the timeless
serenity of the majority of objects on display in the South Gallery.

If the viewer is disturbed, the pieces have fulfilled the artist's purpose. A
veteran of the Vietnam War, Mr. Di Nardo has turned his medium into an
instrument of protest against ''the coverup of mounting evidence'' that Agent
Orange, the widely publicized defoliant, has proved harmful to humans.

Among the approximately 30 works on exhibit, only three reverberate with ''the
voice of collective rage'' amplified in a statement by the artist. But those are
the ones you will take home in your imagination.

As the current exhibitor in an ongoing series of shows featuring New Jersey
artists, Mr. Di Nardo, a resident of Lambertville, has meshed his strong
personal concerns with the prerogative of using the museum as a testing ground
for new ideas.  In the last five years, Mr. Di Nardo has gained wide recognition
for the flawlessly proportioned bowls and vessels in which he has adapted
surface patterns from native American pottery and baskets.

For instance, he has taken a design that originally might have emerged from the
basketry process of coiling and translated it into a pattern that seems natural
for glass. Similarly, he has worked with a feather motif that has been painted
on or carved into clay by generations of southwest Indian potters.

That direction, executed in the demanding ''intarsia'' technique, which the
artist learned at the renowned Orrefors factory in Sweden, is amply represented
here. In addition, there are several works in which colored bands and clear
glass alternate.

Those reveal the artist's keen sense of proportion and scale as important
aspects of color relationships. This group, in singing colors built on crystal
bases, seems to float above the tops of the pedestals.

More complexly, crystal as a foil for opaque color is played up in another
series entitled ''Vetro di Trina.'' Here, two sets of curving lines radiating
from a central point intercept and appear to interlace like a blown-up weaving
diagram.

By comparison with the lace-like delicacy of those patterns, ''Agent Orange
Cover-up'' takes a bold, aggressive stance.

The harsh immediacy of this piece is a giant step away from the timeless quality
of Mr. Di Nardo's Indian designs. A large cylindrical jar banded in orange
stripes, it symbolizes the color-coded, 55-gallon barrels in which the defoliant
was delivered to the combat zone.

Around the crystal lid are repeated images of a Vietnam service medal; on the
handle, the name of a major war contractor is deeply engraved.

Still, at first glance, one might only see a brightly colored cookie jar. The
grimness of the piece is in the contents, visible through a clear glass section:
toy soldiers covered with orange paint have been tossed in with abandon.

The two other works in the series are expansions of the theme.

Mr. Di Nardo's message, issued ''not only from myself, but on behalf of my
brother Vietnam veterans as well'' speaks for itself, even without reference to
an excerpt from an article - it is mounted in large print above the work - on
the suspected harmful effects of Agent Orange and their denial by Government and
corporate authorities.

It is significant, however, that before attempting to express something so close
to the cutting edge of his own experience, Mr. Di Nardo worked through borrowed
traditions to arrive at a mature control of a process that demands unwavering
attention. Now, as if shedding a cloak no longer needed for protection, he
apparently is ready to risk creating his own personal iconography.

In the vitreous luminosity of glass, the Indian pattern seems somewhat rarified.
Yet, in their original manifestation, such designs often represented forces -
lightning or rain, for example - which could not be controlled.

It seems that, while departing from the outward appearance of the Indian works,
Mr. Di Nardo may be making a new connection with them on a different level. It
will be exciting to see where he will go from here.

''The Challenge of Glass'' will remain on view through April 22. The
admission-free State Museum is at 205 West State Street, and is open from 9 A.M.
to 4:45 P.M., Tuesday through Saturday, and from 1 to 5 P.M. on Sundays.



Another place to see new works in glass is the Whichcraft Studio Gallery in
South Orange. There, pieces by Louis Sclafani and Richard Jolley, two prominent
young innovators, will be featured in the Upstairs Gallery through April 29.

In Mr. Sclafani's 16 sculptural objects, a dominant characteristic is the
appearance of an undulating softness that denies the actual brittleness of the
material.

Several are in the pillow shape, which he developed to visually communicate the
pliability of hot glass while it is being worked. Within this genre, surfaces -
some sandblasted with geometric patterns, some with strokes or stains of color -
emphasize the presence of both interior and exterior forms.

Another group of works by this artist, who apprenticed with a glass sculptor in
Venice and has won international awards, consists of what he calls ''bag
vases.''

In several different sizes, they capture the tentative contours of empty paper
bags. Some covered with overall patterns of colored ''blips'' are as demure as
calico prints; in blocks, however, the same form looks slick and sophisticated.

While sculptural form is a dominant quality in Mr. Sclafani's work, in Mr.
Jolley's vases the emphasis is on surface decoration. With lines freely drawn on
glass, he has produced fresh, lighthearted images - a group of cows in repose,
for instance - suggesting that glass-blowing is a carefree activity instead of
an undertaking frought with risk.  Mr. Jolley's paperweights and perfume
bottles, built up in layers of glass, incorporate the same kind of imagery on
several different planes.

Whichcraft Studio Gallery is at 52 Vose Avenue in South Orange.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ILLINOIS DEBATE PROVES SPIRITED FOR DEMOCRATS

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1428 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, March 18


In a debate here tonight, Walter F. Mondale and Gary Hart clashed repeatedly
over Mr. Hart's ''new ideas'' campaign theme and over the local issues that have
divided this city's Democrats along racial lines.

The hastily arranged event, which also included the Rev. Jesse Jackson, came two
days before the Democratic Presidential primary in this Middle Western
industrial state. The fifth debate among the Democratic candidates so far in
this campaign, it was sponsored by the Chicago Bar Association and televised on
local stations and on the national C-Span cable network.

Another primary was won by Mr. Mondale today in Puerto Rico, but the slate of 53
delegates is expected to be challenged before the Democratic National Convention
by an alternate slate supporting Senator Hart. (Page B11.)



Local Issues Arise

In the debate, Mr. Mondale tried to undermine Mr. Hart's ''new ideas'' theme by
questioning the depth of his support of civil rights, by condemning his refusal
to support Federal loan guarantees to the Chrysler Corporation and by contending
that Mr. Hart's proposal for a tax on foreign oil would cost the average family
$600 a year.

Mr. Hart struck back on several fronts. He cited the endorsement of Mr. Mondale
by Alderman Edward R. Vrdolyak, the Cook County Democratic chairman and a
political enemy of Chicago's Mayor, Harold Washington, a black, as contributing
to racial divisions in Chicago.

Because of those divisions and the potentially pivotal role of the minority vote
in Tuesday's primary, this debate dwelt more on local issues than any of the
four previous debates.



'Here's the Beef'

But when they turned to national issues, the exchanges by Mr. Hart and Mr.
Mondale centered on Mr. Hart's ''new ideas'' theme.

''We need new ideas, but the real question is not new ideas or old, but good
versus bad,'' said Mr. Mondale. ''In the race for new ideas, I win.''

Mr. Hart alluded to Mr. Mondale's application of the question ''Where's the
beef?'' to Mr. Hart's campaign. ''Vice President Mondale has cleverly picked up
the slogan from a fast-food chain to try to suggest there are no new ideas when
he knows there are,'' he said.

Accusing Mr. Mondale of not knowing about the ideas contained in his book, ''A
New Democracy,'' Mr. Hart suddenly produced a paperback edition. ''Here's a copy
for you,'' he said to a grinning Mr. Mondale. ''Here's the beef.''

''Yeah,'' Mr. Mondale retorted, ''and you can read this whole book and the word
'civil rights' is not mentioned.''

It was the sharpest exchange of a debate that was marked more by the persistence
with which the two men jabbed at one another than by the force of their
assaults.

Mr. Jackson sought to put down the notion that the race here is a two-candidate
contest, noting that he finished ahead of his two competitors in the South
Carolina caucuses Saturday and saying his support was much broader than the
black vote.

Jackson Challenges Both


As Mr. Jackson, the only black in the contest, challenged both men to assert
their commitment to equal rights for blacks, Mr. Mondale questioned the depth of
the Colorado Senator's commitment to civil rights. This was in keeping with Mr.
Mondale's theme that he is more deeply committed to Democratic Party principles
than Mr. Hart.

Mr. Hart responded heatedly, in an exchange that underscored the tense and close
competition.

''I'm not willing to let Vice President Mondale or anyone else in this country
gauge my commitment to civil rights,'' he said. ''I think it's as deep as his.''

Mr. Hart defended his proposed oil tax, saying the ''Carter-Mondale''
Administration had supported it.

In response, Mr. Mondale said Mr. Hart's proposal was ''a bad idea and should be
rejected.''

Chicago's Political Scene


''It is wrong,'' Mr. Mondale said. ''It would be the worst possible thing for
Illinois, and I oppose it.''

Mr. Jackson and Mr. Hart both condemned Mr. Mondale for injecting himself into
Chicago politics by endorsing a white candidate, Richard M. Daley, against Mr.
Washington last year. That endorsement and the embrace of Mr. Vrdolyak have
created problems here for Mr. Mondale.

Mr. Vrdolyak controls a majority faction on the Chicago City Council that has
thwarted many of the Mayor's initiatives.

Tonight, Mr. Mondale said he would inject himself no further into Chicago
politics because a Presidential candidate could ''not get elected dogcatcher''
if embroiled in local squabbles.

Mr. Hart, however, cited Mr. Mondale's local endorsements in saying the contest
between him and Mr. Mondale was ''a choice between the future and the past,
between special interests and the national interest, between old leadership and
new leadership.''

Lack of Leadership Cited


In a pointed allusion to Mr. Mondale, he said, ''The leadership of the past
failed to come out against the Vietnam War, against Lebanon and now against our
involvement in Central America. Here is a leadership that says we have to keep
troops in Central America.''

In the past week, Mr. Mondale's generally more conservative stand on foreign
policy, including his support of a United States military presence in Central
America, has become a major point of contention.

Mr. Hart has also condemned Mr. Mondale for being slow to withdraw his support
of the Vietnam War and for being one of the last of the Democratic candidates to
withdraw his support for the stationing of Marines in Lebanon.

Chrysler Loans at Issue


The moderator was Thomas Z. Hayward Jr., president of the Bar Association. Under
the debate's ground rules, members of a panel could pose a question to a
candidate and then follow up. Next, each of the candidate's opponents could
address the issue raised.

The questioners were D. Michael Cheers of the magazine Jet, Ron Magers and Carol
Marin of the local NBC television station and Walter Jacobson and Mike Flannery
of the local CBS station.

At the end of the evening, each candidate was allowed to give final remarks.

In his closing statement, Mr. Mondale stressed domestic economic issues,
particularly his support of the Federal loan guarantees to Chrysler. In pointing
up Mr. Hart's refusal to support those guarantees, Mr. Mondale was striking a
central appeal of his campaign in the industrial states.  His emphasis on
domestic economic issues and ''really caring about people'' also reflected his
awareness that in states with high unemployment like Illinois, his vote has come
mainly from people concerned about their economic welfare.

In his closing statement, Mr. Hart defended his refusal to support the Chrysler
loan guarantees by saying he was for a comprehensive industrial policy that
''puts all our factories back on their feet, not just a few.''

Jackson Cites Suffering


Mr. Jackson said he supported aid for the Chrysler Corporation but noted that
many Chrysler plants had been closed despite the Federal assistance. A more
serious problem, he said, was that the people who had been laid off were still
suffering.

On another matter, Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart took strong stands in favor of
shifting the United States Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem from Tel Aviv, where
it is now situated.

In contrast, Mr. Jackson, who earlier in the day had addressed the American-Arab
Anti-Discrimination Committee in Washington, said such a move would be a serious
mistake that would serve primarily to alienate Arab nations and increase the
likelihood of renewed hostilities in the Middle East.

The question of moving the embassy is important to some Jewish voters, a group
that Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart have tried to cultivate. In the campaign, Mr.
Jackson has alienated some Jews with remarks that they considered to be
anti-Semitic.

American Presidents have resisted moving the embassy to Jerusalem, a holy city
to Moslems as well as Christians and Jews, for fear that to do so would
unnecessarily antagonize Arabs.

Jackson Defends Candidacy


Mr. Jackson, in response to a question during the debate, said his campaign was
not ''race oriented,'' and that he would make an effort to reach all those
''locked out'' in the nation. He said that his ''constituency is coming alive,''
and that he had received more black votes than Mr. Mondale across the South in
primaries and caucuses last week.

Mr. Hart said he encouraged Mr. Jackson to run in the Presidential contest.
''Reverend Jackson and I see eye to eye in opening the doors of this party,'' he
said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of democratic candidates; photo of Lee Hart (page B11)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 19, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

KEY SECTIONS FROM CHICAGO DEBATE AMONG THREE DEMOCRATS

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 5010 words


Following are key sections of a transcript of a debate at the Westin Hotel in
Chicago among three Democratic candidates for the Presidential nomination, as
recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of the C-Span network.

The participants were Senator Gary Hart, the Rev. Jesse Jackson and former Vice
President Walter F. Mondale. The questioners were Ron Magers and Carol Marin of
WMAQ-TV, Walter Jacobson and Mike Flannery of WBBM-TV and D. Michael Cheers of
Jet magazine.


Panel Discussion



MR. MAGERS: Mr. Mondale, you were endorsed by the Cook County regular Democratic
organization headed by party chairman Ed Vrdolyak. You have not seemed to stand
as visibly and proudly with Mr. Vrdolyak and that group as you have with
teachers and with other labor leaders, other people who have endorsed you. In
hindsight, has it been a political mistake for you to become involved in local
Chicago politics during the Presidential race?

MR. MONDALE: My appeal to Chicago is to all the voters of this community. I am
asking for everyone to support me for the only reason that counts - who will
make the best President of the United States.

I'm glad to have anybody's support, including Mr. Vrdolyak. But I have not
gotten involved in some of the divisions which are sad in this community. I love
Chicago. But it has to get itself together again, and I'm one of those who's
trying to appeal to everyone in this community to elect me President of the
United States.

I'm not running for alderman in this city; I'm running for President of the
United States and asking for the support of all the citizens of this good state.


MR. MAGERS: Have you consciously avoided public forums with Mr. Vrdolyak or
appearances with him?

MR. MONDALE: No, I've gone to every conceivable kind of meeting in Chicago - so
much so I think Mayor Washington wants me to start paying taxes, because I want
everyone's support. I want everyone's support.



MR. HART: I think it is somewhat symbolic of the differences in our candidacies.
Vice President Mondale set out very early, I think, to co-opt endorsements and
to receive those endorsements from organizations, individuals and political
establishments. One of the arguments I have made in this contest is that the
next President of the United States cannot govern this country in a period of
dramatic change if that President is bound to old agendas and old arrangements.
I obviously want, as Fritz does, the support of every element of this party. I
don't think that's the question. I think the question is, what does one go
through to get that support and how bound is that candidate, once in office, to
those arrangements and those ties?

MR. JACKSON: I think what is fundamental is that now that Mr. Mondale has
accepted Mr. Vrdolyak's endorsement, the real point is that during a Democratic
primary, when it was Mr. Washington running and Mrs. Byrne and Mr. Daley, and
Mr. Mondale endorsed someone in the middle of the Democratic primary, and that
became a divisive factor in the process and that division has not yet stopped.
However, that is behind us now, but that is a fact for the record. We must now
heal our wounds basically because if the party remains broken we cannot win Cook
County in 1984.



Black Voters




WALTER JACOBSON: Reverend, based on the number of delegates committed to each of
the candidates, you're way at the bottom of the heap, and your campaign, it is
generally agreed, is detrimental to the campaign of Walter Mondale. Walter
Mondale appears according to the polls to be the more popular of the two white
candidates among black voters. Are you at any point now preparing to back off to
the degree that you can allow the black electorate to choose between one of the
two candidates who may eventually, or appear more likely, to be the winner?

MR. JACKSON: You should not reduce my campaign to a race-oriented campaign. This
is, in fact, the rainbow coalition. And the 3 percent vote I got in Iowa was not
a black vote. The 6 percent vote I got in New Hampshire was not a black vote.
They do not live there. The 8 percent vote in Vermont was not a black vote. And
to that extent that I only got white votes there because there are only white
people that live there, as we grow, the rainbow will expand. We intend to reach
out for the locked out, we make a decided effort to reach out for women, for
Hispanics, for blacks, for Asians, for Arabs, for Jews, for those who have been
locked out, and that is in part the mission of our campaign.



MR. JACOBSON: Between the two candidates, Mondale and Hart, Reverend, you have
to talk practical politics along here somewhere. I think you'd have to concede
that you would really be a dark horse if you won. In which case you are playing
a very crucial role.

MR. JACKSON: I'm a dark horse no matter how you . . . . I have no apologies
about this horse. It's not whether it's dark or light, it's a good horse and a
fast horse. In South Carolina it's a leading horse. I think the real point,
Walter, is that the main gist with the level of analysis in our campaign - we
did get more black votes than Mr. Mondale in Georgia and Florida and Alabama and
South Carolina and Mississippi and Arkansas, so that constituency is coming
alive. But it's growing much broader than that.



MR. HART: I think Reverend Jackson has as much right to run in this race as
either Vice President Mondale or myself and I don't say that for any cynical or
political purpose. I genuinely mean that.

Reverend Jackson and I met a couple of times in 1983 about his candidacy and I'm
sure he would tell you I encouraged him to run because I think in the final
analysis the kind of campaign he is running will help whoever ends up being the
nominee if it is not Reverend Jackson, and I mean that by broadening the scope
of this party, Rev. Jackson and I see eye to eye on opening the doors of this
party and welcoming all people in.




Hart and Blacks



D. MICHAEL CHEERS: Senator Hart, It has been said that you are almost invisible
in the black community. How do you respond to that?

MR. HART: I have only, in some respects, been on the national scene for about
two and a half or three weeks. I campaigned for the Presidency for a year, and
I've been in the Senate for 10 years, and very little attention was paid to this
candidacy until the New Hampshire primary, which was just less than three weeks
ago.

In every city I went into, I made a point of seeking out the black leadership,
sitting down and meeting with it; talking about my record, which I think is as
good as anyone's in the United States Senate on civil rights and equal rights
for minority people.

I have put forward proposals, as I have for this entire economy, that seek to
open up economic opportunity in the future, particularly for those young blacks
getting into our economy. If I have the chance - and I think I will as this race
goes on - to lay those proposals out: to say that the issue in the 1980's is not
whether Rosa Parks rides in the front or the back of the bus, but whether her
son can own and operate the bus company, then I think I will get my share or
more of the black vote. And I certainly know I'll get the black votes if I am
the candidate of this party.



MR. CHEERS: What might some of these concrete programs be?

MR. HART: First of all, in terms of urban revitalization, Congressman Parren
Mitchell of Maryland and I introduced legislation a year or so ago that
dramatically changed the nature of the so-called urban enterprise zone approach.
What this approach would do is to empower people, residents of a community, to
become involved in the determination of how that zone evolved, up to and
including ownership of stock in companies that locate in that urban area.

Second, I believe in minority enterprise.

Third, I have been a strong proponent of a whole range of new education and
training initiatives including an individual training account for all workers
including blacks, and an American Defense Education Act that would increase
national investment in education across the board including urban schools.



MR. JACKSON: I think the most fundamental question that Mr. Hart must answer and
Mr. Mondale must answer is not programs for the black and the poor but a
commitment to empower the black and the poor that they might develop programs
for themselves. There's no lack of ideas by poor people. Right now if Mr. Hart
and Mr. Mondale would take leadership and end second primaries across the South,
we would in effect have 12 to 20 black Hispanic and female Congresspersons by
this coming November - and that would change the face of American politics.

MR. MONDALE: We need a lot of programs for the future and I favor
entrepreneurship and a whole range of efforts that open up opportunities. But
it's not enough to be just nominally right on these issues. I think we have to
look at our records to see the level of intensity, of personal commitment, of
energy and courage that we've shown on what is really been the central toughest
social issue of our time, civil rights and social justice and opportunity. I
think measuring our records there is a difference between the two of us. I'm not
arguing about Gary's nominal record but I do think there's a dramatic difference
in the intensity, the personal commitment, the effort undertaken to move this
process forward toward true opportunity for all of our Americans.

MR. HART: I would very strongly support Reverend Jackson's efforts to open up
the primary system in the South and prevent a situation in which black
candidates have to jump two hurdles, one of which is almost impossible in many
states. I would be very happy to do that, and I will do it as much as I can this
year in the Senate. I can do it better in the White House. Let me just say one
other thing - I'm not willing to let Vice President Mondale or anyone else in
this country gauge my intensity of commitment to civil rights. I think it's as
broad and deep as his, or, for that matter, anyone else's. I can offer as
evidence to that the support that I've had in my own two races in Colorado - not
a heavily minority state, albeit, but without the black and brown support of the
city of Denver and across the state of Colorado, I wouldn't be here today. And
that support was not automatic. I had to earn it.




Tax Increase



MR. FLANNERY: I'll direct my question to Senator Hart. The one thing that I've
heard a lot about is, people want to know where you guys stand on taxes. And
they've told me all of those Democrats want to raise taxes, don't they. In fact,
each of you does have a proposal for increasing taxes to help balance the budget
here. Explain why you think that's necessary, expecially in light of the fact
that public opinion surveys continually show that many Americans believe the
Federal Government wastes vast sums of money and that it doesn't deserve a tax
increase.

MR. HART: First and foremost, in terms of my own philosophy on the matter, I
strongly oppose the so- called Kemp-Roth supply-side economic approach dating
back to the time when it first reared its ugly head in '78 or '79. I campaigned
against it actively in Colorado in 1980 when I ran for re-election, and I said
at that time if that tax cut were enacted it would lead to the most devastating
record-high deficits in the history of this country and come back to hurt this
country's economy and the people who ostensibly were going to be helped by that
cut. So we have to restore the degree of progressivity which that tax cut
devastated. It was not a progressive tax system when that tax cut went into
effect. It's even flattened the rates out even more.

I do propose a modest increase in taxes, particularly for those in upper,
upper-middle and upper income brackets to restore progressivity. I also propose
some massive overhauls of our income tax system to shelter those at the bottom
against the ravages both of inflation and the tax, unfair tax system we have,
and I think we ought, we have to overhaul the corporate tax system as well so
the corporations only get tax breaks in the form of tax credits for direct
investment back in their plants. The tax increases for middle-income people that
I would support to help balance the budget range to no more than about $600 a
year.

MR. FLANNERY: What about the other part of that, thatpeople have a general
impression that in Washington they are wasting billions if not hundreds of
billions of dollars.

MR. HART: They are indeed, and who's doing it most is Ronald Reagan. One of the
great political ironies of our time, perhaps any time, is the man who ran
against the Carter deficits which, as I recall, averaged about $40 billions of
dollars a year, and probably won on that issue as much as anything, has
quintupled those deficits in three years, I must say with the help of too many
Democrats in the process. This is the biggest spender in this country's history
and he's doing it in the biggest most wasteful bureaucracy in Washington called
the Department of Defense.

MR. JACKSON: In other words what's critical is that Reagan came into office
campaigning on a balanced budget. It went from $30 billion to $200 billion.
Those who make the most pay the least and those who make the least are paying
the most. That's definitive Reaganomics. And Congressman Savage once called it
the kind of reverse Robin Hood process taking from the poor and giving to the
rich. On the other hand once these corporations got the tax breaks they are then
obligated to reinvest in this economy, retrain this work force, and
reindustrialize our work force so we could be assertive and move toward
competition as opposed to reactionary moves towards context. Therefore that was
not a good leverage of that tax system. I submit to you that what must happen
now is that these corporations who get our tax dollars must not be allowed to
take our tax dollars and then take our jobs; closing plants on workers without
notice, and going to slave labor markets abroad. If corporate American paid its
share of taxes the poor would have far less to pay.

MR. MONDALE: Here are my proposals. No. 1, I would put a 10 percent surtax on
people making over $100,000. I would cap the 1983 tax cuts at $60,000. I would
put a 10 percent minimum tax on corporations. We have some 90,000 of them now
that go tax free. I would reform and defer indexing so that people making about
$35,000 or less will be held harmless, and I would put a full court press on the
enforcement of tax collections on the underground economy, and I would do some
tightening up on tax loopholes. All of that would pick up over $60 billion, and
it would be fair to that middle- and moderate-income family that really
desperately needs help today. They're the ones that can't make ends meet - just
barely getting through the month, can't save anything - and they're the ones
that are going to get it from the Reagan Administration, and they're entitled to
have a President who stands up for them. They're paying enough.





MR. CHEERS: Reverend Jackson, your record has been that of civil rights and in
the civil right arena. But many people have been and are continuing to question
your competence on industrial and economic affairs and matters. I would like for
you to respond to that.

MR. JACKSON: First of all all three of us sitting here are public servants. Mine
has been outside the Governnment; theirs has been inside the Government. I was
involved in legislation; helped to get the public accommodations bill passed. I
helped set the climate on the outside; others signed it on the inside. I helped
to get the right to vote, open housing legislation that showed I was right here
in Chicago. I helped to get us out of the war in Vietnam. Helped to open up the
Democratic Party process in Miami in '72 to get to where we have it, in fact,
this day. So mine is a career of public service. You must try to determine
leadership not what it does. There was a strike here four years ago. A fireman's
strike. And 22 people were killed in 22 days. I asked Mrs. Byrne to let me
resolve the strike. She said I couldn't do it because it might fail; I asked her
to give me the right to fail. In 48 hours the firemen were back to work. And
that's leadership. Look at when Robert Goodman was in Syria. Everybody said it
was a bad thing for him to be there but no one was willing to take the risk to
go get him. I did. And that's leadership. So when all is said and done we know
leadership by one who helps to mold opinion and make things happen. Not just
follow opinion polls and so I have survived to this point because I have
expressed a quality and people respond to leadership.

MR. HART: Could I respond if I may. Without responding to Reverend Jackson's
qualifications and industrial or economic policy, there is another kind of
leadership that has to do with ideas and issues. Vice President Mondale cleverly
has picked up the slogan from a fast-food chain and tried to suggest that there
are no ideas or issues when he knows full well that they are in the form of a
book, in the form of strategy and position papers - quite detailed, quite
elaborate. The fact of the matter is that other candidates or the press or
whomever really isn't interested quite often in what industrial policies are,
what those detailed ideas are.

I went around this country for over a year preaching an industrial policy. I
think it's one of the most progressive. Leadership is taking the risk of putting
specific ideas out in the public arena knowing full well that your opponent can
take a shot at those. Conventional politics says don't state your ideas. Be
general, vague and rhetorical because you give less ammunition to your opponent.
The irony of this situation is I've given my opponents enormous ammunition and
they deny that it even exists.

MR. MONDALE:

You can read this whole book and the word civil rights isn't mentioned. There
have been two ideas that I have found that Mr. Hart has proposed and one is a
$10 tax on oil which will cost every resident, ever resident of Illinois $600 a
family and cost a half a million dollars

MR. HART: That's not . . .

MR. MONDALE: That is true and it's been studied because it makes everything
produced by American business or industry far more expensive than any others.
Yesterday or the day before in Detroit you came up with a proposal to spend $2
to $3 trillion on infrastructure. That works out to $100 billion a year and
would add about $100 billion as such to the deficit. He said this could be
funded by killing the B-1 or the MX. As Rostenkowski pointed out today that
wouldn't pay for one year's production. So the two key ideas that cost money are
all in my opinion bad ideas. We need new ideas but the real question is not new
ideas vs. old it's good vs bad. Who can get arms control, who can bring about a
reduction in international tensions, who has the experience and the background
to make a difference? Who will stand up and fight for that average American. I
suggest that in the race for new ideas I win with the experience; I've got the
background to handle the toughest job on earth and I believe the American people
are beginning to see that.

MR. JACKSON: On this industrial policy question: to give corporations a $750
billion tax break which is so large it traumatized the economy. If part of that
break had been the obligation to reinvest in this economy and and
reindustrialize it as opposed to going to slave labor markets abroad, it would
have been a good investment. If these corporations had gotten the tax break if
they located in a high unemployment zone, or if they located in rural America,
or if they built a day-care center at a job where a mother would have to get
neither workfare or welfare but to keep her family and go to work. Now there's
there's been the tax break. There must be a commitment to industrial
accountability for that to work. On the other hand, if we look at the military
budget, paying $150 billion a year to defend Japan and Europe, well now
demanding that they pay their share of that burden at this point, by reducing
those forces we cannot move. There's too much money locked into industrial
policy now without return and a military budget that any money left of any ideas
. . .

MR. HART: If Senator Mondale's staff had read beyond the index of this book to
paragraph three of the first page, they would have read these words: ''But to
prevail in the test of this country's character in that case, we must maintain
our commitments to equal rights and opportunity, to real progress and change in
the standard of living and quality of life for our people. We must continue to
demand justice, and we must also promise and hope for our young people, our
unemployed, our poor, our disadvantaged, our elderly.'' ' Now on the issue of .
. .

MR. MONDALE: Where's the words: civil rights. That's what I brought up. You have
that in there? Where is civil rights?

 MR. HART: I'd like to set the record straight on the $10-a-barrel tax. That was
a proposal that the Carter-Mondale Administration came around to support, and I
had the courage, one of 13 Senators, to support a tariff on imported oil, not
the one that I had proposed but frankly a worse one, because the one I proposed
would have rebated every cent of revenues to the consumers in this country. The
Carter-Mondale oil import fee in 1979 and 80 kept the revenues in the Federal
Treasury and it would have had the effect that Vice President Mondale says.

MR. MONDALE: That's not my plan, it was not a plan we proposed. Yours is a $10
fee on oil that will raise the cost of oil and energy in this nation to $60
billion. That works out to $600 a family and it will cost a half a million jobs
because American exports that are already not competitive will be so much more
expensive than any others that it will be a massive assault upon the competitive
structure of our country. This is a new idea but it's a bad idea and it should
be rejected.

The Carter proposal was for $4. It was carefully designed to hit just gasoline
and not the cost of production. This is an entirely new proposal. Mr. Hart, it
is wrong. Here in Illinois where this industrial base is teetering because of
the Reaganomics, this would be the worst single possible thing for Illinois and
I oppose it.



Israel's Capital



CAROL MARIN: You complained to the Council on Foreign Relations the other day
that the Reagan Administration has lectured Israel publicly, reassured her
privately. There is an insistent cry in some quarters demanding that the United
States move its Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. Should the United States do
that or not?

MR. HART: Yes, it should, and I have said as President I would do that.

MISS MARIN: And your reason for doing so?

MR. HART: Because that has been the tradition position Israel has taken as to
its own capital and it seems to me not to make a great deal of sense to have our
Embassy outside the West Jerusalem area where Israel has maintained that its
capital exists.

MISS MARIN: Reverend Jackson, would you agree with him?

Mr. JACKSON: It would be a mistake. At this point if that embassy were to shift
to Jerusalem, it would shift the balance of power. It would be certain to draw
more fire upon Israeli people at a time when we in fact need to move and be less
provocative. There are three ways we can help Israel, it seems to me. One is to
supply Israel, if necessary, with defensive weaponry. Secondly, to communicate
with Israel's enemies so as to neutralize them and stop them from being Israel's
enemy. Third is to use our influence and try to prevail upon Israeli leadership
not to make any provocative move that will make a complicated situation more so.
Even Saudi Arabia now, our embassy is not in the capital. And at this point
inasmuch as Jerusalem is a holy city for three great religions, that move would
show a tilt that would get a lot of people hurt.

MR. MONDALE: I strongly favor the transfer of our embassy to Jerusalem. Israel's
the only nation on earth, I believe, where our embassy is not in the capital of
the nation with which we have diplomatic relations.

MR. JACKSON: The most fundamental question is will that shift make Israeli
citizens more secure? It will not. It will jeopardize their lives more. Our
nation must move forth with a comprehensive Middle East plan. The genius of Camp
David, which Mr. Mondale supports, is that it was able to get Israel's biggest
enemy militarily to drop arms against Israel. One way to help Israel is supply
Israel arms. The other way is to get Israel's enemies to drop their arms. Good
leadership, given how delicate that matter is now, to try to prevail upon
Israel, the leadership, to be co-partners with us in a transition that would
have minimum violence and reaction.

MR. MONDALE: Can I just make one point though. I think one of the great acts of
courage by President Sadat, who was one of my heroes, was that he had the
courage to go to Jerusalem as the President of Egypt and address the Knesset. If
he can do that surely the United States, after all these years, can locate its
embassy in the capital of the nation with which we're having relations.


Closing Statements

MR. MONDALE: A few days ago I toured the Belvedere and went through the Chrysler
plant, and I had the privilege of driving out the millionth Omni car produced by
Chrysler. It was a thrilling experience. And afterwards one of the workers came
up to me, and he said, ''Mr. Mondale, thank you for helping us save our jobs.''
He said, ''It saved my life, because I have worked here 19 years, and if
Chrysler had gone down, so would I. My pension would be gone. I couldn't get
another good job - I've got gray hair, I know better than that. The plans for my
children would be destroyed, and now thanks to the fact that we've saved this
plant, life is great.'' He said everyone here feels the same way about it.

The Chrysler plan which I helped get through the Congress is a great success
story because it was based on cooperation. Workers put up a billion dollars in
deferred wages. Iacocca worked for a year for $1. The American people gave them
a loan, and now we've saved $600,000. Chrysler is profitable - they've paid back
their loan. The American people have made millions and millions of dollars in
profit, and we've got a healthier auto industry.

That is leadership, and it's based on two things. One, really caring about
people. I do. And secondly, pulling people together to work for the best of our
country. I'll do that. Give me your help.

MR. JACKSON: Even to think about the Chrysler matter, I support the idea of
sustaining Chrysler because our farmers, our vehicle producers need to be saved,
and our steel industry.

The fact is Chrysler has now closed 13 plants. They have now made a profit with
no obligation to reinvest in those workers to loosen up other plants. So Mr.
Iacocca has in many ways a big success story from the top down. The boats stuck
to the bottom are still there.

My concern is that there are five million people under Reagan now in poverty.
Five million more people. Two million children in poverty. Fifteen percent of
our nation by the end of this year from 34 million up to 41 million people
malnourished are in a state of poverty.

We must focus on boats stuck to the bottom. If, in fact, my campaign is a
success will be because I represent a new direction. Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart
are not willing to share the ticket with a woman. Opening up for women is the
way of the future for our party and for our nation. They want to raise the
military budget. You can't raise the budget and in fact rebuild America. We can
cut the budget without cutting without cutting defense. They resist parity for
the small farmers. We either have 90 percent parity or 100 percent charity.
Feed the farmer and let the farmer feed the nation.

Last of this, commitment to social justice. The willingness to enforce the
Voting Rights Act is a way to lift those boats from the bottom. I will work and
I will produce. I need your support.



MR. HART: This primary in Illinois, indeed this nomination and election race, is
a choice between the future and the past, between the special interests and the
national interest, between old leadership and new leadership. Old leaderships
and the special interests look to bail out companies sometimes after they're on
the verge of failure. That does not do the workers any particular favor and it
does their children no favor at all. What is needed is an anticipation of the
onslaught of foreign competition and an industrial policy in the 1970's that
will put all of our factories back on their feet, not just a few.

And there is another leadership issue having to do with an area we didn't touch
on tonight. That's called foreign policy. One of the issues that hasn't come up
in this debate in Illinois is our attitude about Central America. The leadership
of the past that failed to come out against the Vietnam War, against Lebanon and
now against our involvement in Central America is a leadership that says we have
to keep troops in Central America, that poverty is not the issue, it's
communism. I disagree with that. I disagree profoundly with Vice President
Mondale's opinion. I think our forces ought to come out of Central America and I
think this country ought to focus upon the real human needs of the people, not
only in this country but in the Third World, in Latin America, Africa and
Southeast Asia. If we do that, we will save hundreds of thousands of young
American lives.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter Mondale

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HART STRUGGLING TO KEEP SLIM LEAD FOR ILLNOIS VOTE

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1787 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, March 19


Gary Hart struggled today to protect what appeared to be a narrow lead among
Illinois voters, in the face of a determined effort by Walter F. Mondale to
catch up.

Mr. Mondale, trying to avoid a defeat in the year's first Democratic
Presidential primary in a major industrial state, pushed that effort in some of
the harshest verbal fighting of the campaign.

But Hart strategists were counting on a strong surge toward the Rev. Jesse
Jackson among black voters in

Two weeks before the New York primary, Mayor Koch endorsed Walter F. Mondale.
Page B11.

inner-city Chicago to help the Colorado Senator stave off Mr. Mondale.

Today's sharp exchanges underscored the tense nature of the Hart- Mondale
contest. Mr. Mondale once again suggested that Mr. Hart was too inexperienced
and ''naive'' to handle the stress of the Presidency. Mr. Hart released a
statement calling Mr. Mondale an outdated politician who ''has not learned the
lesson of Vietnam.''



Pre-Debate Lead Was Seen

Advisers in both the Hart and Mondale camps said today that Mr. Hart entered
Sunday night's one-hour televised debate here holding an advantage of three to
six percentage points over the former Vice President, according to most public
and private surveys of likely voters.

It is difficult to predict this group, however, making polls before a primary
less dependable than those conducted just before a general election.

And it was unclear today how the large television audience, estimated by one
poll taker at 60 percent of the voters, had responded to the combative three-way
debate among Mr. Hart, Mr. Mondale and Mr. Jackson.

Another, perhaps more important factor throwing a cloud of suspense over the
primary was the entanglement of the Presidential candidates in Chicago's
convoluted, racially charged local politics.

In that regard, Mr. Hart's strategists acknowledged that he had squandered a big
lead through several days of controversy over the content of his campaign
commercials attacking Alderman Edward R. Vdrolyak, the Democratic Party chairman
in Cook County.

At the same time, Mr. Mondale's effort to catch up was also hobbled by local
problems that appeared to be draining badly needed black votes from him.

Though Mayor Harold Washington, the first black Chicagoan to hold that office,
has not officially endorsed a Presidential candidate, he has been appearing here
with Mr. Jackson, the only black in the contest. Polls by the Hart campaign
indicate a growing trend among black voters toward Mr. Jackson, who lives here.

Mr. Mondale appears to be powerless to combat this situation, having chilled
relations with Mr. Washington by endorsing a rival, Richard M. Daley, in the
1983 mayoral primary.

Mr. Hart and Mr. Jackson have also urged local blacks to punish Mr. Mondale for
his acceptance of the endorsement of Mr. Vrdolyak, who is white and is the sworn
enemy of Mr. Washington in a fight over the future of the renowned City Hall
''machine.''

Commercial Didn't Stop


Today, Mr. Mondale focused on a Hart campaign commercial condemning Mr.
Vrdolyak's endorsement of the former Vice President. Saturday, saying the
commercial was too ''personal'' in its attack, Mr. Hart ordered it withdrawn.
But the 30-second spot continued to run on some Chicago television stations this
morning.

''If somebody wants to be President of the United States and they don't have the
power to cancel an ad they're paying for in less than 40 hours,'' Mr. Mondale
said in Peoria, ''there's a question about who's in charge here. What's going
on?''

Oliver C. Henkel, the Hart campaign manager, said the commercial had continued
to run because it was difficult to reach television station executives over the
weekend. Account executives at two Chicago stations said that so few people
worked weekends that it was, indeed, difficult to cancel advertising between
Friday night and Monday morning.

But Hart advisers said their candidate had suffered political damage from the
incident because of his reversed position rather than because of the content of
the commercial. Local television news was dominated by Mr. Hart's defense of the
ad on Friday night, his disowning of it on Saturday, and his inability to get it
off the air until today.

Slip Seen for Hart


The commercial was designed to underscore Mr. Hart's ''new ideas, new
generation'' theme by tying Mr. Mondale to ''Democratic bosses.'' Hart aides
said Mr. Vdrolyak was an unpopular symbol of boss-dominated ''machine politics''
among blacks and white Democrats living outside Chicago.

They said fatigue was the cause of Mr. Hart's erratic statements about the
commercial. A Mondale campaign official said that before the controversy of the
Vdrolyak commercial, Mr. Mondale was more than six percentage points behind Mr.
Hart. Since then, he contended, Mr. Hart has been slipping and Mr. Mondale
gaining.

''The question is where the lines cross,'' said the Mondale aide, who asked not
to be named. ''I think whatever minds were made up yesterday and today are going
to decide it. Part of it is going to have to do with our percentage of the black
vote, too.''

Despite their contention that Mr. Mondale was catching up, Mondale campaign
officials were positioning themselves to survive a defeat by playing down the
importance of Illinois, a state where, under their original plan, the former
Vice President intended to clinch the nomination.

Mondale in Minnesota


Now, the official Mondale campaign position is that the New York primary on
April 3 and the Pennsylvania primary on April 10 are more important than
Illinois to Mr. Mondale's survival.

Even if he wins the popular vote in Ilnois, Mr. Hart cannot overtake Mr.
Mondale's lead in delegates, because Hart delegates are filed for only 42 of the
116 seats at stake on Tuesday.

In another effort to boost his delegate count, Mr. Mondale flew to his native
Minnesota this afternoon. He is heavily favored to win a majority of the 75
delegates to be chosen there as the result of the Democratic-Farmer-Labor
Party's precinct caucuses Tuesday.

Meanwhile, Mr. Hart remained in Illinois, working to shore up suppport among
what his press secretary, Kathy Buskin, called ''wavering and unsure'' voters in
the 30-to-40 age group.

Such voters are essential to Mr. Hart's ''new generation'' candidacy, and in a
news conference and in a speech at the University of Illinois, he described Mr.
Mondale as a candidate who did not share their values on the use of military
force.

Presence in Honduras


''While I have called for immediate withdrawal of our troops from Honduras, Mr.
Mondale has been unwilling to call for such clear and decisive action,'' he said
in the prepared statement that set the tone for his remarks today. ''A major
difference between us is that he is unwilling to exert the leadership needed to
end our potentially dangerous involvement in this country and to stop sending
the sons of minorities and working people to serve as bodyguards for
dictators.''

In a news conference at the St. Louis airport, Mr. Hart also criticized Mondale
commercials featuring ''man-on- the-street'' interviews in which young men and
women condemn Mr. Hart as ''too inexperienced'' to be President.

''He's made an issue of experience, not character,'' said Mr. Hart. ''Clearly,
he's been in office a long time, longer than I have. He makes an argument of the
fact of the red phone and the button and all that. The question is what do you
learn in those experiences.''

Citing Mr. Mondale's support of the United States military presence in Central
America, Mr. Hart said Mr. Mondale was making the same mistake he made in
supporting the war in Vietnam. ''He was late to come out against Vietnam, a year
after President Nixon took office, one of the last leaders of our party to come
out against it, '' the Senator said.

Embassy in Israel


Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale fenced today over an issue raised in the debate Sunday.
Mr. Mondale accused Mr. Hart of misrepresenting his past position on moving the
American embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, an issue of special
importance to some Jewish voters.

Mr. Mondale said that in the past Mr. Hart had endorsed such a move on the
condition that it was approved by Saudi Arabia and other Arab nations.

Mr. Mondale, who has tried to depict Mr. Hart as an uncertain friend of Israel
and other allies of the United States, said the Arab nations ''will agree to
that when the sun comes up in the West.''

Mr. Hart said today that while he had in the past said the location of the
embassy might be a subject of negotiations based on the Camp David process, he
would as President ''be prepared to make that decision unilaterally and would do
so.''

Illinois

 History

Voters in Illinois primary elections have generally supported the eventual party
nominee. In 1976, Republicans chose President Ford over Ronald Reagan.  In 1980
they preferred Mr. Reagan to George Bush and John B. Anderson, and Democrats
went for President Carter over Senator Edward M. Kennedy.

The State

Northern Illinois is heavily industrialized, but southern Illinois cities and
towns are closer to Mississippi than to Chicago. More than 80 percent of state
is farmland; Illinois rivals Iowa as the nation's leading producer of corn.
Chicago, the nation's second most populous city, has the world's busiest airport
(O'Hare) and the world's tallest building (Sears Tower).

Candidates

Only President Reagan is listed on the Republican primary ballot. On the
Democratic ballot are Senator Gary Hart, the Rev. Jesse Jackson and former Vice
President Walter F. Mondale, as well as Reubin Askew, Senators Alan Cranston and
John Glenn, George McGovern and Betty Jean Williams, a Chicago resident. The
Presidential preference part of the ballot has no effect on the selection of
delegates.

Delegates

Illinois will send 194 delegates to the Democratic National Convention and 93 to
the Republican National Convention. Voters in the Democratic primary will elect
116 delegates, with 55 other pledged delegates to be selected later by state
Democratic leaders on the basis of the delegate election. Democratic leaders
also will select 23 unpledged delegates. Only Mr. Mondale has a full slate of
delegate candidates.

Voters

There are 6,052,488 registered voters. Voters are allowed to choose either a
Democratic or Republican ballot regardless of party affiliation . In 1980
1,321,810 residents voted in the Democratic primary and 1,171,708 voters chose a
Republican ballot.

Polling Hours

Polls will be open from 7 A,M. to 8 P.M. Eastern standard time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN CALLS SALVADOR AID FOES NAIVE

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 683 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 19


President Reagan, facing a Senate debate on his request for new military aid for
El Salvador, today denounced as ''naive or downright phony'' those who express
concern for human rights ''while pursuing policies that lead to the overthrow of
less-than-perfect democracies by Marxist dictatorships.''

In remarks at the White House, the President called on Congress to approve his
$93 million aid request, arguing that it was needed to protect Central America
from a takeover by the Soviet Union and its ''roving wolf'' of a proxy, Cuba.

With White House officials expecting a Senate floor vote on the aid request as
early as Wednesday, Mr. Reagan spoke of what he called the Soviet threat in the
hemisphere and depicted the issue of aid to the Salvadoran armed forces as vital
to overall foreign policy.

''If we don't give friends so close to home the means to defend themselves
against Soviet-supported insurgents, who will trust us anywhere in the world,
especially in the faraway Middle East and Europe?'' the President asked a
sympathetic gathering of Cuban-Americans at the White House.

Hungry Eyes and Sharp Teeth

''Like a roving wolf, Castro's Cuba looks to peace-loving neighbors with hungry
eyes and sharp teeth,'' he declared, according to the text of the address
released by the White House. In a departure from past practice at similar
ceremonies, the President's remarks were not relayed by sound system to the
press room so reporters could hear them. The White House said this decision was
made by the President's senior staff.

The President's spokesman, Larry Speakes, declined to say at the daily news
briefing whether the Administration might carry out a threat to use
discretionary funds for El Salvador if Congress declined to approve the aid
request. He said there was concern at the White House that such an action
''could change the Congressional attitude'' on the larger issue of long-range
aid plans for Central America ''if the President attempted to circumvent
Congress.''

Last week, the President insisted the $93 million in military aid was urgently
needed to help guarantee the security of El Salvador's elections, scheduled for
Sunday. Mr. Speakes said that ''every day that passes simply increases the
urgency.''

''It appears that the Salvadoran voters will once again go to the polls for an
election faced with a guerrilla strategy clearly intended to use violence to
prevent the vote,'' Mr. Speakes said, adding that recent statements by insurgent
leaders have cast doubt on earlier pledges not to disrupt the voting.

Human Rights Abuses

The Senate is expected to have a heated debate on the President's El Salvador
policy as well as on his request for $21 million in extra aid to insurgents
fighting the Nicaraguan Government. Critics of his El Salvador policy have been
focusing on human rights abuses, saying that the San Salvador Government has
tolerated the right-wing death squads that are believed to be responsible for
large numbers of political assassinations.

Addressing that criticism, the President said: ''To those who spend time
focusing on the flaws of our friends - and they are far from perfect - let me
just say we are all concerned about human rights. But I believe it is being
either naive or downright phony to express concern for human rights while
pursuing policies that lead to the ovethrow of less-than-perfect democracies by
Marxist dictatorships which systematically crush all human rights.''

Mr. Reagan said this had happened in ''countless countries, including
Afghanistan, Vietnam and, yes, Cuba.'' Referring to Central America, he added,
''We do not intend to let the Soviet Union, through its Communist Cuban proxies,
take over that region.''

The President described the troubles in Central America as ''a power play by
Cuba and the Soviet Union, pure and simple.'' Mr. Speakes said this statement
did not contradict the recent finding of a Presidential study commission that
those troubles are rooted in historic social and economic conditions, and
aggravated by Soviet influences.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE PENTAGON;
FOR MILITARY LEADERS, THE SHADOW OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1138 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 19


As military officers here talk about the invasion of Grenada and the deployment
of marines to Lebanon, or the possibility of fighting in Central America or the
Persian Gulf, the legacy of Vietnam is striking.

The colonels and captains, the lieutenant colonels and commanders who today are
the ''worker bees'' at the Defense Department were the Army and Marine Corps
company commanders, Air Force pilots and Navy ship's officers in Vietnam 15
years ago.

From their ranks will be drawn tomorrow's generals and admirals who will approve
war plans, sign position papers and advise the Secretary of Defense and the
President. The intellectual baggage and emotional scars they bring to those
tasks in the Pentagon will do much to mold their attitudes toward military power
and the advice they give.

Three Points


As those officers talk about the past and especially about the near future, many
slip into an imaginary pose in which they seem to address the President or the
Secretary of Defense. An Army colonel summed up three main points many officers
make, saying:


- ''Mr. President, don't send us to war unless you have clear-cut political
goals and attainable military objectives.


- ''Sir, don't send us unless you give us sufficient forces and enough freedom
of action to use them properly.


- ''And, Mr. President, you'd better have a lot of public support.''

Behind those injunctions is a deep belief that political leaders in the Vietnam
era failed to define their political goals and, instead, gave military
commanders shifting objectives. The officers contend they were prevented from
winning because strategy and tactics were restrained. They are vehement in
asserting that they were left to twist alone in the wind without public support
back home.

'An Ironclad Understanding'


For the most part, the officers are willing to discuss their thoughts freely,
but within the dictates of a military protocol that tells them to keep their
names out of the newspapers.

An Army lieutenant colonel emphasizes the need for a clearly defined mission:
''If I have to go again, I want an ironclad understanding of what it is you want
me to do.''

A Navy commander wants military professionals to be able to do their jobs: ''I
hope the people who are responsible for the care and feeding of the country
don't commit young men to a cause that they proscribe us from winning.''

A Marine Corps lieutenant colonel points to the split in the Vietnam era between
the armed forces and the American public and says: ''Don't get into a war
incrementally; don't try to have guns and butter at the same time.''

Some officers contend that there is nothing really new in what they say, that
they have just rediscovered basic principles dating back to Sun-tzu, the Chinese
statesmen of 2,500 years ago, and Karl von Clausewitz, the Prussian general in
the early 19th century.

Book Stirs Interest


Among the catalysts stirring interest in the lessons of Vietnam has been a book,
''On Strategy,'' by a colonel of infantry, Harry G. Summers Jr., of the Army War
College at Carlisle Barracks, Pa. His treatise is studied in most senior
military schools today.

Colonel Summers, who measured the Vietnam war against Clausewitzian principles,
said: ''On the battlefield itself, the Army was unbeatable. In engagement after
engagement, the forces of the Vietcong and of the North Vietnamese Army were
thrown back with terrible losses.

''Yet, in the end,'' he wrote, ''it was North Vietnam, not the United States,
that emerged victorious. How could we have succeeded so well, yet failed so
miserably?''

Another catalyst has been Gen. Edward C. Meyer, the former Army Chief of Staff
who retired last June. He openly warned against sending military forces to
Central America without public support. Since then, more officers have searched
for guidelines for the future.

Whether those officers will be able to persuade civilian superiors to heed their
advice is not certain. President Reagan has been more prone to deploy military
forces than his senior military advisers and has overridden their judgment in
Grenada and Lebanon.

Three Additional Points

Three other points frequently come up in conversations with military officers.

Some argue that military solutions ought not be sought for political and
economic problems.

Others say top generals and admirals should be more insistent in giving military
advice to political leaders.

Still others assert that military officers are more resistant than civilians to
contemplating the use of nuclear weapons.

An Army colonel, talking about Central America, says: ''The problems down there
are not military, they are political and economic. You shouldn't send soldiers
to solve political and economic problems.''

A Navy captain echoes the thought, saying that, in the services today, ''there's
a real appreciation that you can't solve every international problem by throwing
military force into it.''

A commander in the Navy brings up the question of military advice: ''I hope the
next time, the four-star generals and admirals find some way to register a
protest of they see the political leaders doing something that is militarily
unsound. The guys who wear four stars have a commitment to the nation itself,
not just the President.''

Pride in Being Apolitical


But that suggestion elicits caution from officers who take pride in being
apolitical. They warn against military challenges to civilian control. They
agree that military officers should speak freely within the councils of
government, but once a decision is made, they contend, the generals and the
admirals should salute and do what they are told.

The alternative, those officers say, is for a general or an admiral to resign
from his position and to retire from the service. In the next breath, they note
that there is little tradition in American military service for an officer to
fall on his sword.

On nuclear arms, several officers who have witnessed or taken part in war games
say civilian leaders have shown themselves to be more willing than military
officers to resort to those weapons in a simulated crisis.

An officer who organizes war games tried, in an experiment only with military
offficers, to rig the game so there was no choice except to fire nuclear weapons
or surrender. He says that even in those circumstances, officers squirmed every
which way to get out of the dilemma. In the end, he says, some refused to ''go
nuke.''

As military officers talk about their profession, their own values do not escape
scrutiny. In future battles, an army lieutenant colonel says, ''we must temper
all of our actions with honesty, integrity, ethics. There were people who set
aside their ethics in Vietnam.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HART ON 'LESSON OF VIETNAM'

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 589 words


Following is the text of a statement issued yesterday by Senator Gary Hart as he
campaigned in Illinois:

In the last few days of a campaign, the issues must inevitably come down to a
question of the kind of leadership each candidate offers. In this case, one
issue is clearly how each of us would address the foreign policy challenges of
the 1980's and 1990's.

There is a real difference, particularly in our approach to U.S. policy toward
Central America. Mr. Mondale says that Communism is the main threat in the
region and that the response requires U.S. military presence. I say the
principal threat in Central America is not Communism, but poverty, and that the
response must be cooperation with our allies to address the serious economic and
social problems in the region.

At the heart of this difference is, perhaps, the lesson of Vietnam. The
commitment of U.S. military force to Central America cannot be the answer to the
problems in Central America, as it was not the answer in Vietnam.

A Lesson Not Learned


A reading of Mr. Mondale's comments about Central America last week at the
Chicago Council on Foreign Relations suggests he has not learned the lesson of
Vietnam. While I have called for immediate withdrawal of our troops from
Honduras, Mr. Mondale has been unwilling to call for such clear and decisive
action. A major difference between us is that he is unwilling to exert the
leadership needed to end our potentially dangerous involvement in this country
and to stop sending the sons of minorities and working people to serve as
bodyguards for dictators.

I have been to Central America. I have seen the pain, the starvation and the
dying. I know that slipping into yet another unwinnable military struggle will
not feed the hungry children and house those who sleep in the streets.

History tells us that we gained more ground with the Good Neighbor policy than
we ever will with military action in Central America. We made more friends with
the Alliance for Progress than we ever will by tolerating death squads that
operate with our weapons. I have proposed a new alliance for democracy in the
greatest traditions of this country; Vice President Mondale is at odds with
those traditions.

Troops in Lebanon


Similarly Vice President Mondale was unwilling to oppose the Reagan
Administration's stationing of troops in Lebanon. He waited over a year to join
the call to remove the troops - and then did so only after the leadership of
both parties, the Pentagon, and public opinion itself judged the marines'
mission to be futile.

His caution on these issues should be of little surprise, however. On the
greatest foreign issue of our time, Walter Mondale did not question our policy
until the rest of the Democratic Party was already in dissent. When he finally
did speak out in October 1969 - a full year after Richard Nixon was elected - it
was because the issue had changed from one of principle to one of partisanship.

With the enormous and dangerous crises looming ahead in Central America and the
Middle East, can we afford Mr. Mondale's brand of ''experienced'' leadership?

We need a new kind of leadership that will not wait for consensus to form or
public opinion polls to turn. We need new leadership that is willing to
challenge a policy when lives are at stake. We need new leadership that is more
eager to share our bread than it is to share our weapons.

It is time for America to go forward again. And it is time for Illinois to chart
the way.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CARCINOGENS: A REVIEW OF 20 MAJOR CONTROVERSIES

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2401 words


The substances listed below, all of which have been found or are now present in
the workplace or general environment, are among the most widely cited of the
more than 100 chemicals known or suspected to have caused cancer in humans or
animals.  The chart indicates when and why these chemicals were banned or
regulated and whether they remain under study. Text: Ben A. Franklin.

Substance's Use AmitrolAmitrol, or aminotriazole, a herbicide developed in 1954,
is used to kill weeds along railroad tracks and on crop land.  Certified by the
Agriculture Department in 1958 for use on crop land only after harvest.  AN AN,
for acrylonitrile, is a volatile liquid, soluble in water, important in the
manufacture of synthetic fibers such as nylon, other plastics and rubber. Annual
production: 750,000 tons. Nearly half goes into acrylic fibers. Also in consumer
goods such as plastic kitchen and dinner ware, food and beverage packaging,
toys, luggage, automotive parts, small appliances and telephones.
ArsenicLargely a byproduct of copper and lead smelting. Occurs naturally in
small amounts in soil, minerals and some foods. Compounds are used in
pesticides, glass, ceramics, paints, dyes, wood preservatives and leather
processing. Annual production: 140,000 tons, plus 6,700 tons imported.
AsbestosFound in an estimated 5,000 products, including roofing and flooring
materials, thermal and electric insulation, wallboard, piping, caulking,
gaskets, clutch and brake linings, plastics, textiles, fireproof theater
curtains and paper products. Used as fireproofing in thousands of schools and
other public buildings after World War II.  BenzeneA major and rapidly
increasing raw material in the synthesis of chemical compounds, drugs and in the
rubber industry. Added as octane booster in gasoline and found in oil refinery
and coke oven emissions, shoe manufacturing adhesives, pesticides, inks and
paints. Highest ambient values in urban areas from motor vehicle emissions and
evaporation at gas stations. Annual production: 8 million tons.  DDT The
''miracle chemical'' of World War II, a synthetic, ''second generation''
pesticide discovered in 1939 and used to control typhus- and malaria-carrying
insects in wartime, reached peak agricultural use in 1959.  DES Synthetic sex
hormone DES, for diethylstilbestrol, was used increasingly from the 1940's,
particularly after 1960, as a prescription drug for pregnant women to deter
spontaneous abortion; and in veterinary medicine, from 1946 until it was banned
in 1979, as a livestock and poultry growth stimulant, thus entering the food
chain.  DioxinNot a product in itself. An unwanted, unavoidable contaminant in
the manufacture of some herbicides and defoliants such as Agent Orange, used in
Vietnam from 1962 to 1970, and 2,4,5-T, a World War II substance later widely
used commercially as a weed killer on U.S. pasture and range land.  EDB EDB, for
ethylene dibromide, is chiefly used as a chemical additive and scavenger of lead
oxide residues from the combustion of gasoline in automotive engines using
leaded fuel, but also as a pesticide and preplanting soil fumigant in
agriculture, principally in citrus.  tl Formaldehyde A colorless, pungent gas
most widely used, in a water solution called formalin, in plastics and in such
building materials as particle board, plywood and foaming home insulation
products.  Also in automotive parts, textiles, embalming fluid, room deodorants,
fungicides and as a fingernail hardener and preservative in cosmetics.  Hair
dyesUsed largely at home by millions of women and unknown numbers of men.
Beauticians are also exposed.  KeponeA pesticide used chiefly against fire ants
and in cockroach traps.  NickelIn a wide range of metal alloys in the
shipbuilding, aerospace and other heavy industries, and in a variety of
electroplating, chemical and catalyst applications. In ceramics, dyes, paints,
magnets, welding.  NitritesUsed since the time of prehistoric man (then in the
form of saltpeter) as a cure, or antibacterial preservative, for meat and fish.
Chemical reaction also gives bacon, hot dogs and cold cuts, for example, their
traditional red color. Also used to texture rubber and plastic products such as
infant pacifiers and nipples.  PCB'sFor polychlorinated biphenyls, a family of
synthetic compounds produced since 1929. Before 1972, used in electric
transformer coolants, in hydraulic fluids, lubricants, plasticizers, coatings,
sealants and pesticide extenders.  SaccharinFor 100 years an artificial,
non-nutritive sweetener. Until 1959, restricted for use as a prescription drug.
Since 1960 largely in soft drinks but also as a tabletop sweetener, in juices,
jellies, candy, chewing gum, cosmetics, toothpaste and in drugs as coatings on
pills. Virtually monopolized the market when cyclamates were banned as a
carcinogen in 1969.  Soots, coke and tarsCoke, or carbonized coal, is produced
in massive ''ovens'' for use in the extraction of metals from their ores,
particularly iron. Coke byproducts include tars and oils.  TobaccoSmoking,
chewing, sniffing. Cigarette smoke contains more than 3,000 chemical components,
including such carcinogens elsewhere on this list as arsenic, formaldehyde,
nitrites and vinyl chloride, plus benzo(a)pyrene and such ''organ-specific''
chemicals as N-nitrosonornicotine (esophagus) and NNK (lung, liver).  TRISFlame
retardant in textiles, fabrics, clothing, furnitire, toys and wigs. Widely used
in children's sleepwear after 1972 after a Congressional requirement in 1967
that garments of synthetic textiles be fire-retardant.  Vinyl chlorideA gaseous
raw material of plastics, floor tiles; formerly in a wide range of plastic food
packaging films and beverage containers, and formerly a propellant in aerosol
containers.

WhenDanger WasDiscoveredof Riskegulatory Action

Just before Thanksgiving in 1959

Federal health officials found some

cranberries contaminated before

harvest with amitrol, which had been

declared a carcinogen in animals earlier

that year. They urged people not to buy

cranberries.

In 1976 and 1977 laboratory tests

disclosed a high incidence of cancers

and birth defects in test animals. In

1977 du Pont reported epidemiological

evidence of an elevated rate of human

cancers in workers exposed to AN from

1950 to 1956. Reports in 1979 and

1982 showed that two groups of AN

workers studied for 10 years and 20

years had increased incidence of brain,

lung, bowel and prostate cancers.

As early as 1845 cancer was observed

among smelter workers. However, not

until 1969 did interest by the National

Cancer Institute disclose flaws in earlier

studies that masked the fact that the

rate of cancer of the lung and liver

among arsenic-exposed smelter

workers was at least triple that of the

general population.

In 1918 U.S. life insurance companies

stopped selling policies to asbestos

workers. By the 1930's asbestos was

still only a suspected carcinogen. A

British study in 1955 found lung cancer

mortality 10 times greater for asbestos

workers in comparison with others the

same age. The most definitive study of

cancer deaths among asbestos

workers, by Dr. Irving Selikoff of Mt.

Sinai Medical Center in New York, was

published in the 1970's.

Health hazards were long recognized

but, as in the case of asbestos, their

seriousness was ignored or

underestimated until the late 1970's.

Studies published from 1974 to 1977

linked benzene exposure directly to

increased leukemia among workers in

industries using benzene and the

general population.

Tests from 1947 to 1969 consistently showed DDT to be carcinogenic in

animals, but resistance to its continued

use was spurred by its persistence in

the food chain, long retention in fatty

body tissue and death of wildlife.

Carcinogenicity in animal tests as early

as 1938 was ignored. In 1971 young

women whose mothers had been given

DES in pregnancy began appearing

with uterine cancers, leading to the

discovery not only of elevated cancer

risks among the pregnant women

treated with DES but also among their

female offspring. This led to questioning

of DES in livestock feed.

There were findings of dioxin's acute

non-cancer toxicity in laboratory guinea

pigs and reports of non-cancer illness

among production workers exposed in

the 1950's to accidental spills of 2,3,5-

T. But dioxin was not isolated as a

carcinogen in rats until 1977. There is

so far no evidence of the

carcinogenicity of dioxin in humans or

of death from any dioxin-related cause

in man.

In 1975 and 1977 the National Cancer

Institute published evidence of EDB-

induced cancer in laboratory animals. In

1980 an E.P.A. study of EDB disclosed

possibly persistent contamination of fruit and grain fumigated in storage. By

1983 serious ground water

contamination was reported in Georgia,

California, Hawaii and Florida.

Toxic effects and formaldehyde's

characteristic as a strong sensitizer -

promoting acute reactions in exposed

persons - were observed when it went

into wide production after 1900. After

1975 epidemiological studies disclosed

increased cancers among such

occupationally exposed groups as

beauticians and morticians.

In 1977 tests suggested a link between

the widely used compound 4-methoxy-

m-phenylenediamine (4-MMPD) and

cancer of the breast and bladder. The

F.D.A. was petitioned for a warning

label. Manufacturers voluntarily

withdrew some components. The

National Cancer Institute began testing

ingredients in 1973.

In a public health detective story that

began in the summer of 1975, a Virginia

doctor sent blood samples to the U.S.

Centers for Disease Control taken from

Kepone production workers he was

seeing as patients. The patients had a

variety of severe neurological

symptoms. Hurried animal tests of

carcinogenicity were begun.

In 1932 British investigators found

cancers of the lung and nasal passages

among nickel workers in Wales.



WhenDa nger

WasDiscoveredof Riskegulatory Action

Tests in 1970's confirmed that nitrites

used in the curing of meat products

synthesized nitrosamines, many of

which are carcinogenic. Nitrosamines

originating in automobile exhausts were

linked to cancer in the 1970's.  In the early 1970's scientists identified

PCB's as a persistent contaminant of

fish. A report in 1976 said PCB's were

entering the human food chain in fish,

cheese, eggs and animal feed.

Feeding tests on laboratory animals

since 1948 have produced bladder

cancer and leukemia in rats.

Coal soot was found in 1775 to be

causative agent in cancer among

chimney sweeps. Study in 1971 found

deaths among coke oven workers from

respiratory cancer to be twice that of

steel workers as a group, and N.T.P.

says evidence of carcinogenicity is

''overwhelming.''

There is debate over whether the

carcinogenicity of tobacco was first

noticed 223 years ago or 189 years

ago. But modern scientific studies were

not published until the 1920's and

1930's. The first major retrospective

proof of a direct association of cigarette

smoking with lung cancer came in

1950.

The bromine-phosphate basis of Tris

aroused concern among scientists in

1973. A study published in 1977 by the

National Cancer Institute documented

cancer in test animals.


In 1974 the B.F. Goodrich Chemical

Company informed NIOSH that four

workers in Louisville died of rare liver

cancer possibly related to vinyl chloride

exposure.Substance's Use

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE parade of chemicals that cause cancer seems endless

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 2; Science Desk

LENGTH: 3563 words


Today, the focus of public and regulatory attention is EDB, or ethylene
dibromide, a pesticide that was widely used to fumigate grain, citrus fruit and
soil until residues were detected in drinking water and food products.

AFTER YEARS OF CANCER ALARMS,PROGRESS AMID THE MISTAKES Yesterday, it was
dioxin, a contaminant found in many chemical products, including Agent Orange,
the herbicide used to defoliate the jungles of Vietnam.

And before that, stretching back a decade or more, the roster of commercial and
industrial chemicals suspected or known to cause cancer included the pesticides
DDT and Kepone; the artifical sweeteners cyclamate and saccharin; the synthetic
hormone DES; the industrial chemicals asbestos, vinyl chloride, benzene,
formaldehyde and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's); such consumer products as
hair dyes and children's nightgowns treated with Tris, a flame retardant; and
even such common items in the American diet as coffee and charcoal-broiled
steaks.

These and dozens of other substances like them were accused of causing cancer
and often other health or environmental damage. Each flared briefly into public
prominence, generating headlines, scientific debate and political or legal or
regulatory proceedings. In the end most were subjected to regulatory
restrictions or, in a few cases, banned entirely. Each then disappeared from
public debate, to be replaced shortly by the next ''carcinogen of the month.''
This chemical carcinogens, among all the causes of cancer, have for the most
part attracted the greatest amount of public and regulatory attention.

What has it all added up to? Are we being bombarded relentlessly by one manmade
chemical carcinogen after another in a losing war against cancer? Or are we
making steady progress in our efforts to control the hazards of carcinogenic
chemicals?

Although virtually any statement made about the role of chemicals in cancer is
subject to dispute by one expert or another, recent interviews with more than
two dozen cancer and health experts suggest the main lines of development over
the last decade can be summarized in these ways:


- Commercial and industrial chemicals, the kind that typically raise alarm when
detected at unexpected levels in food, air, water, soil, consumer products or
the workplace, cause only a small proportion of the nation's 450,000 annual
cancer deaths, probably less than 10 percent by the most widely accepted
estimates.


- Even so, such chemicals remain a significant health problem, causing tens of
thousands of cancer deaths each year that could potentially be prevented.


- Substantial progress has been made in assessing the extent of the carcinogen
problem, establishing regulatory mechanisms and reducing exposures, although the
extent of the progress cannot be measured and enormous gaps remain in regulatory
surveillance.


- The impression that carcinogens are cropping up everywhere results, in part,
from astonishing advances in analytic instruments that can detect chemicals in
food or the environment in minute quantities, whose biological significance is
uncertain. Scientists can find chemicals present in concentrations of one part
per billion, roughly equivalent to measuring one second in a period of 33 years.


- Many mistakes have been made in coping with individual chemical carcinogens as
the nation moves from one chemical alarm to another in seemingly haphazard
fashion. Regulators and Government officials have often been slow to act against
economically important carcinogens until the evidence of their hazard becomes
inescapable, and then have sometimes overreacted to ease public anxiety or
outrage. Regulators also sometimes ban one chemical carcinogen only to replace
it with an alternative that is as bad or worse.


- The magnitude of the job ahead appears daunting. An enormous amount of work
remains in testing, assessing and controlling exposures to chemical carcinogens.


- The fundamental problem is scientific ignorance, which prevents a more
coherent approach to carcinogens. Only when scientists learn the precise
mechanisms by which cancer is caused and the role chemicals play in the process
will they be in a position to abandon their chemical-by- chemical attack and
adopt a more comprehensive program of prevention and cure, some experts say. The
most optimistic among them predict the disappearance of cancer as a major health
problem by the end of the century.

Chemical Threat: How Great Is It?

The last decade has seen a striking shift of opinion among Government officials
and many scientists in the importance attached to chemical carcinogens.

In the 1970's, a decade of great environmental sensitivity, Government officials
and scientists emphasized the role of manmade chemicals encountered in the
workplace or the general environment as a major cause of disease, including
cancer.

In 1978, for example, Joseph A. Califano, Secretary of Health, Education and
Welfare, warned the nation was headed for an alarming increase in cancer deaths
from occupational chemical exposures. He based his warning on an estimate,
attributed to 10 distinguished Government scientists, that 20 percent to 38
percent of all cancers in the near future would be caused by workplace exposures
to just six industrial chemicals: asbestos, arsenic, benzene, chromium, nickel
oxides and petroleum fractions. These themes dominated news coverage of cancer
issues. Studies of articles about cancer in the country's 50 largest daily
newspapers in 1977 and 1980, conducted by the National Cancer Institute, found
the most frequently mentioned causes of cancer were environmental pollutants,
job- related exposures to carcinogens, and chemicals or additives, according to
a report in the 1984 winter issue of the Journal of Communication.

But now the official emphasis has shifted. On March 6, while beginning a new
cancer prevention program, Margaret M. Heckler, Secretary of Health and Human
Services, stressed that the two major causes of cancer were smoking and diets
that were low in fiber and high in fat. She estimated that only 7 percent of all
cancers were caused by environmental and occupational exposures or chemical food
additives.  The shift may partly reflect the differing approaches of the Carter
Administration, with its emphasis on Federal actions to safeguard the
environment, and the Reagan Administration, with its emphasis on self-help
solutions rather than regulation. Myra Karstadt, a cancer analyst at the Mount
Sinai Medical Center in New York, said she believes many of the most
environmentally sensitive scientists of the 1970's have left the Government or
been relegated to lesser jobs.

But the shift goes deeper than that, reflecting a major change in the weight
given to particular scientific analyses by policymakers and many scientists.

The scientists most responsible for this change are two British epidemiologists,
Sir Richard Doll and Richard Peto of Oxford University, who analyzed American
cancer mortality rates for the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment.
Their findings were published in The Journal of the National Cancer Institute in
June 1981. Both researchers are world-renowned in their field.

After analyzing a wide range of scientific reports, cancer rates, population
groups and places, the two scientists concluded carcinogens in the workplace,
environment, food additives and industrial products cause fewer than 8 percent
of American cancer deaths.

They attributed two-thirds of all cancer deaths to two factors: tobacco, which
was firmly estimated to cause 30 percent of all cancer deaths, and diet, which
was less confidently estimated to cause 35 percent.  By diet, they did not mean
chemical additives or chemical pollutants that invade the food supply. Rather,
they meant such dietary factors as carcinogens that appear naturally in food, an
excess of fats that increase the production of carcinogens in the body, a lack
of fibers that flush potential carcinogens out of the bowels, and a variety of
other nutritional factors that affect the formation and transport of carcinogens
in the body. The British scientists also estimated viruses and other infectious
agents cause 10 percent of the nation's cancer deaths; sexual and reproductive
factors, 7 percent; alcohol, 3 percent, and other factors lesser amounts.

Most leading cancer institutions and experts think the Doll and Peto estimates
are generally accurate, at least when it comes to defining the limited role of
commercial and industrial chemicals in causing cancer.

Frank J. Rauscher Jr., a top official of the American Cancer Society, said in an
interview that ''a remarkably small percentage of cancers so far'' can be traced
to chemical carcinogens, exclusive of those in tobacco. And Richard Adamson, a
top official at the National Cancer Institute, said, ''We're comfortable with
the Doll-Peto estimates.''



A New Viewpoint

A second factor that has caused at least one prominent scientist to switch sides
in the debate over manmade chemical carcinogens is a new emphasis on carcinogens
made by nature. The scientist, Dr. Bruce Ames, of the University of California
at Berkeley, was the developer of the most widely used rapid laboratory test,
the so-called ''Ames test,'' for detecting the probable carcinogenicity of
chemicals.

Just a few years ago Dr. Ames was warning of ''enormous possible carcinogenic
risks'' from industrial chemicals and was battling against Tris in children's
clothing, carcinogens in hair dyes and high levels of ethylene dibromide in
California workplaces. But then he started studying the carcinogenicity of
natural substances found in food and changed his emphasis.

''I think the whole field is going to change enormously now,'' Dr. Ames said in
an interview. ''I came into the field because I was worried about manmade
chemicals being produced in enormous amounts. But in the last few years an
incredible amount of natural carcinogens have been found out there. I think we
got off on the wrong track. We're concentrating almost exclusively on little
bits of pollution and manmade things and completely ignoring enormous amounts of
natural mutagens and carcinogens. I'm starting to question our whole way of
thinking.''

Some of the country's most eminent biomedical leaders believe the public has
overreacted to repeated alarms over chemical carcinogens. Joshua Lederberg, a
Nobel Prize-winning geneticist who is president of The Rockefeller University in
New York, lamented in an interview, ''Every day there is a new cancer scare
about the impact of minute amounts of specific chemicals.'' Not one of these
chemicals, he said, can compare to the impact of tobacco in causing lung cancer
or of hormonal influences in causing female breast cancer.

Similarly, Lewis Thomas, president of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
in New York, warned in a recent essay that the fear of cancer ''is reaching
epidemic proportions these days.'' He cited the national scare over dioxin as an
issue that ''got out of hand.'' He said there was ''no acceptable evidence as
yet'' that dioxin has caused any sort of cancer in man.

However, some scientists warn that cancer deaths from chemicals could surge in
the future. There has been a sharp increase since the 1960's in the production
of artificially produced organic chemicals that cause cancer. Since it usually
takes 15 to 40 years for cancer to develop after first exposure to a carcinogen,
scientists for years have been nervously watching for changes in cancer
mortality rates.  A few scientists assert the first evidence of a possible
chemically caused surge in cancer is already here. Devra Lee Davis, Abraham D.
Lilienfeld and Alan Gittleson, all associated with Johns Hopkins University,
reportedly contend that ''epidemic increases'' in multiple myeloma, brain and
lung cancers can already be detected among elderly whites, a group that has
presumably been exposed to industrial chemicals for the longest period and thus
would have the greatest likelihood of developing cancer by now. The Doll-Peto
analysis excluded the elderly from consideration on the ground that the data
were unreliable, but the Johns Hopkins scientists, in a paper presented to
seminars at several major universities, reportedly argue that the data are
reasonably accurate.


Extent of Progress

There are no good measures of progress in the fight against chemical
carcinogens, but many scientists believe there have been significant gains both
in assessing the risk of chemicals and in controlling exposures to those deemed
hazardous.

''It's hard to say how much progress we're making, but we're certainly better
off than we were 5 or 10 years ago,'' said David Rall, director of the National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, based in North Carolina.

Ellen Silbergeld, a top biologist for the Environmental Defense Fund, agreed.
''We're playing catch-up, but I think we've made a good beginning on testing and
regulating chemical carcinogens,'' she said.

The most important advance in testing over the last decade has been the
development of laboratory tests that use microorganisms or cell cultures to
assess the potential carcinogenicity of chemicals in a matter of days or weeks.
Approximately 100 such tests have been described in scientific literature. None
are trusted to give a definitive answer and virtually all are apt to miss whole
classes of carcinogens. But chemical companies and Government agencies are using
the tests to provide a quick indication of which chemicals are most likely to be
carcinogenic.

There has been no comparable advance in improving the mainstays of carcinogen
evaluation: epidemiological studies of humans exposed to toxic chemicals and
long-term animal tests. Although epidemiological studies are considered the
strongest evidence of hazard to humans, relatively few are conducted. Such
studies seldom detect cancer caused by low levels of chemical exposure, and have
difficulty apportioning the blame for a cancer when a variety of chemical agents
is present. And because cancer takes so long to develop after first exposure to
a carcinogen, by the time epidemiologists detect it much damage has already been
done.

Animal tests are considered the next best thing in the absence of human data,
but scientists often disagree on whether the effects seen in mice or rats given
high doses of a chemical will necessarily occur in humans at lower doses. Animal
tests are costly and can take two or three years to complete.

Were it not for the short-term tests, the job of evaluating chemicals for
possible carcinogenic hazards would seem hopeless. A report on ''Toxicity
Testing'' issued by the National Research Council this month estimated that some
53,500 different chemicals were potentially important in American commerce. New
chemicals are being introduced at a rate of 500 to 1,000 a year.

How many of these may ultimately be found carcinogenic is anybody's guess. Many
scientists assume that there cannot be any substantial number of potent
carcinogens in the lot, otherwise the epidemiologists would be finding more
chemically caused cancer. But nobody knows for sure.



Chemicals Linked to Cancer

There is strong evidence that at least 116 chemicals or processes can cause
cancer. Only 22 substances or processes are definitely known to cause cancer in
humans, according to the National Toxicology Program's latest annual report on
carcinogens, issued in 1982, while another 94 substances ''may reasonably be
anticipated to be carcinogens'' based on animal tests or limited human data.

The National Research Council concluded that there is a major testing job still
to be done. It estimated that ''thousands or even tens of thousands of
chemicals'' are candidates for further tests of their toxic effects, including
carcinogenicity.  But Federal regulators express confidence that, with the help
of short-term tests and other assessment techniques, the testing job is
ultimately achievable.

As for the second half of the job - controlling or eliminating hazards once they
are identified - the Federal Government passed important new laws in the 1970's
that permitted stronger regulation of chemical carcinogens in the environment,
the workplace and commerce and industry. Implementation of the new laws has been
spotty. But the regulatory framework, at least, is in place.

Most scientists and regulators believe the workplace has become much cleaner
over the last decade or two, at least at the biggest, most responsible
companies. They see indications that the companies are adopting cleaner
production systems, phasing out hazardous blue-collar jobs and trying to avoid
liability suits by producing cleaner materials. But there is scant data
available to document these trends for certain. There is no national monitoring
system to estimate either the total chemical exposures received by the
workforce, or the health of the nation's workers, or the levels of carcinogens
present in consumer products. It was an unpleasant surprise, to the regulators,
when they hurriedly tested food products for EDB residues and found levels they
never expected.

The regulators have moved to restrict exposures to a wide variety of chemical
carcinogens over the last decade, and whatever dangers were posed by these
specific chemicals have almost certainly been reduced. But the impact on health
is not measurable.

The National Toxicological Program, which is required by law to evaluate the
effectiveness of Federal regulations in decreasing the risk to public health,
called this ''perhaps the hardest task'' of all because virtually all the key
laws were passed within the last 15 years, too recently to exert a measurable
impact on cancer rates.

The chief complaint about the regulatory system is that it seems to move
sluggishly and haphazardly, dealing with one apparent crisis after another, in
relative isolation. ''Except for responding to a few crisis situations as they
arise, we haven't really come to grips with the problem,'' said Samuel S.
Epstein, professor of occupational and environmental medicine at the University
of Illinois medical center in Chicago.

Critics also complain that chemical-by-chemical regulation has put the nation on
a treadmill going nowhere. The pesticide DBCP was suspended in 1979 because of
reproductive and cancer hazards, only to be replaced by EDB, which is now being
phased out as a cancer and reproductive hazard. One of the most prominently
mentioned alternatives to EDB is methyl bromide, which is suspected of causing
cancer itself.

Perhaps the classic case of industrial and governmental failure to avert tragedy
has been the handling of asbestos. Although asbestos was proved to cause lung
disease early in this century, lung cancer by the 1950's and mesolthelioma by
the early 1960's, it was only after new regulatory laws were passed in the
1970's that significant action was taken to reduce exposures in the workplace.
But much damage has already been done. Asbestos is believed to be causing more
cancer deaths than any other carcinogen used in commerce and industry, exclusive
of those in tobacco.


Improving the System

Many scientists fault the chemical- by-chemical approach to eliminating
carcinogens. But given the current state of knowledge, few suggest anything but
minor incremental improvements. Some suggest that regulators try to assess whole
categories of chemical products simultaneously, to avoid trading one chemical
risk for another that may be worse. Others seek a consistent Federal carcinogen
policy to replace the chaos of fragmented regulatory agencies. Still others
insist that more teeth be put into existing regulation so that industry can be
compelled to produce vitally needed estimates of human exposure and chronic
toxicity. And many want far better monitoring of exposure in the environment,
the food supply and the workplace.

But the most fundamental problem, many say, is lack of scientific understanding.
Despite rapid advances in molecular biology in recent years, scientists still do
not know much about how chemicals cause or promote cancer, or about the
mysterious processes that go on in the body during that long lag period between
first exposure to a carcinogen and the appearance of cancer, or about the
biological impact of minute doses of a carcinogen. They also do not know enough
about the basic biology of animals and humans to permit translating the results
of an animal experiment into an accurate, quantitative risk assessment for
humans.

With greater knowledge, some say, scientists might be able to determine if there
are ''safe'' levels for some carcinogens. They might be able to devise antidotes
to counteract the impact of carcinogens or to repair the damage caused by
carcinogens. They might even, some optimists assert, be able to wipe out cancer
as a major disease by the turn of the century.

But for now, the nation is faced with the need for action in the face of
uncertainty. ''Our knowledge base is still not solid enough despite an enormous
amount of work,'' said William W. Lowrance, a risk assessment expert and
director of the life sciences and public policy program at The Rockfeller
University. ''I'm deeply frustrated by the whole problem. We're at the
scientific boundaries.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of pcb drum(pg.c-13); drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 365 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 21, 1984 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

LOOKING AT PERILS OF TOXICITY

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Cultural Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 485 words


THE cinema of contamination, which has grown timely enough to have engendered
commercial hits such as ''The China Syndrome'' and ''Silkwood,'' has two more
hard-hitting documentaries to add to its roster. Jacki Ochs's ''Secret Agent,''
which was shown at last year's New York Film Festival, details the illness and
the indignation of Vietnam veterans who were exposed to Agent Orange, and
contends that the manufacturers of this chemical withheld evidence of its
toxicity from the United States Government. Disturbing as ''The Secret Agent''
is, its co-feature at the Film Forum, ''SL-1,'' is even tougher.

''SL-1,'' made by C. Larry Roberts and Diane Orr, is a grisly meticulous
examination of the details of a nuclear accident. The explosion took place in
1961, at the Atomic Energy Commission's SL-1 reactor in Idaho Falls, Idaho.
Three workers were killed, and there was evidence that one of them, in the midst
of marital problems, might have triggered the accident deliberately.

The film makers consider this question of motivation, and try to speculate about
what might have induced the man to do such a thing. But they concentrate on
well-documented, utterly horrifying minutiae. Disposal of the three bodies and
removal of radioactive waste in and around the reactor eventually exposed 790
people to harmful levels of radiation, despite elaborate attempts to alleviate
the danger.

A worker attempting a cleanup mission in the reactor would typically spend four
hours suiting up and then showering, and for all that would only accomplish
eight minutes of actual work. Parts of the bodies of the three dead men had to
be removed and buried separately, because they were ''hot'' enough to be
considered high- level nuclear waste. This surgical work had to be performed
using knives and hacksaws fastened to the ends of long poles. Truly, this was -
as someone in the film describes it - ''a new way to die.''

The film makers' style is one of grim understatement, and it is highly
effective. Using documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act to
reconstruct the story, and making especially chilling use of a Government-filmed
re-enactment of the disaster, they create an enormously sobering record of the
accident, its lessons and its legacy.

Agent Orange

THE SECRET AGENT, directed by Jacki Ochs; edited by Daniel Keller and Jacki
Ochs; music by Country Joe McDonald; produced by Mr. Keller and Jacki Ochs; a
Green Mountain Post Film/Human Arts Association Production; distributed by First
Run Features. At the Film Forum, 57 Watts Street. Running time: 56 minutes. This
film has no rating. Narrated by Max Gail.

Three Bodies

SL-1, produced, directed, written, photographed and edited by Diane Orr and C.
Larry Roberts; music by Brian Eno, Popol Vuh; a Beecher films Production;
distributed by direct Cinema, Ltd. At the Film Forum, 57 Watts Street. Running
time: 60 minutes. This film has no rating.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 21, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE IS ILLINOIS WINNER; HART 2ND AFTER STIFF BATTLE; JACKSON,3RD, RUNS
STRONGLY

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1222 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, March 20


Walter F. Mondale defeated Gary Hart in the Democratic Presidential primary in
Illinois tonight, achieving a hard-fought victory he needed to put new life into
his candidacy.

The Rev. Jesse Jackson was running a strong third in a contest that marked the
start of the nomination battle in the big industrial states. Mr. Jackson, the
only black candidate in the contest, was riding a wave of minority support.

Although Mr. Jackson pulled black votes that probably would have gone to Mr.
Mondale, the former Vice President made up for that by running much more
strongly than Mr. Hart among white voters in Chicago and by getting up to 40
percent of the vote in Hart strongholds in the rural and suburban areas.



Hart Acknowledges Defeat


Acknowledging his defeat in Washington, Mr. Hart stressed Mr. Mondale's
advantage in union support and more numerous campaign appearances in Illinois.

''That was a terrible hurdle for me to overcome, and I don't consider tonight's
loss that big a loss,'' the Colorado Senator said.  In addition to winning the
popular vote, Mr. Mondale was also expected to win a large share of the
delegates chosen today in a separate vote. Hart delegates were running for only
42 of the 116 seats at stake, while Mr. Mondale had delegate candidates for
every seat.



The Vote Tally


With 8,820 of 11,640 precincts, or 76 percent, reporting, the vote was: Mondale*
513,975 (41%)Hart* 452,412 (36%)Jackson* 231,345 (19%)

Elsewhere today, Democrats in Mr. Mondale's native state, Minnesota, convened in
caucuses that started at 9 P.M. Eastern standard time. The former Vice President
was expected to win a majority of the 75 delegates to be selected. Early returns
confirmed this, with Mr. Mondale holding a commanding lead and uncommitted
delegates running second, far ahead of Mr. Hart and Mr.  Jackson.

Both Hart and Mondale strategists expected the popular vote in Illinois to be
more important than the delegate count in determining which candidate would be
perceived as the popular favorite going into the New York primary on April 3 and
the Pennsylvania primary on April 10. These contests are now regarded as
potentially decisive events in the increasingly bitter Hart- Mondale contest.
''The thing I'm most pleased about is this,'' Mr. Mondale said tonight in St.
Paul, Minn. ''I think this primary got the debate on the only question that
matters, namely who would make the best President of the United States.'' Mr.
Mondale focused the debate through a series of speeches and commercials raising
questions about Mr. Hart's experience, character and personality. But Mondale
strategists said today that victories in Illinois and other big primaries to
come were essential for a reason beyond shaping the campaign debate.  After his
defeat in the New Hampshire and Florida primaries, Mr. Mondale desperately
needed a major primary victory to show popular support to go along with the
delegate strength he had amassed in the caucus states. In that regard, Illinois
represented a breakthrough state for Mr. Mondale. His strategists were also
counting on the victory today to help sustain their campaign through the
Connecticut primary next Tuesday, which they expect Mr. Hart to win.

Mr. Mondale's showing here represented a strong, late comeback. Five days ago,
most public and private public opinion surveys showed him three to six
percentage points behind Mr. Hart.

But when the Colorado Senator became mired in controversies created by his
campaign commercials and a series of erratic public statements, Mr. Mondale
mounted a strong drive that apparently gained force over the weekend and peaked
just as the voters started to the polls.

The voting came after a week of grinding campaigning in which fatigue began to
show in the candidates' appearance and behavior.

Mr. Hart, in particular, suffered from a series of misstatements that, according
to his strategists, cost him his lead in the polls.

Problems With Commercials


He first ran into problems Thursday, when he accused Mr. Mondale of attacking
his character by using television commercials noting that Mr. Hart had changed
his name and signature and had subtracted a year from his true age, 47, in some
official documents.

When it was discovered that no such commercials existed, Mr. Hart apologized.
But Mr. Mondale, saying Mr. Hart seemed ''unnerved,'' used the incident to push
his argument that Mr. Hart was not seasoned enough to be President.

Then, on Friday and Saturday, Mr. Hart got mired in another controversy of his
own creation. He first defended and then ordered withdrawn a Hart campaign
television commercial condemning the endorsement of Mr. Mondale by Alderman
Edward R. Vrdolyak, the Democratic Party chairman in Cook County, who is in a
bitter local fight with Mayor Harold Washington.

Even after Mr. Hart disavowed his commercial, it continued to run through the
weekend. Mr. Mondale seized on Mr. Hart's inability to get the commerical off
the air as further evidence that he was too ''naive'' to be President.

Hart Lead in Polls Shrank


To the dismay of Mr. Hart's strategists, reports about the Vrdolyak commercial
dominated television news programs in Chicago throughout the weekend.

Mr. Mondale's television commercials included interviews in which people
depicted as average voters said they regarded Mr. Hart as ''inexperienced'' and
lacking the toughness needed to deal with Communist countries.

Illinois voters, accustomed to rough- and-tumble local campaigns, also saw some
of the toughest verbal fighting and commercials of the Presidential contest. Mr.
Hart hammered at the former Vice President as a candidate who ''has not learned
the lesson of Vietnam,'' citing Mr. Mondale's support of the United States
military presence in Central America.

Local Struggle Evident


Mr. Hart complained Monday that, despite the foreign policy debate between him
and Mr. Mondale, their battle had ''focused too much on local politics.''
Indeed, the candidates continually were confronted with problems created by the
convoluted, racially charged political atmosphere here.

These problems threatened to hamper Mr. Mondale's effort to catch up. By
accepting the endorsement of Mr. Vrdolyak, who is white, Mr. Mondale chilled his
relationship with Mayor Washington, who is black. The two men are fighting over
control of City Hall and over the future of the renowned patronage ''machine''
that Mr. Washington is trying to dismantle.  Although officially uncommitted,
Mr. Washington helped spur black turnout for Mr. Jackson, who pulled minority
votes needed by Mr. Mondale.  Despite a strong vote in Chicago, Mr. Jackson
appeared unlikely to win as many delegates as he would have if Mr. Washington
had not run 43 delegates pledged to him as a ''favorite son'' in six heavily
black Congressional districts. Mr. Jackson was running 32 delegates.  In
Illinois, the delegate count was lagging far behind the count on the popular
vote. But the final result seemed certain to enhance Mr. Mondale's lead. Going
into today's contest, he had 542 of the 1,967 delegates needed for the
nomination, according to United Press International.  Mr. Hart had 318, Mr.
Jackson 79, and 267 delegates were uncommitted.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jesse Jackson(pg.B-8); photo of Walter Mondale

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 21, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS WATCHDOG GROUP TO VOTE ON ITS FUTURE

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 642 words


The National News Council, a private organization that sought to be journalism's
watchdog, will vote Thursday either to disband or to suspend operations,
according to Richard S. Salant, the organization's president.

The organization struggled since 1973 to gain acceptance as an investigative
body with recognized power to judge news coverage and ethical questions.
Yesterday, Mr. Salant acknowledged that the organization had not been effective.

''We didn't make much of a dent,'' he said, ''but we're not going to let the
idea die.''

Options for Organization


Mr. Salant said the 15-member council might send the organization's files to the
Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, the University of Minnesota
or another institution for study by scholars. Another possibility, he said, is
to suspend operations and reorganize at a later date, perhaps in a different
form.

Backers of the National News Council considered it an effort to make news
organizations and the public more aware of questions of accuracy and fairness
and viewed it as a lightning rod to fend off anti-journalism sentiment. The
organization was created in response to some public charges that news coverage
of Vietnam, the Nixon Administration and Watergate was inaccurate and unfairly
critical of participants in the events.

Founders of the group hoped it would be embraced by both journalists and the
public as a recognized, if voluntary, forum in which to examine journalism's
performance.

But while a few news organizations, such as CBS News and The Courier- Journal
and Louisville Times Company of Louisville, Ky., gave the effort full support,
much of the news industry did not cooperate or cooperated only tepidly.

Backers and Opponents


''An editor is accountable to his readers, and not to some self-appointed
group,'' said Creed Black, president of the American Society of Newspaper
Editors and chairman of The Lexington (Ky.) Herald-Leader, who was long an
opponent of the National News Council.

But Eugene C. Patterson, president and editor of The St. Petersburg Times and a
former president of A.S.N.E., expressed sorrow at the council's apparent demise.

''It depended on a larger number of us supporting it,'' he said. ''Otherwise, it
was working in a vacuum.''

The New York Times was vigorous in its opposition to the News Council on the
ground that it would put shackles on the concept of a free and independent
press.

''We are being asked to accept what we regard as a form of voluntary regulation
in the name of enhancing press freedom,'' Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, publisher of
The New York Times, said when the council was announced in 1973. He added that
the council ''could actually harm the cause of press freedom in the United
States'' and said that The Times would not be a party to council investigations.

The council consisted of representatives of both the public and journalists,
with non-journalists forming a slight majority on the board.

In its 11 years, the council investigated 242 complaints about stories ranging
from abortion to a ''60 Minutes'' segment on Jews in Syria.

Of those, 78 were made against television networks, 68 were prompted by
newspaper stories, 27 involved news syndicates, 19 were aimed at The Associated
Press and United Press International, 30 at magazines and the remaining 20 were
against a variety of print and electronic media, according to William B.
Arthur, the executive director.

The council found 82 of the complaints ''warranted'' as a result of its
investigations, but such findings were non-binding and carried no penalty.

Though about 100 publications and broadcast organizations had made contributions
over the years, fund raising had been increasingly difficult. The council's
annual budget is $350,000 and it has six employees.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 21, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE RECORD;
MONDALE ON THE USE OF FORCE

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 346 words


From a statement issued in Minnesota Monday in response to a statement by
Senator Gary Hart:

I think there is an issue here that should be debated between myself and Senator
Hart about our differing views of foreign policy and the use of force and how
it's described and how it's managed, and I think it's the difference between
someone with experience and someone without it.

Vietnam was a mistake, and I was a part of that mistake in the early years. I'm
proud of the fact that I spent nearly five years fighting it, including
Cambodia. But the lesson from Vietnam is not that we should forgo power
everywhere at all times. It is that we must know what we're doing, that we must
understand the societies with which we're engaged before such things are
decided.

I believe that power should be used as a last resort and not a first resort, but
I do not believe that there is no role for American power. We are the strongest
free nation on earth, and as regrettable as it is, America has a role to play
there as well.

My opponent has said that if the Persian Gulf explodes, our allies can't count
on us. That's naive. He hasn't thought it through. If that were to happen, it
would be a disaster to the Western world. He has said the problem in the third
world is poverty; that's part of it, but if you go to Afghanistan and Cambodia,
if you look at what's happening in Syria and Poland, there's another part of it
as well. He was asked whether Cuba was totalitarian; he said no. I think that's
wrong.

We need to have a sensitive, mature, sure-footed President who knows when and
when not to use American power, how to describe it, how to work with our allies
and how to deal with the world as it really is. And if you look at my speech at
the Council on Foreign Relations and you look at what in effect was his
response, what I've just described does pose a very deep difference between us.
And I think a debate precisely on that issue is well in order. I think his views
are naive and I don't think they reflect what is needed for American
Presidential leadership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter Mondale

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 21, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FROM VIETNAM, SUBTLE MIX OF FLAVORS

BYLINE: By NANCY JENKINS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 2; Living Desk

LENGTH: 3712 words


WHEN Huynh Qui Nanh became a United States citizen two years ago, he changed his
name to Martin Wynn. It was both a tribute to his American sponsor, a Lutheran
minister, and a recognition of the irreversible distance he had traveled since
leaving Saigon on April 27, 1975.

A former Mekong River pilot, Mr. Wynn now threads 800-foot-long tankers through
the intricate passages of Upper Bay. He also serves as the genial, soft-spoken
ma,itre d'h,otel at Wynn's Ba-Nam Restaurant at 3 Pike Street near the Manhattan
Bridge. It is the most recent addition to this city's small but apparently
flourishing battery of unpretentious Vietnamese restaurants. Unlike many of the
better-known Vietnamese establishments in Paris and Washington, these places are
modest in the extreme, although their food often holds its own against fancier
counterparts elsewhere.

The cuisine of Vietnam, almost unknown in New York only a few years ago, offers
a fascinating contrast with that of its near neighbors to the north and west.
Although a close cousin to Chinese cooking, especially in technique, Vietnamese
food is leaner and not as rich as Chinese, with a variety of fresh raw herbs and
vegetables - mint and coriander, cucumber, lettuce and grated carrot - seldom
seen in China.

Borrowing hot chili peppers and lemon grass from Thailand and curry, coconut and
tamarind from India, Vietnamese cooks manage to combine these flavors in a style
that is as subtle and intricate as the cooking of the subcontinent but without
the overwhelming punch of that cuisine at its most aggressive. Accurate
estimates of the Vietnamese population of the New York area are difficult to
come by, ranging from 10,000 to 20,000. But one thing all refugee resettlement
officials agree on is that the number is growing. In the last few years at least
six restaurants in lower Manhattan have sprouted up and there is another near
New Haven. Several food shops in Chinatown now cater to Vietnamese and most of
the larger Chinese groceries also stock Vietnamese ingredients.

Sophisticated Vietnamese like to say that their cooking style is the nouvelle
cuisine of Asian food. Chef Huy Eien of the Saigon Restaurant at 60 Mulberry
Street explained recently through a translator that Vietnamese sauces are
lighter and less oily than Chinese sauces and are added at the end of the
cooking process or served separately.

Vietnam's long coastline means that fish is an important element in the
traditional diet, but surprisingly beef, as a result of French influence, is
prepared in a number of elegant ways and is often cooked on a brazier at the
table.

The cuisine of this Southeast Asian country is as unique as its most famous
ingredient, nuoc mam, the pungent sauce rendered from salted anchovies left to
ferment in barrels in the tropical sun. Mention nuoc mam to an American who has
spent time in Vietnam and you may see a peculiar look on his face. It is, to be
frank, an acquired taste, but once acquired it is very nearly an addiction.

''Nuoc mam is like camembert,'' Martin Wynn said recently. ''It's pretty strange
at first, but eventually you get used to it.''

The fundamental ingredient in Vietnamese food, nuoc mam is present in almost
every dish and on almost every table, where it takes the place of salt in
Western cooking and soy sauce in Chinese. It is used as a marinade and as the
basis of other sauces. Diluted with lemon juice and water, flavored with sugar,
garlic and very hot little green chili peppers or sweet grated carrots, it
becomes the dipping sauce called nuoc cham.

Many of the best-loved foods of Vietnam, such as cha gio (pronounced cha-YO),
the Vietnamese version of spring rolls; chao thom, a delicate paste of ground
shrimp and water chestnuts molded around sticks of sugar cane and grilled over
charcoal, and nem nuong, sweet and spicy pork balls threaded on a skewer, as
well as salads and many other foods, are dipped in nuoc cham as they are eaten.

The finest nuoc mam comes from Phu Quoc, an island off the south coast of
Vietnam where fishermen put in with their catch of anchovies several times
during the year. As with olive oil, the first pressing is considered the best.
Nuoc mam from Phu Quoc is a clear, dark amber liquid, the color of an oloroso
Sherry, with a rich aroma and the robust, mouth-filling chewiness of a great
wine.

If Vietnam has a national dish, it is cha gio . Inadequately described as a
Vietnamese egg roll, cha gio as prepared at Wynn's Ba-Nam makes the usual New
York egg roll seem like a potato knish.

Light, crisp and delicate, cha gio are made from a combination of chopped pork,
shrimp and crab, mixed with diced tree-ear mushrooms and bean thread or
cellophane noodles called bun in Vietnamese. Grated carrot may be added for
sweetness or little dried shrimps for their pungent, salty flavor. In the south,
grated coconut often gives a distinctive flavor to the mixture.

Brittle rice wafers called banh trang, softened in warm water, are wrapped
around the farce of pork and crab. The cha gio may be as small as a fat thumb or
the size of a Chinese egg roll, in which case they are cut into smaller pieces
before serving.

The well-wrapped packages are dropped into hot fat and deep fried until brown.
Because the paper-thin rice wrapper absorbs very little fat, cha gio are
wonderfully crisp and light. At Wynn's Ba-Nam they are served in the traditional
manner with a platter of tender leaves of soft-head lettuce, garnished with
mint, coriander, cucumber, grated carrot and scallions. Diners wrap each cha gio
in a lettuce leaf, adding the other vegetables to taste, then dip the little
packages into a saucer containing nuoc cham.

Cha gio is somewhat complicated to prepare but well worth the effort. For the
most part, however, Vietnamese cooking is unique among Asian cuisines in that
there is little distinction between home cooking and haute cuisine or
restaurant-style cooking. Once the main ingredients have been procured (not
always an easy task outside New York), the dishes are not difficult to prepare
at home.

Soup in Vietnam is traditionally served for breakfast, especially the hearty
northern soup called pho (pronounced FA-oh), a rich beef broth that is poured
hot over rice noodles and paper-thin slices of raw beef and garnished with
chopped green onions, coriander and nuoc mam.

A meal in itself, pho used to be, and probably still is, a great favorite for a
stand-up breakfast in the market soup stalls of Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City. In
New York, the pho served at the Viet Huong at 64 East Broadway is especially
good. On the menu it is listed as ''pho bo (tai, nam, gan beo).''

Banh trang, nuoc mam and other Vietnamese ingredients, such as tuong, a sweet
bean sauce served with nem nuong, and tamarind to flavor the delightfully light
sour soups called canh chua, may be purchased at a number of grocery shops in
Chinatown, such as Hoa Thanh at 218 Canal Street, the Southeast Asia Trading
Company, 68A Mott Street, and Thuan-Nguyen at 82 Mulberry Street.

On Sunday mornings, Vietnamese from all over the New York area do their weekly
shopping at Thuan- Nguyen for chilis and lemon grass, varieties of rice noodles
and soft rice wrappers, pork and chicken p,ates either steamed (cha lua) or
fried (cha chien) and wrapped in banana leaves; sour pork sausages called nem,
and soft little cakes of sticky rice with sweet yellow bean paste inside, as
well as Vietnamese paperbacks and popular music on cassettes.

Wynn's Ba-Nam - the restaurant is named for Mr. Wynn's wife, an engagingly shy
woman who speaks little English but quickly communicates her enthusiasm for the
dishes of her native country - is apparently the only eating place in the
metropolitan area operated by Vietnamese rather than by ethnic Chinese from
Vietnam.

The Saigon Restaurant is run by Sang Dao. Her husband, Quang Li, and nine
children, ranging in age from 9 to 27, help out, waiting on tables, chopping
vegetables, cheerfully translating and explaining the dishes. With the most
recent arrival, Chef Huy, in the kitchen, they prepare and serve a traditional
Vietnamese menu, except for one or two Chinese dishes, perhaps as a concession
to their Chinatown location.

The Daos and their chef are all ethnic Chinese whose families lived in Cho Lon,
the Chinese section of Saigon, for several generations. To this Western
observer, as well as to a Vietnamese photographer, dishes like steamed banh cuon
(pork-stuffed noodles), ga xao xa (chicken with lemon grass), eel soup with
tamarind broth and fresh pineapple, and banh tap (spiced pork on shrimp
crackers) seemed to be authentically Vietnamese, and very good.

Concessions are made for American tastes. Kenneth Dao, enthusiastically
translating for the Saigon's chef, explained.

''This sauce,'' he said, indicating the bowl of nuoc cham on the table, ''should
really taste stronger and spicier, but we're not quite sure if the American
customer can eat it or not. The Vietnamese, they love very much strong food and
strong smell, but the American - well, we like it saltier and you like it
sweetier. That's the real difference.''

Bach Ngo's Pho (Hanoi Beef Soup)

9cups water

1 1/2pounds oxtail, chopped into

2-inch pieces, or 2 pounds of beef

bones

1pound beef chuck, in 1 piece

12-inch piece fresh ginger

3shallots

2star anise

1stick cinnamon



 1/4 cup chopped fresh coriander

 1/4cup chopped green scallion tops

1large onion

4ounces bean sprouts

 1/2pound beef shoulder roast or

round, in 1 piece

 1/2pound rice stick noodles, banh

pho (see note)

 1/4cup nuoc mam (see note)

1lemon, cut in 8 wedges

 1/2tiny hot red or green chili pepper, sliced thinly.

1.*Bring 9 cups of water to a boil. Add oxtail and chuck. Return to boil for 10
minutes, removing scum. Impale the ginger on a fork and hold it over a flame
until it is blackened. Do the same with shallots. Add both to broth, together
with star anise and cinnamon. Cover and simmer gently for 3 hours.

2.*While soup is simmering, chop coriander and scallions and combine. Set aside.
Slice onion paper thin and set aside.

3.*Blanch bean sprouts in boiling water for 30 seconds. Remove and drain.

4.*Slice round or shoulder roast into paper-thin slices. This will be easier to
do if the meat has first been slightly frozen.

5.*About 20 minutes before serving, bring 3 quarts of water to a boil and add
rice noodles. Boil 5 minutes, then drain, run cold water over them and set
aside.

6.*When broth is done and chuck and oxtail are tender, remove meats from broth.
Slice chuck and remove meat from oxtail bones. Remove ginger, shallots, anise
and cinnamon from the broth. Add nuoc mam to broth.

7.*To assemble and serve the soup, set out a bowl for each guest. Distribute
noodles, cooked meat, and raw meat slices among the bowls. Add a few sliced
onions, a few bean sprouts, and sprinkle with the combined scallion and
coriander.

8.*Immediately before serving, pour boiling beef broth over the contents of each
bowl. This will slightly cook the raw beef.

9.*Serve accompanied by a platter with the remaining bean sprouts and onion
rings, the lemon wedges and the hot pepper slices. Serve additional nuoc mam for
those who prefer a saltier taste.

Yield: 8 servings.

NOTE: Vietnamese ingredients called for in these recipes are available at Hoa
Thanh, 218 Canal Street; the Southeast Asia Trading Company, 68A Mott Street,
and Thuan- Nguyen, 82 Mulberry Street.

The following recipes will serve 4, 6 or 8 people, depending on how many dishes
are presented at one meal.  Nuoc Cham This is the basic sauce that almost always
appears on the Vietnamese table, where it serves somewhat the same function as
salt and pepper in the West. Nuoc cham is frequently presented in individual
saucers and diners dip their food in the sauce before eating it.

10tablespoons nuoc mam

4tablespoons sugar

2lemons

1tablespoon finely minced garlic



Water to taste

3tiny hot green or red chili peppers, thinly sliced.

1.*In a 4-cup measuring jug, place the nuoc mam, sugar and the juice of the
lemons. Mix well until the sugar has dissolved.

2.*Add garlic and stir to mix.

3.*Note the quantity of liquid in the measuring jug and add one and a half times
that amount in water. Stir well and taste. You may add more of any ingredient.
The nuoc cham should have a delicately fishy flavor, sweet and tart at the same
time.

4.*Add chili peppers.

NOTE: The sauce can be made ahead of time and stored in a tightly covered jar in
the refrigerator for two to three months.  Ba-Nam's Cha Gio

 1/2 cup dried shrimp, if desired

10tree ear or black fungus mushrooms

1stick (approximately 2 ounces)

bean thread or cellophane noodles

 1/2pound cooked crabmeat

1pound lean pork, ground

1cup coarsely grated carrot, if

desired

 3/4cup chopped onion

2teaspoons finely minced garlic

 1/2teaspoon ground black pepper

 1/2teaspoon cornstarch if necessary

1package banh trang rice papers

2to 3 cups peanut or corn oil.

For serving:

1head Boston lettuce, washed and

separated into leaves

1cucumber, unpeeled, sliced very

thin

1medium carrot, coarsely grated

1bunch coriander

1bunch mint

1cup nuoc cham.

1.*Put dried shrimp in a small bowl and cover to a depth of 1 inch with warm
water. Set aside to soak for 30 minutes. Do the same with the mushrooms and
noodles.

2.*Pick over and shred crabmeat, removing shell and cartilage.

3. Mix crabmeat and pork together in a large bowl. Add carrot, onion, garlic and
black pepper, mixing well with your hands.

4.*Drain shrimp, chop coarsely and add to pork mixture.

5.*Drain mushrooms well, slice thinly and add to pork.

6.*Drain noodles, squeezing to remove all water. Chop into pieces no more than 1
inch in length and add to pork.

7.*Using your hands, mix everything together very well. Ba-Nam adds a little
cornstarch if the mixture does not seem to adhere. When well mixed, set aside
for 15 minutes.

8.*Take a deep pie plate into which a rice paper will fit comfortably and fill
it with hot water. Dip a rice paper in water to soften it and spread it gently
on a clean dry surface such as a cutting board. Put about 3 tablespoons of pork
mixture, roughly shaped like a fat cigar, on the edge of the rice paper nearest
you. Flip that edge over pork, then fold sides of rice paper toward center over
the stuffing. Roll up securely. The damp rice paper will adhere to itself. You
should have a firm and compact roll. Set aside on a plate and proceed with the
rest of the rice papers.

The cha gio may be prepared ahead of time up to this point but if you are going
to keep them longer than 15 minutes or so, cover the plate with a dampened towel
and refrigerate.

9.*To serve, arrange lettuce, cucumber and carrot attractively on a plate. Wash
coriander and mint and remove thick stems. Arrange on the plate. Have a small
saucer or bowl of nuoc cham at each place setting.

10.*Heat 2 cups of oil to the point that a bread cube browns quickly and rises
to the surface. (A wok is preferable but a sauce pan with high sides will do.
The oil should be at a depth of about 2 1/2 inches.) Add cha gio to hot oil, a
few at a time, and fry until golden brown. Remove and drain on absorbent paper.

11.*Serve cha gio on a bed of lettuce. (If they are large, cut into 2 or 3
pieces.) Pass vegetable plate separately. Each diner takes a lettuce leaf and
rolls it around a cha gio, adding mint, coriander and so on as desired. Dip into
nuoc cham before eating and in between bites.

NOTE: If smaller cha gio are preferred, cut rice paper circles into quarters
after softening. Rice paper in smaller sizes can occasionally be found.

Ba-Nam's Nem Nuong

With Nuoc Leo Sauce

2ounces pork fat

1pound lean pork

1teaspoon sugar

1teaspoon finely minced garlic

 1/2teaspoon ground black pepper

2to 3 tablespoons peanut oil

For sauce:

2tablespoons tuong

2tablespoons water

2tiny hot green or red chili peppers

 1/2cup unsalted peanuts, finely

chopped

To serve:

1package banh trang rice papers

1cucumber, unpeeled, thinly

sliced

1bunch mint, thick stems removed

1bunch coriander, thick stems removed

1head Boston lettuce, leaves

separated.

1.*Have butcher grind pork and pork fat together very fine, or do it yourself in
a food processor. Mix sugar, garlic and pepper with pork and set aside, covered
and refrigerated, for a few hours or overnight.

2.*Make the sauce: Combine tuong and water and mix well. Add thinly sliced chili
peppers to taste. Place sauce in serving bowl and sprinkle peanuts over top.

3.*When ready to serve, form pork into little meatballs about 1 inch in diameter
and thread onto wooden skewers. Grill over charcoal if possible, basting
frequently with peanut oil; or broil in a gas or electric oven for 15 to 20
minutes, basting and turning skewers until meatballs are nicely browned.

4.*While meat is cooking, arrange vegetables on platter with rice papers and a
bowl of warm water.

5.*To serve: Each guest should dip a rice paper in water to soften, then arrange
lettuce on rice paper with other vegetables as desired and two or three
meatballs. Wrap rice paper to make a little package and dip in nuoc leo sauce
before eating.

Chef Huy's Banh Tap (Spiced pork on shrimp crackers)

 1/2pound lean pork, slightly frozen

(for easier slicing)

2stalks lemon grass

1tablespoon sugar

1tablespoon nuoc mam

1tablespoon finely minced garlic

5tablespoons peanut oil

1dozen prawn crackers (kroepoek)

2cups peanut or corn oil for deep

frying

3scallions, green and white parts,

finely sliced (about 1/4 cup)

3tablespoons unsalted peanuts,

finely chopped.

1.*Slice the pork as thinly as you can, cut each slice in half and place in a
deep bowl.

2.*Peel the rough outside husks off the lemon grass and chop the tender inside
very finely. Add to pork.

3.*Add sugar, nuoc mam, garlic and 2 tablespoons of oil to pork, mix well, cover
and refrigerate for several hours or overnight.

4.*When ready to serve, heat 2 cups of oil to the point that a bread cube browns
quickly and rises to surface. Lower heat and drop in a prawn cracker. If the oil
is hot enough (it should be just below the smoking point), the cracker will puff
and swell and rise almost immediately to the surface. Remove and drain on
absorbent paper. Proceed with rest of prawn crackers. The crackers must be
removed as soon as they have fully expanded or they will curl up too tightly to
spread the pork on them. This sounds complicated; in fact, it's a lot of fun.

5.*In a wok or frying pan, heat 2 tablespoons of oil and saute scallions over
medium-low heat, stirring constantly until brown. Remove, drain on absorbent
paper, and set aside.

6.*Add 1 tablespoon oil to pan. Raise heat and saute pork over high heat until
brown. Remove, leaving behind as much oil as possible.

7.*To serve, arrange shrimp crackers on platter. Top each cracker with a few
slices of spicy pork and garnish each cracker with browned scallions and chopped
peanuts.

Chef Huy's Chicken With Lemon Grass

3chicken legs (including thighs)

2stalks lemon grass

2tablespoons peanut oil

 1/2cup chicken broth

1tablespoon sugar

1tablespoon nuoc mam

 1/4teaspoon ground black pepper

1tablespoon thick soy sauce

1tablespoon honey

1teaspoon sesame oil.

1.*Skin and bone chicken legs and cut meat into bite-size pieces.

2.*Remove rough outer husk from lemon grass and chop until very fine.

3.*Heat oil in wok and add chicken. Saute quickly over high heat just to brown.
Add broth, sugar, nuoc mam, pepper and soy sauce and continue cooking over high
heat until broth has almost evaporated.

4.*Add honey and mix well. Turn chicken pieces in honey, then add lemon grass
and mix very well. Continue to cook, stirring continuously for 30 seconds
longer.

5.*Just before serving, remove pan from heat and add sesame oil. Mix well and
turn onto serving platter.  Ca Chien Sot Ca (Fried fish with tomato sauce)

Adapted from ''The Classic Cuisine of Vietnam'' by Bach Ngo

and Gloria Zimmerman.

1clove garlic

1scallion, white part only

1medium ripe tomato

2tablespoons nuoc mam

2teaspoons sugar

 1/4teaspoon ground black pepper

1pound halibut steak, about 1 inch

thick

 1/4cup peanut or corn oil

2tablespoons chopped green coriander.

1.*Slice garlic and scallion paper- thin and set aside. Peel and seed tomato and
cut into dice. Combine nuoc mam, sugar and pepper and set aside.

2.*Cut fish into 2 pieces if necessary and dry well with paper towels. Heat oil
in frying pan and add fish. Cook over medium heat for 10 to 15 minutes per side,
or until fish is cooked through. Remove to a heated platter.

3.*Remove all but 2 teaspoons oil from pan. In remaining oil, over medium heat,
saute garlic and scallion, stirring frequently, until brown. Add diced tomato
and stir. Then add nuoc mam mixture, turn heat to medium high and boil, stirring
constantly, for 1 minute. When sauce is cooked, pour over fish on platter.
Sprinkle with chopped coriander before serving.  AN excellent introduction

to Vietnamese food is ''The Classic Cuisine of Vietnam'' (Barron's, $17.95) by
Bach Ngo and Gloria Zimmerman.

Like many Vietnamese, Bach Ngo left Saigon in the waning days of April 1975. She
had 30 minutes in which to collect her children and pack her bags. In the
confusion, she says, laughing now at the recollection, what she packed in her
suitcase was not her husband's clothes but her considerable collection of
recipes.

What might have been a minor tragedy turned out to be a major triumph, for with
the collection she was able to compile the cookbook and eventually to open a
restaurant, Chez Bach, in Branford on the Connecticut shore.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of chef(pg.C-6); photos of Dao family

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 22, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
THE DEMOCRATIC QUANDARY

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 21


The Illinois primary results define the agonizing problem now faced by the
Democratic Party. Each of the three candidates for its Presidential nomination
has a strong appeal to a constituency that he has defined. But each is in
trouble when he goes outside his base.

Walter Mondale's victory in Illinois was psychologically crucial to him. He
confounded those, including me, who thought the defeats he suffered earlier
would be fatal to his candidacy. He showed that he could wage a comeback fight,
using an elbow now and then.

But his margin of victory in Illinois came from the same groups of voters that
have been his all along: older people, union members, the less affluent, party
regulars, residents of older urban neighborhoods. And no Democrat can expect to
win in November if his appeal is largely restricted to those groups.

The former Vice President led Gary Hart by 10 percentage points, according to
exit polls, among households including a union member. Gary Hart led among
nonunion voters.

Mr. Mondale had a slight edge among those who call themselves Democrats. Mr.
Hart was way ahead among independents.

Voters over 50 went for Mr. Mondale by around 20 points, a huge margin. Mr. Hart
had a seven-point edge among younger voters.

White factory workers gave Mr. Mondale a majority of their votes. Senator Hart
won among voters making more than $30,000 a year.

It takes no great political wisdom to see the threatening character of those
statistics for the Democrats. To win next fall, their nominee will have to do
better than Jimmy Carter did last time in exactly the areas of Mondale weakness:
in the suburbs, among political independents and the upwardly mobile striving
class.  Moreover, Mr. Mondale has shown little ability in the campaign to
overcome the doubts of younger and more independent voters. He still comes
across, to many of them, as yesterday's man: a figure representing the old
free-spending liberalism of the kind that was a juicy target for Ronald Reagan
last time.  In foreign policy, too, the Mondale themes are less appealing to
younger voters. In Illinois he emphasized he was readier to intervene with force
abroad than Senator Hart would be. In what must have been a Vietnam reference,
he said ''Guilt is not a foreign policy.'' He decried the notion ''that talk
alone would get the Syrians out of Lebanon'' - presumably meaning that he would
have taken military action against Syria, or encouraged Israel to do so.
Senator Hart has had his most dramatic primary victory so far in just those
states with new service and computer economies, and with voters less tied to
historic patterns: New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Florida. For the same reason he
is likely to do well next week in Connecticut.  But Illinois showed that Senator
Hart has not broken through the reserve, the doubts of older people or older
cities or older industrial bases. He has tried with words, but somehow trust is
lacking. He has not made emotional contact - not with enough of the
old-fashioned Democrats who are also needed to win in November.

The Hart campaign in Illinois was also the victim of self-inflicted wounds:
charges made and withdrawn, advertising canceled and so on. Senator Hart was
described as exhausted. But campaigns are a test of endurance among other
things. He will have to show that he can get his act back under control.

For Jesse Jackson, Illinois capped a phenomenal performance in the South. He has
shown that he has enormous appeal to the black people of this country - and,
just as important, that he can get them out to vote. He will have a major,
perhaps even decisive, influence on the bargaining at the Democratic convention
in July.

But in that power lie the doubts about Mr. Jackson: How will he use his
influence, in the Democratic Party or outside? Will he campaign for the nominee
and urge those who believed in him to stay inside the system and vote? Or will
he tell them that they have been used? Might he even run as an independent
candidate?

All this - the vision of three candidates speaking to three different
contituencies - is the more agonizing to Democrats because they now sense that
President Reagan can be beaten in November. The Meese affair, the disarray in
foreign policy and the economic tremors begin to show a vulnerable Reagan.

The sense of divided constituencies has become so acute in this heated
nominating campaign that some Democrats have actually begun talking about a
brokered convention: one that would choose an entirely new figure. But the odds
against that happening are astronomical. Either Walter Mondale or Gary Hart will
find a way to broaden his appeal, or in all likelihood the Democrats will go
down.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 22, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE AIDES LINK TURNAROUND TO STRATEGY AND HART'S BLUNDERS

BYLINE: By FAY S. JOYCE

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 708 words

DATELINE: ALBUQUERQUE, N.M., March 21


Last Thursday was not the best campaign day Walter F. Mondale ever had.

Commuters at a northwest Chicago transit station brushed past him in the morning
rush hour as he stood outside grinning and shaking hands. The head of the Polish
National Alliance, the group he next addressed, confided to reporters, as Mr.
Mondale stood by stoically, that he liked President Reagan. And that night his
own polls showed him trailing Senator Gary Hart of Colorado by a wide margin in
Illinois, a state his strategists felt he had to win to still the Hart tide.

What happened in the next few days to turn that situation around, in the view of
the Mondale camp, was a combination of blunders on Mr. Hart's part and cautious
strategy by Mr. Mondale. Those events culminated in a victory that stands the
former Vice President in good stead for the Democratic Presidential nomination
as he heads for the big New York primary April 3.

In Illinois, while Mr. Hart strode into the mine field of Chicago politics, Mr.
Mondale managed to steer clear. While Mr. Mondale was trying to plant doubts
about Mr. Hart's steadiness and reliability, Mr. Hart obliged him by reversing
himself twice on matters of campaign advertising.

'No Receivers' for Passes

While Mr. Mondale stressed specific economic problems in Illinois, such as jobs
at Chrysler's Belvidere automobile plant, Mr. Hart clung to more overriding
themes. ''He was throwing passes where there were no receivers,'' one analyst
noted.

And while Mr. Mondale was trying to broaden his appeal to all age groups by
talking about the need for experience in the White House, the Mondale camp said,
Mr. Hart may have narrowed his to one generation by reminding voters that he
took an early and outspoken stand against the Vietnam War.

''We wanted to raise the stakes in the election so people would focus on who
would make the best President,'' said Mr. Mondale's campaign chairman, Jim
Johnson. ''The groups that provided Hart's margin of victory in New Hampshire
are now coming back,'' he continued, citing Mr. Mondale's gains among
18-to-30-year-olds and voters who earn $30,000 to $40,000 a year.

Mr. Johnson said Mr. Hart had erred in putting on a television commercial that
tied Mr. Mondale to the Cook County Democratic chairman, Edward R. Vrdolyak. The
advertisement may have left the impression that Mr. Hart was taking the side of
Mr. Vrdolyak's rival, Mayor Harold Washington of Chicago, and wading into a
dispute that has wearied many Chicagoans.

In contrast, Mr. Mondale's aides said, the former Vice President talked about
how much he loved Chicago and how deeply he longed to see an end of the harsh
divisions there.

Decision to Halt Ad


Then, Mr. Hart's decision to withdraw the Vrdolyak commercials, after first
defending them, ''fed into the broader question of who is the most effective,
who is the most sure-footed,'' Mr. Johnson continued.

The mistakes included falsely accusing Mr. Mondale of preparing to run a
commercial about Mr. Hart's changes of name, age and signature. Mr. Hart
apologized just as the Mondale camp was about to begin three days of advertising
that raised doubts about Mr. Hart's ability and experience.

In repeatedly suggesting that Mr. Hart lacked commitment to civil rights, Mr.
Mondale also strove to turn out the minority of black voters who were not in the
camp of the Rev. Jesse Jackson. Mr. Mondale acknowledged that he had no quarrel
with Mr. Hart's domestic record on civil rights, but that point was largely
lost.

The Mondale camp says it maneuvered adroitly to get Mr. Jackson and Mr. Hart to
agree to their debate in Chicago Sunday night.

Believing that Mr. Mondale has shown to good advantage in these forums, they
have accepted an invitation from CBS News for a proposed debate that would be
moderated by Dan Rather in New York City. However, the plan is one of three such
proposals for a televised debate in New York, and no agreement has been reached
on holding a debate.

Mr. Mondale stopped in Alburquerque today to raise money, and then went on to
California for the same purpose. After Mr. Mondale's victory in Illinois, fund
raising for the former Vice President is picking up, an aide said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter F. Mondale

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE 'HANDMADE' BLOCKADE

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 409 words


The United States regrets that a Soviet tanker hit a mine off Nicaragua but
insists the danger ''was well known from previous incidents.'' Superpower
confrontations should not depend on surmise.

Imagine the roles reversed: An American ship in the Persian Gulf strikes a mine
planted by a Soviet-led operation. Is it any answer to be told the Gulf was
knowably dangerous and that, in any case, American arms sales to the region
there were the real source of the trouble?

The White House would protest as Moscow has protested about ''an act of banditry
and piracy'' by ''mercenaries and terrorists.'' As a nation that values
unimpeded ocean shipping, the United States is in a pickle of its own making.

The State Department contends comfortably that the mines off Nicaragua are
''relatively'' unsophisticated, ''handmade'' by anti-leftist insurgents. Does
anyone really believe that the ''contras'' could plant mines in the path of
Soviet ships without America's connivance? The C.I.A.'s hand in their sabotage
is also ''well known.'' The day before the incident, Secretary of State Shultz
pleaded for more money ''to keep the pressure on Nicaragua.''

International norms are not suicide pacts and all nations circumvent them, with
different degrees of justifcation. But when Americans and Russians feel impelled
to direct force against each other, let them do it openly. Only then will they
think through the possible consequences. Only then will they avoid
miscalculation and graver crisis.  Even an ''unsophisticated'' blockade is an
act of war. And the Soviet Union is not Nicaragua. When its shipping was
challenged in Vietnam by President Nixon and in Cuba by President Kennedy, they
took care to show they understood the gravity of the act and named their terms
for ending it.  Communist hypocrisy does not excuse American carelessness. The
right to condemn hypocrisy, in the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan or the
destruction of a South Korean airliner, has to be earned.  Reflecting recently
on the surge of lawlessness condoned by governments, Senator Moynihan put this
sharp question: ''Could it be that the inattentiveness of the West, and of the
United States in particular, to considerations of law has contributed to an
international political climate that allows other states to believe that we will
not hold them accountable to standards of civilized and peaceful behavior?'' The
honest answer is yes, it could.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NATIONAL NEWS COUNCIL WILL DISSOLVE

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section B; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 625 words


The National News Council, established in 1973 with the announced aim of
increasing public trust in journalism by assessing complaints about the work of
major news organizations, voted yesterday to dissolve itself. The group
attributed its demise to ''a general lack of news media acceptance of the
concept of a news council.''

By a vote of 9 to 3, the council agreed to dismiss its six-member staff by March
31 and to transfer its files and remaining funds to the University of Minnesota
by July 1. Gerry Kline, director of the university's School of Journalism and
Mass Communication, said the records would be useful to scholars studying issues
of reportorial ethics and mechanisms for mediating public complaints about
journalistic unfairness or inaccuracy.

The council president, Richard S. Salant, said the members felt the group was
needed, adding, ''The press itself in coming years will reach the same
conclusion.''

''We believe that a national news council is a valuable and valid idea whose
time has not yet come, but will come in the near future - in the best interests
of this nation, its press and its people,'' Mr. Salant continued.

Era When Council Was Founded


The council's founders, primarily the New-York based Twentieth Century Fund,
conceived it in the turmoil of the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandals, when
Nixon Administration officials were attacking the national press as ''negative''
and divisive. The council was to have been an impartial forum that would examine
the complaints of individuals about reports in the major national news
organizations, such as the news services, news magazines or television networks.

Individuals who brought complaints had to agree not to sue the publisher or
broadcaster involved, and the council had no power to enforce its conclusions on
any news organization or even to compel the organization to report the findings.

Despite those limitations, many news organizations opposed the council as a
potentially dangerous infringement on the press freedom guaranteed by the First
Amendment. They said the council could be a precursor to press regulation and
would encourage a public view of the press as a monolithic entity whose conduct
was legitimately susceptible to some single standard other than the approval of
readers or viewers.

When the council was formed in 1973, a leading opponent, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger,
publisher of The New York Times, said it would divert attention from the actions
of government officials that he said were the real threat. Mr. Sulzberger
declined to comment yesterday on the council's decision to dissolve.

Press Opposition Cited


Mr. Salant said the opposition of The Times and other news organizations had
limited the council's effectiveness. He said the public was not aware of the
council because most news organizations did not report its conclusions in the
242 cases it handled or its general studies of journalistic problems, such as
whether reporters should cooperate with law-enforcement agencies.

The Associated Press and United Press International usually reported council
decisions, and The Times and other newspapers published those that their editors
concluded were newsworthy. Departing from its initial aim of examining only the
national press, the council often dealt with relatively narrow issues, such as
the fairness of an editorial in The Daily News of New York, that editors
elsewhere said were not of interest to their audiences.

Mr. Salant, a former president of CBS News, said that the council had wounded
itself by mishandling some cases, but added that those incidents were minor in
comparison with the decision by much of the press that the council was not
helpful.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ART: VARIETY OF FORMS FOR DAVID SALLE IMAGERY

BYLINE: By MICHAEL BRENSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1500 words


DAVID SALLE, along with Julian Schnabel, is the artist most identified with
American Neo-Expressionism. He and Schnabel are also its most controversial
figures. Salle has been acclaimed by one prominent art critic, Peter Schjeldahl,
and referred to as ''David Silly'' by another, Robert Hughes. What is certain is
that Salle, who is 32 years old, is a voice of his generation. For that reason
alone, it is important to listen to what his art is saying.

Salle's recent paintings, at Leo Castelli, 420 West Broadway, through April 7,
bear all his trademarks. The images in his large Abstract Expressionist-scale
canvases come out of cartoons, pulp romance, films, television, pornography and
20th-century art. Some images are almost photographic; others are sketched. Many
are somewhere between photography, drawing and painting. The words across some
of his canvases suggest Salle's Conceptual Art background.

Along with a bombardment of artistic media, there is a bombardment of materials
and contexts. The paintings in this show contain an assortment of gaudy fabrics
and a bizarre collection of three-dimensional objects that refer to home, school
and industry, as well as art. One canvas is lit up with lightbulbs; attached to
another canvas are what look like two 1950's elementary-school chairs.

For the first time, two of Salle's paintings also include sheets of lead. In one
painting, the sheet retains the relief shape of a saxophone, in the other a
bottle. The reliefs are essential to the bawdy, bittersweet content. In the
context of a naked woman and a flower in the ''Miller's Tale,'' for example, the
lead relief with the bottle helps suggest both flowering and deflowering, both a
night on the town and a hangover.

The brashness in Salle's paintings is misleading and a true reflection of his
New York hipness. While his basic imagery could hardly be more explicit, his
juxtapositions trigger an explosion of contradictory meanings. In the painting
''His Brain,'' the image of a woman on a bed is almost pornographic. Across the
canvas, however, in part superimposed upon the woman, are tiny images of Abraham
Lincoln taken from pennies. The Lincoln images therefore suggest cheapness, but
they also suggest moral rectitude. The conflicting meanings not only compete
with each other, but also compete over the naked woman, finally draining the
image of its pornographic content.

Other paintings as well seem caught between freedom and hesitation, between a
laugh and a cry. In ''Tennyson,'' a found wooden relief of an ear is attached to
the left side of a painting dominated by yet another naked woman. There is a
word across the center of the painting, but it is not van Gogh, which one might
expect from the ear, but ''Tennyson.'' Painting the name of a Victorian poet
across a naked female body creates an incongruity that stops the painting in its
tracks. The letters are different colors, however, and those colors are picked
up by abstract geometric color areas. The correspondences start the dialogue
going again, this time linking Victorian morality and the naked body to the pure
abstractions of a painter like Josef Albers. The detached ear seems to be
listening attentively to all of this talk about art and sexuality. The ear also
seems like an emphatic reminder of the potential human consequences of an
artist's loneliness and deprivation.

The clash between Salle's secular orientation and inherited puritan values may
make religious associations aroused by his paintings worth mentioning. In
''Concave Warrior,'' a row of chair legs seems to be impaled on the canvas in a
way that makes the painting seem like a slapstick ''Martyrdom of St.
Sebastian.'' In ''B.A.M.F.V.,'' a cartoon figure of a chuckling, grubby duck
presides over a gold satin surface that suggests not only Schnabel's velvet
canvases but also the fiery gold backgrounds in Sienese art. Salle has begun to
make his way through mass media culture and contemporary art to something that
has little to do with either. It is worth waiting around to see where he winds
up.


Also of interest this week:

''Modern Expressionists'' (Sidney Janis, 110 West 57th Street): This is not just
another group exhibition about Neo-Expressionism. It does contain work by Julian
Schnabel, David Salle, Anselm Kiefer, A. R. Penck, Georg Baselitz, Sandro Chia
and Enzo Cucchi, but it also contains work by artists only peripherally
identified with Neo-Expressionism, such as Susan Rothenberg, Louisa Chase,
Jonathan Borofsky and Katherine Porter. By focusing on the seriousness within
this kind of painting, the show suggests how much it has done for contemporary
art.

The range of subject matter is impressive. The works by Penck and J"org
Immendorf have to do with a divided Germany. In his small-scale painting
''Untitled,'' Eric Fischl swims in psychological waters few other artists would
wade into. Matt Mullican's ''Death Pulling the Soul out of a Dead Man'' and Enzo
Cucchi's ''Paesaggio Barbaro,'' in which skulls seem to have been unfurled onto
a dark and barren field, have to do, in part, with death.

So does Schnabel's 1983 painting on velvet ''St. Vulture,'' in which a gigantic
lobster claw becomes the body of a kerosene lamp and also a skull. This show may
create a taste for more works by these artists. (Through April 7.)



Irving Petlin (Marlborough, 40 West 57th Street): Irving Petlin is a storyteller
with roots in many places and an unusual ability to handle paint. There is a
wide range of subject matter in this large show (21 paintings, 19 pastels),
including myth, religion and portraiture. The influences that seem to be present
in these works - Pointillism, Redon, Balthus, 14th-century Italian painting and
Watteau - suggest the artist's interest in both geometry and dreams, in
precision and enchantment.

The strength of these paintings seems to me their textures and the landscape
elements. In ''Revolution Pastorale,'' the paint of the hills has such a liquid,
organic quality that the hills seem to be rolling down over the canvas as we are
looking at them.

Nothing is more striking in the paintings as a whole than the water.  In
''Goya's Song,'' the feel of the blue river winding out of the hills past shapes
like impaled heads reminds us that blue is the color of blood before it is
turned red by oxygen. Petlin's rivers wind through other fiery, troubled lands
as well. They seem, almost always, like a river of life that is capable of
absorbing everything. (Through March 31.)



Daniel Dallman (Robert Schoelkopf, 825 Madison Avenue, at 69th Street): Daniel
Dallman is a landscape painter from the Middle West, whose clearly delineated
houses, fields and skies develop a tension between nature and industrial life
that was defined in painting in the 19th century. The tone of this show can be
suggested by the painting ''Handling the Ferret.'' A man has just let a ferret
out of a cage. His hand holding the leash is wearing a huge, protective glove.
While the size of the glove and the leash seem disproportionate to the size of
the animal, the ferret also possesses a power that merits such respect. In
Dallman's paintings, the natural world, no matter how threatened or hemmed in,
is always stronger than what would destroy or contain it.

In ''Tree Row Near Industrial Buildings,'' in which two rows of trees seem to be
dancing a Virginia reel in front of a group of houses, there is a festive
defiance. In ''Pine Grove and Town Houses,'' a clump of pine trees seems to be
squaring off menacingly against ticky-tacky houses around them. In ''Landscape
With Hay Bales,'' we are not watching a struggle between natural and
technological forces but are pulled into it. Dallman knows how to draw. These
geometrically composed paintings almost always become moving sands. (Through
next Wednesday.)



Oyvind Fahlstrom (Arnold Herstand, 24 West 57th Street): Oyvind Fahlstrom came
into his own in the artistic environment of the 1960's, when in the words of
Pontus Hulten, his painting ''abandoned its place on the wall'' and became
''also theater, a game and psychodrama.'' In the 60's and 70's his work was
admired for its social responsibility and determination to inspire political
action.

None of the works in this show was in the late painter's exhibition at the
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in 1982. All are ''variables'' (works with movable
parts). All are overtly political in subject. The 1967 ''Life-Survey No. 2 (Snow
Field) Oswald'' consists of photographs of Mao Zedong, Bob Hope, Dane Clark and
a variety of other images related in one way or another to the Vietnam War.
''Indochina Monopoly'' is a 1972 ''game painting,'' in which pieces can be moved
around the board to boxes labeled ''Tiger Cages,'' ''Hanoi'' and ''Ho Chi Minh
Trail.'' This show is an example of how quickly time will demolish work that is
dependent upon the political language and point of view of a given historical
moment. (Through April 20.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of 'B.A.M.F.V.'

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Writing After Vietnam

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 6; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 90 words


''Back in the World, Writing After Vietnam,'' on Sunday at 8 P.M. will focus on
the work of 13 Vietnam-veteran writers in readings and a panel discussion
sponsored by the American Arts Project, Fordham University and the West Side
Y.M.C.A., 5 West 63d Street, where the event will take place. Robert Stone
(author of ''Flag for Sunrise''), John Del Vecchio (''13th Valley'') and Stephen
Wright (''Meditations in Green'') will participate. Tickets are $5, to be
purchased in advance by calling Jason Shinder at the Y.M.C.A., 787-6557.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 248 words


William S. Frates, 66; A Watergate Attorney


CORAL GABLES, Fla., March 22 (UPI) - William S. Frates, a trial lawyer who
represented John D. Ehrlichman, President Nixon's former chief domestic affairs
adviser, in the Watergate cover-up case died today. He was 66 years old.

Mr. Frates was stricken at his home here and was taken to nearby Doctors'
Hospital, where he was pronounced dead, a hospital spokesman said.

Besides Mr. Ehrlichman, Mr. Frates's clients included Charles G. Rebozo, a close
friend of Mr. Nixon. Mr. Frates represented Mr. Rebozo in a $10 million libel
suit against The Washington Post, which was settled out of court.

Mr. Ehrlichman and three other former officials in the Nixon Administration were
convicted on Jan. 1, 1975, of conspiracy in the Watergate scandals. The three
others were John N. Mitchell, the former Attorney General and Nixon campaign
manager; H. R. Haldeman, the former White House chief of staff, and Robert C.
Mardian, a former Assistant Attorney General.

Mr. Frates, who replaced John J. Wilson as Mr. Ehrlichman's attorney in the
Watergate cover-up case, also represented Mr. Ehrlichman in a trial in which his
client was convicted of perjury and conspiracy in the burglary of a California
psychiatrist who treated Daniel Ellsberg. Dr. Ellsberg has said he distributed
the Pentagon Papers, a top-secret study of the Vietnam War, to the press.

Mr. Frates's survivors include his wife, Sara, and seven children.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
China and Japan Doubt Soviet Ties Will Improve

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 194 words

DATELINE: PEKING, March 24


The Foreign Ministers of China and Japan met here today and ruled out an early
improvement in relations with the Soviet Union. They expressed hopes for
improved ties with the United States.

The Ministers met on the second day of a visit to China by Prime Minister
Yasuhiro Nakasone of Japan.

According to a Japanese spokesman, Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian of China told
Foreign Minister Shintaro Abe of Japan that Moscow had avoided serious
discussion of China's three main conditions for improved relations: a reduction
of Soviet forces along the Chinese border, an end to support for Vietnam's
military intervention in Cambodia, and the withdrawal of Soviet forces from
Afghanistan.

Mr. Abe replied that he did not expect improved relations with the Russians as
long as they ignored Japanese demands for the return of the islands north of
Japan and kept their forces in Afghanistan.

Meanwhile, Hu Yaobang, the Chinese party leader, told Mr. Nakasone at a luncheon
that it was impossible to achieve a great improvement in relations with the
Soviet Union at present.

Both sides have played down their problems with Washington, stressing good
relations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG CITES ADVICE TO PRESS HAVANA

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 24


Former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. says in his forthcoming memoirs
that he advocated bringing maximum political, economic and military pressure to
bear on Cuba in 1981 ''to force the issue early'' in El Salvador, even if it
brought a Soviet response.

In excerpts from the memoirs, Mr. Haig said, however, that his call for
forcefulness found no support in the highest councils of the Reagan
Administration. He named Vice President Bush, Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger, William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence, and the senior
White House advisers, Edwin Meese 3d, James A. Baker, Michael K. Deaver and
Richard V. Allen, then the national security adviser, as all fearing ''another
Vietnam.''

''I was virtually alone in the other camp, which favored giving military and
economic aid to El Salvador while bringing the overwhelming economic strength
and political influence of the U.S., together with the reality of its military
power, to bear on Cuba in order to treat the problem at its source,'' he said.

''In my view that the potential strategic gain from this combination of measures
far outweighed the risks, and that the U.S. could contain any Soviet
countermeasures, I was isolated,'' he said.

'Another Vietnam' Feared

Mr. Haig said the other top officials were so concerned that ''another Vietnam''
would sap public support for the Reagan Administration's domestic program that
they opposed his proposal and preferred modest aid to to El Salvador and covert
action in the region. He was not explicit in his memoirs on what specific
actions he had in mind toward Cuba.

Mr. Haig, whose resignation was accepted by President Reagan in June 1982, has
written ''Caveat: Realism, Reagan and Foreign Policy,'' which will be published
in a month by Macmillan. Time magazine will publish the first of two
installments of excerpts on Sunday.

During the first six months of the Administration, despite his lack of support,
Mr. Haig nevertheless began a highly publicized campaign to focus attention on
Cuban and Soviet support, through Nicaragua, for insurgents in El Salvador. He
said in the memoirs that this had the effect of alarming Fidel Castro's Cuban
Government and of leading to a brief tapering off in supplies to the Salvadoran
guerrillas.

Mr. Haig's point, which he makes in the memoirs, and which he made privately at
the time, was that a more forceful Administration policy instead of the modest
program that was eventually approved would have led to an early resolution of
the problem.

Sharp Criticisms

The memoirs contain sharp criticism and unflattering remarks about almost every
member of the Reagan hierarchy, particularly Mr. Meese, the White House
counselor, Mr. Baker, the chief of staff, and Mr. Deaver, the deputy chief of
staff.  Mr. Haig said he was stunned on the day after Mr. Reagan's inauguration
to hear at a meeting at the White House that many of Mr. Reagan's aides wanted
to cancel the agreement that had just been negotiated on returning frozen
Iranian funds for the release of the American hostages in Iran.

''This amazing proposition won the support of many in the room,'' he said.
''Insofar as Jim Baker's reaction could be interpreted, he appeared to be in
sympathy. So did Deaver. The President did not seem to be surprised by the
suggestion; evidently he was prepared, in his remarkable equanimity, to listen
to the most audacious ideas. I had to say that I was appalled that such a
cynical action could even be considered.''

Mr. Haig said he had told the group it was a pledge of American honor to return
the money. The President, he said, just listened. In the end, Mr. Reagan agreed
that it should be honored.

Communist Subversion

The former Secretary said he had been so deeply worried about Communist
subversion in Central America that his first meeting with Anatoly F. Dobrynin,
the Soviet Ambassdor, was devoted largely to that subject.

''I raised with him the question of transshipment of Soviet arms through
Nicaragua to the insurgents in El Salvador,'' Mr. Haig said. Mr. Dobrynin
responded, ''All lies,'' he said. '' 'Photographs don't lie,' I replied.''

He said that Mr. Dobrynin commented that this was not the way to start a new
relationship.

''How, he asked, should the U.S. and the Soviet Union begin to develop a
dialogue?'' Mr. Haig went on.

''I said, 'It is not acceptable to talk peace while acting differently,' ''Mr.
Haig said.  Mr. Dobrynin, the memoir continues, said that ''it would be very
unfortunate if the Soviet leadership formed the impression that the Reagan
Administration was hostile to the U.S.S.R. because first impressions often
persisted.''

Mr. Haig said he responded that the United States was not hostile, but
''offended by Soviet excesses.'' He said that he constantly raised ''our concern
with Cuba's role as a Soviet proxy.''

''Dobrynin complained, 'All I ever hear from you is Cuba, Cuba, Cuba!' '' Mr.
Haig said.

President Reagan himself was spared direct criticism by Mr. Haig. But
throughout, the former Secretary portrays the President as either uninformed or
misinformed by his staff about what was going on, or distant from events.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STATE IS ATTACKED ON HISPANIC HIRING

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 49, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 534 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, March 23


The chairman of the Assembly Affirmative Action Subcommittee has charged the
Cuomo administration with failing to hire sufficient numbers of Hispanic people
or Vietnam veterans in state agencies.

The chairman, Victor L. Robles, a Brooklyn Democrat, this week completed seven
days of hearings on whether state agencies were complying with an executive
order signed by Governor Cuomo last year that gave the Department of Civil
Service the responsibility for the state's affirmative- action policies.

At the same time, Mr. Robles said Mr. Cuomo had made greater strides in
appointing minorities than had his predecessors.

''This administration has made more meaningful appointments than any other
administration,'' he said. ''However, there are those commissioners who are
disappointing the Governor. His commissioners are making him look like a fool.''

Mr. Robles said he would decline, at least for the moment, to name those
commissioners.

Governor's Aides Defend Record


Mr. Robles's comments came two weeks after a private group, the Institute for
Puerto Rican Policy, wrote to Mr. Cuomo contending that there were ''serious
inconsistencies'' between his claims of minority hirings and actual
appointments. Based on an analysis of records provided by the Governor's
appointments office, the institute said that 5.6 percent of the administration's
appointments in its first year went to blacks and 3.2 percent to Hispanic
persons.

Key aides to Mr. Cuomo, including Andrew Cuomo, a special assistant to the
Governor and his son, insisted that 10 percent of the administration's
appointments were black and 8 percent were Hispanic. Those aides also attacked
the institute's credibility.

Amid the charges and countercharges over the administration's hiring practices,
the administration released its ''Ethnic Survey of New York State Agency Work
Force'' for 1982, the last year of the Carey administration, and its
affirmative-action plan for state agencies.

17% of State Workers Are Black


The survey, which was prepared by the Civil Service Department, reported that
21.3 percent of the state's 173,401 employees in 1982 were members of minority
groups. Of them, 17 percent were black, 2.9 percent Hispanic and 1.4 percent
other minorities such as Asian and Indian.

The 1980 census for the state found that 13.1 percent of the population was
black, 9.4 percent Hispanic and 2.5 percent other minorities.

At Mr. Robles's hearing, Karen S. Burstein, the Commissioner of the Civil
Service Department, outlined the administration's affirmative-action plan for
state agencies drawn up in response to last year's executive order.

''It is essentially a guideline and a context for affirmative-action efforts and
initiatives in the selection process for state service,'' said Miss Burstein
later.  As part of the plan, Miss Burstein said, the Civil Service Department
will issue preliminary goals and timetables for each agency in May.

Miss Burstein said that while the administration's policy did not constitute
quotas, it did anticipate that the composition of the state work force would
more closely reflect the racial composition of the state's population.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUNDAY, MARCH 25, 1984;
 International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 605 words


Salvadorans were urged to vote in today's presidential elections. They were told
by Government officials that the elections were the most important and decisive
in the country's history. (Page 1, Column 1.)

350 American paratroopers landed in Honduras to begin a two-day maneuver
coinciding with the election in El Salvador, the Defense Department said. (1:2.)


Alexander M. Haig Jr. says in his memoirs that he advocated bringing maximum
political, economic and military pressure to bear on Cuba in 1981 ''to force the
issue early'' in El Salvador, even if it brought a Soviet response, but his
position got no support in the Reagan Administration because all the advisers
feared ''another Vietnam.'' (11:1.)

French troops in Beirut were ordered to withdraw by next Saturday. Defense
Minister Charles Hernu said the 1,250 naval infrantrymen and paramilitary
policemen, the last unit of the multinational force, would be relieved ''by
elements designated by Lebanese authorities.'' (1:1.)

$21.8 million was stolen in Rome from Brink's Securmark, an armored car and
security company, by five people identifying themselves as Red Brigades
terrorists. (3:4.)

Israel's Defense Minister denied in emphatic terms that he had made several
remarks attributed to him in an article in The New York Times Magazine today.
Moshe Arens said he had never called Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger
''a prime candidate for psychoanalysis,'' as the article quoted him as saying.
He also denied the article's statement that he had offered to return to Egypt
most of the disputed territory along the Egyptian-Israeli border in exchange for
a meeting with the Egyptian Defense Minister. (14:1.) National

The Rev. Jesse Jackson took a narrow lead over Walter F. Mondale in delegates in
the first round of Virginia's Democratic caucuses. It was one of his strongest
showings. (1:5.)

Edwin Meese 3d said that the only thing he would differently if he could relive
the past, would be to list a $15,000 interest-free loan on his financial
disclosure forms. In an interview at the White House, the Presidential
counselor, nominated to be Attorney General, said it never occurred to him that
the his wife's acceptance of the loan might look improper. (1:3.)

Prevention of nuclear war and reversal of the arms race are a growing concern of
the nation's philanthropies. ''The prevention of nuclear war is going to be in
the 80's what civil rights were to the 60's,'' said William M. Dietel, president
of the Rockefeller Brothers Fund. (1:2.)

Georgia will defend Federal charges that the State Regents Test for college
graduation is racially biased. The Department of Education's Office of Civil
Rights said students at three historically black schools had consistently failed
to pass the Regents Test at a rate much higher than students at any of the 30
other state colleges and universities. (18:1.)

Sam Jaffe, a character actor on the stage, screen and television for 65 years,
died of cancer at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif. He was 93 years old. (36:4.)
Metropolitan

Formal charges against Anthony J. Alvarado, Chancellor of New York City's school
system, are expected to be filed today by the Board of Education, its president,
James F. Regan, said. Mr. Regan said the board would also meet today to consider
suspending Mr. Alvarado. (1:6.)

A medical education program for Queens agreed on by the Cuomo administration and
the City University of New York, will be, borough officials hope, the first step
in establishing a medical school there. (34:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A PIONEER SPIRIT SWEEPS BUSINESS

BYLINE: By LESLIE WAYNE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 4012 words


AMERICA has long been the land of the entrepreneur. It was born of an
entrepreneur - Christopher Columbus - who, with his venture capital backer,
Queen Isabella, developed a strategic plan to exploit business opportunities in
distant lands. Isabella's investment in Columbus paid off handsomely - Spain
gained a dominant hold on new world markets well ahead of its competitors. For
Columbus, the tale was less happy. A poor manager, Columbus was replaced in 1499
as administrator of the Indies and died several years later, frustrated,
humiliated and looking for work.

From the ships of Columbus to the garages of Silicon Valley, America's economic
engine has for centuries been thrust forward by the efforts of entrepreneurs
large and small. Today, however, there is a new breed of entrepreneur -
well-schooled, well-financed and born into comfort, if not affluence. The new
entrepreneur is not an inventor like Eli Whitney nor an industrial visionary
like Henry Ford. He is neither the immigrant shunned by the corporate world nor
the strident iconoclast. Rather, young people by the droves - refugees from
corporate life, career- minded housewives and the cream of the business school
elite - are turning their backs on giant corporations and going it alone. In
doing so, they have pushed forth America's inventive edge and are restoring
vitality to an economy that, far too often in recent years, seemed to have lost
its competitive might.

''Entrepreneurship will be the major impetus of the decade immediately ahead of
us - and what's ahead is terrifically exciting,'' said Donald C. Burr, an
entrepreneur who is founder and president of People Express Airlines. Mr. Burr,
42 years old, is one of the new entrepreneurial superheroes - those who have
truly made it big. Their names read like a Who's Who of the youngish and the
rich: Computer wizards Steven Jobs, 28, and Stephen Wozniak, 32, who started
Apple Computer with money raised by selling a Volkswagen micro-bus; Morris J.
Siegel, 34, who turned the 1960's taste for herbal teas into a
multimillion-dollar enterprise; or Nolan K. Bushnell, 40, whose golden touch
created Atari, Pizza Time Theatre and now Catalyst Technologies, an unusual
venture capital and management company.


JUST behind these giants are thousands of lesser-

knowns and unknowns, in high-tech and low. From

communications to transportation, retailing to bioengineering, they are creating
waves - and enormous profits. They are people like Steven Poses, 36, whose
creative cookery spurred Philadelphia's restaurant renaissance, or David
Liederman, 34, head of a


Related articles on three new entrepreneurs. Pages 12, 13. coast-to-coast empire
of 92 ''David's Cookies'' stores, or Heather Evans, 25, a Harvard M.B.A. who
makes high fashion dresses for the executive woman, or Steve Solms, 44, who
pioneered converting old cast-iron buildings into apartments in small cities
like Lancaster and Harrisburg, Pa.

''Clearly, there's been a radical rise of entrepreneurship,'' said Karl H.
Vesper, professor of entrepreneurship at the University of Washington. ''There's
a latent lust for it in all of us - it's the American way.''

Entrepreneurship has always been the American way, but it has waxed and waned
over time, to return today in full force. Perhaps the biggest burst of activity
- indeed, the golden age of entrepreneurship - occurred at the end of the 19th
century: America shifted from an agrarian to an industrial economy, largely
through the efforts of a handful of remarkable entrepreneurs who built the great
steel, oil, auto and chemical empires. Between the two world wars,
entrepreneurial activities shifted to large corporations - Du Pont,
Westinghouse, RCA and General Electric - which provided an umbrella for the
development of such dazzling innovations as radio, television, and nylon.


IN recent years, the rapid-fire pace of technological change in computers and
communications has given birth to a new and different age of entrepreneurship in
manufacturing and in the never-ending array of services. For example, the
creation of the microprocessor by the Intel Corporation enabled Apple and other
companies to develop the home computer, which, in turn, opened new markets for
software companies like Lotus Development and Microsoft - and the ripples
continue.  ''There is more entrepreneurship today and it is somewhat different
than before,'' said Alfred D. Chandler, the Isidor Straus Professor of Business
History at the Harvard Business School. ''Society is quicker, more mobile,
bigger and more urban. This growth, combined with new technologies, has given
the entrepreneur opportunities that simply weren't there prior to World War
II.''

Technological change may be the seminal force in the rise of the new
entrepreneur, but other forces are at work, too. The sputtering of smokestack
industries has caused the nimble and aggressive to look for careers in new
growth areas. The cut in capital gains tax rates in 1978 triggered an
unprecedented rise in venture capital - money dedicated to new business - so
that a record $11.5 billion is available today to turn an entrepreneur's
stirrings into reality. And the baby-boom generation has thundered into the work
force, bringing with it a dislike of big institutions and a passion for
individual expression.

This ferment is showing up in statistics. Since the late 1970's, small business
has become the sole provider of new jobs in the United States economy, as
employment by Fortune 1,000 companies continues to spiral downward. It is not
the Exxons or the U.S. Steels or the General Motors that, collectively, are
sources of job formation anymore. Between 1977 and 1982, companies too small to
make the Fortune 1,000 provided 8.6 million new jobs. By contrast, the Fortune
1,000 lost 1.5 million jobs over the same time. In fact, Fortune 500 companies
today provide fewer jobs than they did as far back as 1969.

Riding the crest of this wave is the new entrepreneur: Self-reliant, willing to
take risks and unscarred by a Depression mentality that sought security above
all else. If the post World War II era was dominated by the large modern
corporation, what is happening among 25-to-40 year olds today is a reaction to
that.

''The role models show you don't have to be a super flamboyant, super aggressive
and totally confident person to be an entrepreneur,'' said Howard H. Stevenson,
a professor of entrepreneurial management at the Harvard Business School.
''These aren't superstars, but simply people who left a company and are now
doing O.K.''

THIS is a generation that came of age amid the idealism of the 1960's and was
nutured on the notion that life - and work - should be an exercise in
self-fulfillment. It is a cynical and disillusioned generation - its faith in
big institutions shattered by the Vietnam War and Watergate.

''The big corporation was Nirvana for a whole postwar generation,'' said Jeffry
A. Timmons, the Paul T. Babson professor of entrepreneurial studies at Babson
College. ''There was an implicit faith and trust in these huge corporations. But
that love affair with bigness and big business institutions blew apart during
Vietnam.''

The economic turmoil of the late 70's and early 80's played a cruel trick on the
baby boom - making it even harder to attain the standard of living that they
were accustomed to. And the corporation also let them down: It takes too long to
attain real responsibility, most corporate jobs do not provide great wealth and,
as the huge layoffs of middle managers in the last recession has shown, the
modern corporation cannot even deliver on its promise of job security. ''They
aren't anti-corporate,'' said Rosabeth Moss Kanter, an organization professor at
the Yale University School of Management, ''they're impatient. You have a
generation that is ambitious, active, believes in its own talent and is looking
for a different type of environment.''

And, in doing so, they have turned the entrepreneur into a new cultural hero.
''Money is the long hair of the 80's,'' said John J. Kao, a professor of
organization behavior at the Harvard Business School.

The new entrepreneurs, as often as not, have attended a top business school and,
most certainly, are college graduates. They tend to enter the world of business
with savvy, either from business school, from a few years in a corporation or
simply from a heavy dose of reading, thinking and studying those who have gone
before. They are a curious blend of the old and the new: They may know the
sophisticated techniques of business, but they still often hold fast to the
humanistic values of the 60's. A study by Mr. Kao showed that many of today's
entrepreneurs were once student activists - whether it was in civil rights, the
anti-war movement or campus politics. Instead of turning against business, as
such a radical past might suggest, the new entrepreneurs are leaping into
business - but on their owns terms.

''Money is back in vogue and the people who start businesses and are successful
are bearers of the cultural standard,'' said Mitchell Kapor, 33, a former radio
disk jockey and teacher of transcendental meditation, who is the multimillionare
founder of the Lotus Development Corporation. ''The 60's generation has matured.
There's been a generational decision that society is worth salvaging. It's not
that institutions per se are corrupt. But it requires a dedicated effort to
create institutions that treat people well, provide value and are profitable.''

If anything, the new entrepreneurs have tried to build organizations radically
different from the traditional corporation. Young in age, if not in spirit, many
entrepreneurs are trying to translate the search for excitment, stimulation and
newness of the 1960's into the entrepreneurial environment of the 1980's. They
often don't fit the executive image: Mr. Kapor wears chino pants, tennis shoes
and an oxford cloth shirt with no tie to his Cambridge, Mass., office in a
renovated industrial building. In such ventures, unions are unheard of, hours
often staggered to meet employees' personal demands and entrepreneurs speak of
trying to infuse their organization with humanistic values.

''These people think it is possible to do things differently and better,'' said
Mr. Kao of Harvard. ''I see real tribal differences. These new companies are
laboratories for experimenting with new values, new ways of organizing people
and a new vision of the individual. Clearly, these businesses are a far cry from
food co-ops of the 1960's, but a lot of the management skills were learned in
those 1960's organizations.''

Mr. Burr, whose People Express has been innovative in blurring the
organizational lines between labor and management, recalled the view of
entrepreneurs that prevailed during his youth. ''When I was in college, an
entrepreneur had a bad connotation,'' he said. ''It was a downbeat idea 20 years
ago. People said they wanted to be doctors or lawyers, but never entrepreneurs.
Entrepreneurs weren't accorded the status of today, they were seen as promoters
who lined their pockets at the expense of others.''

Today, the march to business is moving at a quickening pace. New business
incorporations continue to inch up and last year reached a record 600,000. This
includes all types of new businesses - both the new entrepreneur with millions
in venture capital as well as the traditional small-business man opening a
corner candy store or a neighborhood dry cleaner. Some eight million people are
currently self-employed, a number that has climbed by one million since 1982 to
reach an historic high.

Still, entrepreneurship is not without risks - although the stigma of failure
has lessened over time. For every three businesses that start, two will fail and
nearly half that fail do so in the first five years, according to the Small
Business Adminstration. But, entrepreneurs who fail often brush themselves off
and simply start up again - and can even line up investors. Venture capitalists
once never touched an entrepreneur who had gone bankrupt, but not anymore. ''The
price for failure in California is non-existent,'' said C. Kevin Landry,
managing partner of Boston-based TA Associates, one of the nation's largest
venture capital firms. Adam Osborne, whose California-based Osborne Computer
Corporation went bankrupt last year, is starting a new software company and he
claims to have a $2.2 million financing package in the works.

Bankrolling this entrepreneurial boom is the dramatic growth in venture capital.
''Never in the history of business has there been so much money specifically
devoted to financing the growth of small businesses,'' said Franklin P. Johnson,
a lecturer at the Stanford Business School and general partner of Asset
Management Associates, a Palo Alto, Calif., venture capital firm.

Venture capital funds - typically a partnership of investors - provide money to
fledgling entrepreneurs in return for an equity stake in their business, usually
30 to 60 percent of the company. Seven to ten years later, when the company is
either sold through a public offering of the investors' equity or is acquired by
another company, the original investors recoup their money - and then some.
Returns in the range of 20 to 30 percent pretax are common, although 50 percent
returns are not unheard of. And tales are told of companies that went public 90
to 180 days after the investors plunked down their first dime, netting an
immediate windfall.

THE United States is unique because it has so many big stock exchanges where
companies can go public - an arena where investors can exit from their
investment and where struggling entrepreneurs are turned into multimillionaires.
A total of 825 companies went public in 1983, raising a record $10.5 billion.
Venture capital is a phenomenon that feeds on itself: The success of one
entrepreneur encourages venture capitalists to up the ante, which provides more
money for other entrepreneurs to take a chance.

Last year a record $4.1 billion in new venture capital was raised, fattening the
pool of available funds to $11.5 billion, the highest ever, according to the
Venture Capital Journal, a trade publication. This compares with a pool of $6
billion as recently as December 1981. While only about 3 percent of those who
apply for venture capital funds actually get them, the presence of such a fat
sum of money acts as a magnet for all.

''Entrepreneurs are saying 'There's money out there and some of it's got my name
on it,''' said Stanley E. Pratt, publisher of the Venture Capital Journal.
''They come out like flies. There are a 1,000 qualified entrepreneurs for every
venture capitalist.''

Originally, the venture capital business grew out of the search by wealthy
families for new investments - one of the most famous venture capital funds is
Venrock, the Rockefeller family fund that was an early investor in Apple
Computer. Others active in the business were the Whitneys, the Rothschilds, the
big steel families - the Phipps and the Hillmans. Today there are some 1,000
venture capital funds and their investors tend to be pensions, corporations,
insurance companies, wealthy individuals, endowments and foundations. But, the
explosion in venture capital activity has caused these investors to bid up -
even overpay - for equity stakes in the most promising ventures, threatening
future venture capital returns. ''The rewards are still better than investing in
the New York Stock Exchange,'' said Mr. Landry, of TA Associates. ''It's still a
good business. But five years ago it was a great business.''


MONEY is not the only stimulus to the aspiring entrepreneur. Information is,
too. In the last five years, magazines like Inc., Venture and In Business have
sprung up to glorify success and offer practical advice. Such venerable
publications as the Harvard Business Review have started regular sections
devoted to small-business problems.

Nearly 160 schools now offer courses in entrepreneurship - up from 16 in 1970,
according to Mr. Vesper of the University of Washington. At Harvard - training
ground for the new generation of business leaders - nearly two-thirds of all
students take the entrepreneurial management course and, last year, 80 percent
of first-year Harvard students said they wanted to own and manage their own
business someday.

Ironically, business schools, which traditionally churned out managers for the
nation's biggest corporations, are now finding their teachings are having the
opposite effect. After being exposed to the latest theories in finance,
organizational behavior and marketing, many students are rudely shocked by the
reality of corporate life, where practice lags behind theory. Armed with the
training to be a manager and the vision of a perfect business world, these
students are not settling for anything less than the ideal - even if they have
to create it.

And, business schools today are attracting a different crowd. A decade ago only
the most hard-nosed conservative students went to business school. They got
their ticket punched and headed straight for the corporate world. Their shaggier
counterparts flocked instead to liberal arts graduate programs or worked in
community service agencies. With funds - and jobs - drying up in such bastions
of liberalism, these people are instead giving business schools a crack. These
students enter the business world with a different mission in life.

''Some of the people are going into business not because they have a fundamental
belief in American capitalism, but because they have a social mission,'' said
Yale's Miss Kanter, ''and it is not suprising that they will be attracted to
entrepreneurialism. Ten to fifteen years ago, everyone in business school had
reactionary values while the others wanted to support the Great Society. Now
there are those in school who see business as good and as something that can
bring about social change.''

The entry of women into the work force has also propelled entrepreneurship. It
has brought about two- paycheck families, allowing one spouse to chance an
entrepreneurial venture. And, with more women in the work force it has clogged
the corporate channels for all. Women, typically, turn to entrepreneurship for
one of two reasons - either they feel discriminated against within the
corporation or they lack the right credentials to get a good job.

In recent years, women have started businesses at a faster rate than men, Small
Business Adminstration statistics show. Between 1980 and 1982, self-employed
women increased by 213,000, or 10 percent, to reach a total of 2.3 million.
Self-employed men increased by only 47,000, or 1 percent, to reach 5 million.
''For many women, ownership is the fastest track to the economic mainstream,''
said Charlotte Taylor, president of C.T.A. - A Management Group, a Washington,
D.C. consulting firm.

''The only way women can get into a high business level is through being an
entrepreneur and going into a business you can control,'' said Mary Kay Ash, who
founded Mary Kay Cosmetics Inc. in 1963, when she retired from a direct mail
company, where she was continually passed over for promotions. Mary Kay sells
cosmetics door-to-door and, last year, toted up some $600 million in sales.
''When you are on your own, you get paid what you are worth, not what your job
is worth.''

Some big corporations are fighting back by co-opting the techniques of the
entrepreneurs. Called ''intrepreneurialism'' or ''corporate venturing,'' some
corporations have attempted - with mixed success - to replicate an
entrepreneurial atmosphere in a large bureaucracy. Others have simply played
venture capitalist by investing in fledgling companies to get a toehold on new
technologies.

One of the oft-cited failures of ''corporate venturing'' is Exxon's foray into
office systems. In an attempt to diversify in the late 1970's, Exxon started or
acquired more than a half- dozen fledgling office ventures with names like Qyz,
Qwip and Vydec and pumped more than half a billion dollars into them. Exxon
promised freedom to the founding entrepreneurs if they stayed under the Exxon
umbrella. But, when the giant oil company began to merge these ventures into one
operation, it found itself caught between its own corporate grand scheme and the
goals of the individual entrepreneurs. The entrepreneurs fled and the whole
endeavor ultimately rolled up tens of millions in losses.

On the other hand, Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing, which makes some 84,000
products, is a corporate haven for entrepreneurs. The company goes along with
wild, offbeat ideas on the hope that they may hit it big. It awards corporate
incentives to innovators - employees share in the profit of ventures they start,
even long after they started another project.

Even giant I.B.M. tore a page from the entrepreneur's book to get into the
exploding home computer business. It freed a group of employees from corporate
red tape, set them up in Boca Raton, Fla., far from headquarters and gave them
the resources to design a personal computer in a year's time. They did, and the
computer has been so successful it has dominated the personal computer market.


BUT successful ''intrepreneurialism'' is extremely rare. ''It's very hard for a
corporation to appreciate what it takes to run a small business,'' said John
Larson, a consultant with McKinsey & Company. ''The corporations are looking for
a quick payback and new companies often are high risk and have a long time
horizon.''

Others have bought equity stakes in new ventures to flesh out their own
activities. The Lubrizol Corporation, a specialty chemical company, for
instance, has bought into a number of high-tech companies whose research
complements its own product line. Among these are Genentech Inc. the
bioengineering company, the Altus Corporation, makers of high-energy lithium
batteries; the Greenwich Oil Corporation, which developed a thermal technique of
oil recovery, and a handful of others.

''The small entrepreneur can make decisions fast and can develop commercial
technology faster than is possible in a large corporation,'' said Norman Fast,
executive vice president of Venture Economics Inc., a research firm. ''So for
certain types of projects, a small corporation is the most effective vehicle.''

How long the wave of new entrepreneurship will last, no one can say. The ebb and
flow of entrepreneurial spirit in America has historically been shaped by many
events - wars, depressions, grand inventions and changes in the tax system. The
entrepreneurial boom of the early 1900's lasted two decades, only to be snuffed
out by wars, which put limits on many forms of economic growth, and by the Great
Depression, which sapped the economy's energy.

With Washington today in a froth over the Federal Government's huge deficit,
venture capitalists and entrepreneurs are clearly worried. They point out that
venture money virtually dried up after the capital gains rate was increased in
1969 and did not flow again until the rate was lowered in 1978.

But it is not only capital gains rates that affect the entrepreneur, corporate
and personal taxes do as well. America will probably never see entrepreneurs on
the scale of Henry Ford or John D. Rockefeller, who amassed fortunes in an era
when Federal taxes were almost nil. When Mr. Rockefeller retired in 1911, his
net worth was valued at $1.5 billion - staggering now and even more staggering
then. It is doubtful that people like Steven Jobs or Nolan Bushnell or Donald
Burr will ever attain the stature of a Ford or a Carnegie or a Du Pont.

And if Washington tinkers too much with tax policy, some venture capitalists
warn that the new age of entrepreneurship could be snuffed out. ''We need to be
left alone,'' said Mr. Landry of TA Associates. ''If the Government starts
tampering with capital gains incentives, I think they will be amazed at how all
this will change.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of smaller companies (page 13); drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS DRAWS ITSELF INTO FOREIGN POLICY FORMULATION

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 909 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Congress, acting under its constitutional powers to regulate foreign commerce
and appropriate money, has been invading the foreign economic policy domain of
the executive branch. This has brought it into increasing conflict with the
President and the Secretary of State and has upset many foreign capitals.

Complaining about the expanding overseas reach of American laws and growing
confusion about who speaks for the United States, foreign governments have
increased their lobbying, sometimes even with State Department encouragement.
''State tells us to fight our battles ourselves with Congress,'' a foreign
official said. ''Our contacts with Congress have definitely increased,'' said
Ella Krucoff, a Common Market spokesman, adding that Congressional aides are
''seeking us out more.'' As a Senate-House conference committee debated export
control legislation last week, Japan, Canada, Australia and the 10-nation Common
Market were waging an unusual, coordinated lobbying campaign against provisions
they regarded as potentially harmful.

Examples of Congressional economic strictures abound. Showing its antipathy for
South Africa's apartheid system, the House recently voted to impose fair labor
practices, notably black access to management posts, on the 330 American
companies that employ 127,000 workers there. The Senate voted to punish foreign
companies that violate American export controls by barring their products from
the United States - even if they are in compliance with laws in their own
countries. Both Houses have restricted foreign aid; funds cannot be shifted from
Kenya to Sudan, for instance, without legislative authorization. And in the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and similar agencies, the United
States is under Congressional orders to oppose loans to Vietnam, Cambodia and
Cuba and to vote against certain projects such as steel mills and copper mines.

The White House, for its part, has served notice that it will try to prevent
further encroachments. It has ticked off a dozen provisions of the controls
legislation (formally known as the Export Administration Act) as items that, if
left in, would bring a veto. ''Veto-bait'' topics included apartheid, nuclear
proliferation and high-technolgy exports to China and Western Europe. ''There's
now a gridlock between the President and Congress,'' said Myer Rashish, an
economic consultant who is a former Under Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs. He sees the restrictions as part of the ''post-Vietnam, post- Watergate
challenge to executive authority in foreign policy.'' He added, ''More and more
the business of foreign policy is economics.'' The sponsors, however, have
stoutly defended their proposals. The United States should use its corporate
presence to counter South African racism, said Representative Stephen J. Solarz,
Democrat of New York, who sponsored the anti-apartheid amendment. And the Senate
Banking Committee chairman, Jake Garn, Republican of Utah, argued that tougher
export controls and a broader reach for American law were needed to help the
Europeans ''learn their lesson.'' ''For a mess of pottage, for a few jobs, they
are willing to sell most anything they can sell to anybody without regard to
security.'' Senator Garn contended during Senate floor debate. ''It is easy to
see why they were lulled into World War I and World War II.'' he added, ''So to
put it bluntly, the hell with the Europeans until they come around a little bit
to our way of thinking.'' Growing Interdependence But others saw the incursions
into foreign policy- making as sometimes injurious to American interests. ''This
bifurcation is a big problem for the United States in a world of growing
interdependence,'' said C. Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute for
International Economics and a former Assistant Secretary of Treasury. Because
the American Congress and executive branch are separate and independent, the
people on the other side of the bargaining table can go over the heads of United
States negotiators. ''It puts us at a great disadvantage, compared with other
countries with parliamentary democracies (where policies are usually carried out
by leaders directly answerable to parliament),'' he added. ''They are as good
democracies as we are, but they are more effective in international
negotiations.'' Alexander B. Trowbridge, president of the National Association
of Manufacturers and a former Secretary of Commerce, said that the United States
ends up ''shooting itself in the foot.'' Citing Senate efforts to restrict high
technology exports, he argued that ''to limit market access for our most
competitive companies more than we already do may be tantamount to economic
suicide.'' The United States is no longer the insular power it was throughout
much of its history. In the last 10 years, the percentage of the gross national
product involved in trade has doubled, to more than 20 percent. Each $1 billion
added to exports generates 40,000 jobs. But greater exposure to the world
economy has brought increased vulnerability. Some political scientists question
whether Congress, entangled in the web of special interests and preoccupied with
re-election prospects, should have so important a role in foreign economic
policy. As Robert Pastor of the University of Maryland's School of Public
Affairs put it, ''The failure of Congress to take a broad and long view puts the
nation at risk.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of worker at Ford plant in Port Eliz., South Africa

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAEL AFTER LEBANON

BYLINE: By Lucinda Franks; Lucinda Franks, a Pulitzer Prize-winning writer, is a
frequent vistor to Israel

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6444 words


WHEN MOSHE ARENS ASSUMED office as Israel's Defense Minister a year ago, the
nation was at war with neighboring forces, at war with itself and at odds with
its closest ally.  Twelve months later, the moral agony has subsided and, in the
face of the latest disaster in Lebanon, Israe turn inward and rely more than
ever on itself.  Lebanese President Amin Gemayel, under Syrian pressure, has
cancelled the May 17, 1983 security agreement with Israel that called for the
withdrawal of all foreign troops abruptly washed its hands of the pact, has
withdrawn its forces from Lebanese soil and has approached Jordan in an effort
to fashion a new Middle East strategy - an overture that Jordan has rejected.
Egypt, in continuing protest of Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon, refuses to
return its ambassador to Tel Aviv. And Yasir Arafat, who was forcibly evicted
from Lebanon with his Palestine Liberation Organization troops, has been
huddling with King Hussein of Jordan over possible ways to coordinate policies
to regain the occupied West Bank.

The responsibility for dealing with all these developments and the larger issue
hovering over them - how does Israel extricate itself from Lebanon while
securing its northern frontier? - falls mostly to Arens. In a country surrounded
by enemies, with every inch of border a potential leak, the Defense Minister's
job is crucially important to national survival. As a symbol of Israel's new
Government, Arens is more visible than his boss, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir,
who shuns the spotlight, issuing his comments through a spokesman.

Pragmatic rather than confrontational, Arens and Shamir represent a new breed of
Israeli leader whose low-key methods of operation may be more suited to the
country's present problems than the strident style of the controversial
''hero-warriors'' - former Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Arens's
predecessor, Ariel Sharon, who was ousted after the massacre of Palestinian
refugees by Christian Phalangists in Beirut. The newcomers are, excepting
Shamir, generally younger, nonprofessional politicians whose statements are
unsalted by biblical analogies or mention of the Holocaust and whose faces
always carry the smile of ostensible accommodation. It is a style that has
warmed the hearts of United States officials, largely because it is so
distinctly American. It has also captured the imagination of some sections of
the American Jewish community that had been alienated by the truculence of
Begin.

Although the new Government shares the basic philosophy of the old - both spring
from the conservative Likud coalition - Arens made it clear from the beginning
that he did not feel that Sharon's larger goals, for a Lebanon free from Syrian
influence, were feasible. Instead, he has expressed willingness to settle for
maintaining Sharon's major achievement - the shattering of the P.L.O.
infrastructure in Lebanon and the prevention of terrorist infiltration into the
south. Until the recent events in Lebanon, Arens had been carrying out a
carefully phased withdrawal of Israeli troops from that country and as a result
had considerably eased tensions within a nation that had been experiencing
unprecedented tumult - massive protest demonstrations, desertions from the army
and large-scale riots in the occupied territories.

While Arens shares some of Sharon's hard-line policies - he even voted against
the peace treaty with Egypt - he is temperamentally the diametric opposite of
his predecessor, and in a sense the men symbolize two different species of
Israeli leader.  Sharon is a soldier-farmer, a sabra who grew up among Arabs and
believes that they respond only to power and might. He is passionate, earthy,
outspoken and lightning-quick to move. In his leisure time, he likes to till his
soil and attend to the birthing of his lambs. Arens, who was raised and schooled
in New York's Washington Heights, where his family settled after emigrating from
Lithuania when he was 14 years old, is a technocrat. He is an aeronautical
engineer who prefers to arrive at his decisions after many meetings and position
papers. He is also, according to one friend, ''just beginning to study the Arab
mind.'' He is urbane, reserved and highly embarassed at any public show of
emotion. He likes to take his exercise in a swimming pool.


Since taking over the Defense Ministry from Sharon, Arens has rebuilt an army
shaken by the aftermath of the Beirut massacres. He has reached out to Arab
leaders on the West Bank and minimized the use of force against their followers.
He has been instrumental in patching up relations with the Druse in Lebanon and
with Israel's opposition Labor Party. And last November, he helped unthaw months
of frozen silence between the United States and Israel.

Arens maintains that the visit he and Shamir made to Washington last fall, from
which emerged a strategic agreement centering on the need for a strong, central
Lebanese government free from Syrian domination, marked a turning point in the
tumultuous relationship between the United States and Israel, ''completely
clearing the atmosphere and setting the stage for close cooperation.'' Given
subsequent events, the agreement was perhaps more symbolic than lasting.

The collapse of the Lebanese Government - as well as the American retreat - did
not come as a surprise to Arens, although he had hoped that Presidents Gemayel
and Reagan would have stood strong longer. Hedging his bets, however, he had
been trying to map out an Israeli solution to the Lebanese quagmire for many
months. He and Israeli security advisers met repeatedly with local Shiite, Druse
and Christian groups in the south - including one early meeting with the
principal Amal Shiite leader, Nabih Berri - in an effort to work out a plan of
partition whereby local militias would take over security so that Israel could
eventually withdraw completely. None of these three groups have any love for the
P.L.O., and Arens is still hopeful that within a year Israel will be able to
move back to strategic areas and turn over control of populated regions to local
Moslem and Christian entities, most of whom would like to establish independent
cantons. Until that time, Israel intends to hold tight to its present positions
in Lebanon.

ARENS REPRESENTS A NEW GENERAtion of Israeli intellectual,'' says Benjamin
Netanyahu, the No. 2 man at the Israeli Embassy in Washington and one of a host
of young men Arens has put into government. ''He appeals to a populace that is
moving increasingly toward the center and which rejects the rhetoric of a Begin
and the antagonisms of a Sharon.'' Although popular, Arens has his critics.
Those on the right accuse him of having reversed all of Sharon's gains in
Lebanon, and those on the left say he is no different from his predecessor, and
actually more dangerous because his calm appearance puts a wonderful face on
terrible policies. Others claim that he lacks imagination and is guilty of
evasiveness. During a series of recent interviews, however, he was acidly and
humorously blunt about his feelings toward several political figures: His
American counterpart, Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, for example,
was, ''a prime candidate for psychoanalysis . . . you can hardly talk to him,''
and Shimon Peres, leader of the opposition Labor Party, was one of the few
politicians who ''is worse than he appears.''

Arens looks enough like the late actor Peter Sellers for critics who are
suspicious of his sometimes enigmatic personality to dub him Dr. Strangelove,
but he talks more like a corporate vice president with a weakness for baseball,
and operates with the studied efficiency of an engineer.

In a country where many a politician resembles a rabbi or scholar, dispensing
aphorisms and arguments from the armchair of his party, Arens is an anomoly on
the move, striding across sectarian lines, pumping the hands of Arab shopkeepers
in the casbah like Mayor John Lindsay working a crowd in Harlem during the
1960's.

A LANDING-LOCATER SMOKE GRENADE EXPLODES IN a field near the Dahaishe refugee
camp, near Bethlehem, and Moshe Arens's helicopter descends into the white
billows like a piece of weaponry propelled into the heat of battle. Israel's
58-year-old Defense Minister, clad on this wintry day in a blue parka, bounces
out, hair flying in the wind, an ebullient smile on his face.

If he is not a politican by profession, Arens is certainly one by nature. A few
days before, he had done something no previous Israeli Defense Minister had:
attended Christmas Eve festivities in the occupied West Bank town of Bethlehem,
a visit toasted by Mayor Elias Freij as ''surprising and significant.'' Today,
Arens is high with the excitement of a walk through the market area of the Arab
city of Nablus.  ''How are you doing?'' he asks the owner of a soap and oil
factory with whom he stops to chat. ''Tell me how you manage with the terrible
rate of inflation.'' After being told that a person can't count on the price of
anything from one day to the next, Arens strolls on to be greeted by an old
woman selling oranges.

''Hey, Mr. Defense Minister, I saw you on TV! My son is in jail, can you help
him?''

''What's he done?''

When told it had something to do with explosives, Arens smiles wryly, thanks the
woman for talking to him and moves on.


Now his helicopter has put him down in more hostile territory, one of the West
Bank's largest refugee camps, where youths repeatedly stone cars and buses.
Arens does not go inside the Dahaishe camp, surveying it instead from a nearby
ridge, staring down intently at laundry flapping above corrugated shacks from
behind whose makeshift doors peer the large dark eyes of children.

One of Arens's first acts as Defense Minister was to issue a directive
prohibiting soldiers and Jewish settlers from using excessive force or firepower
in controlling hostile crowds. When stone-throwing attacks increased, some
defense experts urged him to allow the military to exert greater force, but
Arens decided on other tough, but still nonviolent, measures, including the
barricading of exit roads from several of the camps, periodic curfews and the
closing of schools.

''It seems to have worked,'' Arens says, as he looks down at the camp, whose
entrance is flush with a main bus route where many incidents have occurred. One
solution proposed to reduce the attacks further is to demolish the refugee
shacks close to the road, but Arens sees a more ''American'' way out. ''In the
States, you would never have a highway without a fence along it, right on top of
someone's front lawn. I don't see why we just can't move the road and build a
bypass; then we won't have to destroy anyone's home.''

One of the Army officers huddling with Arens on the gusty ridge is Benjamin
Ben-Eliezer, a retired general now serving as civilian administrator of the West
Bank. ''In the last six months, I feel a change,'' says Ben-Eliezer, an Arens
appointee. ''I can't touch it yet,'' he says, circling the air with his hands.
''But I can feel it. The Palestinians have woken up as from a dream. They are
disappointed in Arafat. They feel they have lost the last 16 years. If this
regime can only feel what they feel, try to understand and talk to them,
constantly, I think there will be a breakthrough.''

ALTHOUGH HE WAS A NEOPHYTE when he took up the post of Ambassador to Washington
in 1982, Arens instinctively knew the secrets of diplomacy: know your enemy and
psych out your friends. He met regularly with members of Congress on the Armed
Services and Foreign Relations Committees and built political alliances that
continue to bear fruit. Most notable is his recent victory in getting Congress
to approve the use of $250 million of military aid for Israel to produce its own
Lavi fighter aircraft. Normally, United States military aid must be used to buy
American weapons, and in spite of intense efforts by Arens to convince the
Defense Department that Israel needed to manufacture its own, Caspar Weinberger
would not budge. That was when Arens turned to his friends in Congress. (An
additional $300 million for research and development on the Lavi in the United
States was eventually appropriated.)

Capitol Hill fell under Arens's spell. Legislators liked the fact that there was
not a minute of fat in his conversations. In addition, he used expressions such
as ''we're batting on the same team,'' that the old-boy network in Washington
could relate to; he walked, talked - in English so lightly accented as to lend
only music to his words - and behaved like an Anglo-Saxon. Even Weinberger, who
once kept Sharon waiting an entire week to see him in Washington, relations were
at such a low, changed his tactics when Arens assumed the mantle - ''Cap''
answered the calls of ''Misha'' himself.

Arens made his defense debut at the same time an American marine drew his pistol
to halt an Israeli tank in Beirut. His immediate reaction was to persuade
Weinberger to establish direct lines of communication between the two countries'
troops in Lebanon. He also decided to release military information derived from
Israel's experience in the Lebanese war to the Americans with no strings
attached, reasoning that the Central Intelligence Agency had already gathered
most of the data itself and that Israel could score a diplomatic gain with only
a slight loss of pride. He succeeded. Secretary of State George P. Shultz as
well as Weinberger sent him personal letters of thanks.

When Arens talks frankly about his American counterpart, however, ambivalence
clouds his normally serene and bemused expression: ''Caspar Weinberger has his
view, and he just won't budge. He thinks Israel is just one of many countries in
the Middle East, and that all of them should be given equal time and
consideration. He has a lot of hang-ups about his Jewishness. We got him to
Israel once, he had never been there, and took him to Yad Vashem'' - the
Holocaust Museum. ''When we went into the hall where all the names of the
concentration camps are etched in stone, we told him that since his grandfather
was Jewish, he would be considered a Jew according to the Nazi racial laws. We
watched his face for a reaction and there was none.

''Now Shultz is different. He's a decent man and a man of values. You can talk
to him. He's not like a brick wall, like some of those State Department
Arabists. We brought him a long way in understanding particular problems of the
Middle East - which is not the Middle West, as some Americans imagine. We were
all worried when he was appointed because of his Bechtel connection,'' Arens
continued, referring to Shultz's previous position with the massive American
construction company that has many projects in Arab countries. ''The Arabs he
was used to dealing with were reasonable businessmen. But Shultz is a smart man
and he realized after going to some of these countries, like Syria, that he was
dealing with a different breed - persons that would smile at you and then stab
you in the back. He realized that many of these people are crazy and cannot be
trusted.''

SO FAR, 1984 HAS BEEN A TUMULTUOUS YEAR FOR ISrael. The swiftly changing events
in Lebanon, the continued though isolated activities of a radical fringe group
called Terror Against Terror that bombs mosques and other Arab targets and the
worsening economy have all combined to create deep feelings of uncertainty among
Israelis.

Moshe Arens is one of the troika of noncareer politicians who form the heart of
the Likud Government that is trying to resolve these problems. Prime Minister
Shamir, who is of East European origin and was a kingpin of the old Jewish
terror group called the Stern Gang, did not came to politics until 1970, and
although he is 68 years old, he has more in common with the new breed of younger
statesmen than with Begin. Arens, who came to Israel via the United States, did
not actively participate in government until his election in 1974 to the
Knesset. The third key member, Yigal Cohen-Orgad, 47, is a professional
economist and educator who was appointed to the critical post of Finance
Minister on Arens's recommendation when the former minister was forced to resign
because of unpopular economic policies.

All three are committed to the global Realpolitik vision of the Zionist
revisionist leader, Vladimir Jabotinsky, who lobbied for a greater Israel that
would incorporate both banks of the Jordan River. The new troika hopes to
achieve this by waging a campaign of national unity, unbloating the economy,
encouraging mass immigration to Israel and building a fortified,
weapons-independent country that can take a place among equals in the area of
world politics.

There has always been a split in Israel between the Zionist socialism propounded
by Israel's first President, Chaim Weizmann, and the Zionist revisionism
advocated by Jabotinsky. The first is embodied by the leftist Labor Party, and
the second by the right-wing Herut Party, which is now part of the Likud
coalition. Critics of Begin, who fashioned Herut in 1948 from the followers of
Jabotinsky, argue that he betrayed the right and departed from Jabotinskyite
politics by pursuing a foreign and defense policy that was inconsistent and
unpredictable.

It is still too early to gauge the durability and credibility of the regime that
replaced Begin. The new Likud coalition, though dominated by the Herut Party, is
backed by a fragile coalition of divergent parties on the right, each demanding
satisfaction of its special interests. But the general response so far has been
one of respect and gratitude for an end to bitter divisiveness.

Even those on the other side of the political fence still acknowledge that a
shift in atmosphere has taken place. ''At least you can talk to them without all
this historic hatred,'' says opposition leader Shimon Peres, who adds, however,
that though Arens ''is very good at public appearances, what's behind the sunny
side, we have to wonder.''

Likud is by no means securely in place. For one thing, the public will soon
demand to see evidence that the economy, plagued by almost 200 percent
inflation, is on the mend. Moreover, the Government has suffered embarrassment
over the Reagan Administration's espousal of Arafat's diplomatic moves in the
Arab world and over the American abandonment of Beirut. The only thing that
holds the coalition together is the reluctance of both the Labor opposition and
the smaller politicial parties in the Likud to move up the 1985 elections, as
least for now.



The Tel Aviv suburb of Savion is one that nurtures millionaires, but the Arens
family home is a simple stucco ranch house with carport. It is furnished so
sparely in angular and frill- free Danish Modern - there are some framed
pictures of the Arenses with the Reagans, a piano which the minister says he
doesn't play any more and a transparent table bearing three phones - that it
might almost be the hospitality suite of a good hotel.

Here, in safe and relaxed surroundings, Misha, as his friends call him, has
another face: that of the shy boy from the ethnic backwaters of upper Manhattan
who is slightly bewildered at the lofty perch where fate has deposited him.

Along the way, there was service in the United States Army, the acquiring of a
Bachelor of Science degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a
master's degree from the California Institute of Technology, a stint in a
Jabotinskyite, Betar-movement kibbutz, a turn with the Curtiss-Wright
Corporation's jet-engine development program in California, and then the return
to Israel to teach and later to become an executive of the government-run Israel
Aircraft Industry. After he was elected to the Knesset, Arens became chairman of
the Foreign Affairs and Security Committee.

Now that his popularity has given rise to speculation about his political
future, his aides are anxious not to disturb the good relations that exist
between Arens and Shamir, who talk several times a day. Unlike other cabinet
ministers, Arens is no longer a member of the Knesset, having come to the
defense post right from Washington, but few doubt that he would step into the
breech if asked to run for Prime Minister. Though his friends say he is
unconcerned about image, he sat glued to the television set last Christmas Eve
waiting to see himself on the news.

''Ruthie! Come and see me on television. I'm in Bethlehem.''

A fresh-faced, 21-year-old student at Hebrew Univerity, Ruthie is the youngest
of his four children.

''The other three were born in America,'' Arens says. ''Ruthie is our only
sabra. That's the reason we had her.''

''What a great reason, Dad,'' replies his daughter.

Arens and his wife Muriel met at New York's George Washington High School. Henry
Kissinger also went there, Arens says, but ''when I told him we graduated
together, he didn't seem to be the least interested.''

Arens likes to keep his family life separate from his public one. Nevertheless,
some of his family have garnered headlines: His son Yigal, a computer analyst in
California, one of two Arens children to settle in the United States, has been
quoted as openly disagreeing with his father's hawkish policies, as was Arens's
brother, who until his death last month was a law professor at the University of
Bridgeport Law School.

 Muriel Arens talks like the native New Yorker she is but offers food like a
true Israeli, urging little sandwiches of asparagus and roast beef onto her
husband. She complains that ''he works seven days a week and gets called in the
middle of the night and never knows what he'll be doing in the next 10
minutes.''

Arens continues to stare impatiently at the television set. Everybody seems to
be on except him. An announcer asks Labor leader Shimon Peres what he thinks
about Arafat's visit to Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and the American
applause of that move.

''What's he saying?'' asks an American visitor as Peres replies.

''Nothing at all,'' grins Arens. ''He never says anything. Don't misunderstand
me, we are on good terms. But he does go on and on. That's why he hasn't got any
popularity.

''Actually,'' Arens adds, ''part of what Peres is saying is right. These
diplomatic visits by Arafat are going to come to nothing. He's a loser. The
Americans are so naive about the Middle East, they think Arafat is more powerful
than he is. Hussein would be better than Arafat to negotiate the fate of the
Palestinian population.

''What American officials don't understand,'' Arens adds, ''is that the Arabs
have no democratic institutions. The P.L.O. is certainly not one. You can't find
their leaders or their popular support unless it is at the end of the barrel of
a gun.''


The corridors of the Ministry of Defense in Tel Aviv look like the halls of a
hastily erected bivouac unit - no marble halls, no statues, no portraits of
former ministers. On a raw day in February, the rumor mill so characteristic of
the Byzantine politics of the Middle East echoes through the halls: The
Americans are fleeing Lebanon. Gemayel has fallen . . . Wait, he hasn't fallen.
The Americans only gave us five hours' notice . . . No, it was less than three.
Arens is furious . . . No, he expected it. We are back where we started out in
the second week of the war . . . Like the Americans in Vietnam.

Only weeks before, Arens had been proud, even a bit cocky, about his ability to
warm the cold winds from America. ''It's not because I'm so damn smart but
because I have a much more organic connection with the United States. I've seen,
as Ambassador, how easy it is to have misunderstandings. When I went out to the
United States, my first diplomatic post, I didn't know much about it. I read
Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, trying to find out what diplomacy was all
about. I set myself three targets: First, avoid misunderstandings. Second, try
to bring about a measure of understanding. And third, see if you can bring about
a measure of agreement. And I thought, at first, this is easy. I quickly found
that, boy, there are so many pitfalls and there are frequently
misunderstandings, and that simply has to do with human contact. And this is
why, of course, understanding the context and the society in which the political
decisions are being reached is very important.''

Too soon, Arens found out just how true his words were.  The Israelis got a
hand-delivered letter from President Reagan shortly after the Lebanese army
began to collapse.

''It was absolutely bizarre,'' recounts a close adviser to Arens. ''Reagan
started out by saying he was strengthening the United States Army commitment in
Lebanon and that they were going to start this new commitment by retreating from
Beirut.

''This means, of course, that we can never trust any written agreement between
us and another Arab country that has been pushed by the Americans. The U.S.
forced us to sign that May 17th agreement. Now it is like the U.S. abolished its
own contract.''

Arens, the adviser says, ''never had any illusions that the Lebanese forces
could take over security on our northern border; ironically, it was the
Americans who believed they could be equipped and trained. We kept telling them
that an army made up of Christians, Druse, Shiites and Sunnis in a country where
all the fighting is between Christians, Druse, Shiites and Sunnis, has real
problems. But Arens never expected it to collapse so fast. That was our grand
illusion.''

Not that there was ever any question of Israel's coming to the aid of Gemayel,
even when it was asked to do so by Christian Phalangist leaders. The Lebanese
President would never even meet with any high Israeli official. And he
consistently refused to cooperate with Israeli forces. That, in large part, was
behind Israel's decision to withdraw unilaterally from the Shuf Mountains last
fall, without making sure that the area was secured by alternative peace-keeping
forces. Arens's critics on the right say that this decision led eventually to
the loss of Lebanon to Syrian influence.

''There was little point,'' Arens explains, ''in paying the cost in casualties
and resources it took to keep our forces there when we did not see a possibility
of working in a coordinated manner.''

He tried to get the Lebanese Government to make a political accommodation with
the Druse community in the Shuf and to get Lebanese Army troops to move into the
areas that Israel was withdrawing from, but he failed. ''If those two things
would have happened,'' Arens says, ''we would have avoided that bloodshed'' -
the massacre of Christian residents by the Druse - ''which was really a tragedy
of major proportions that had very negative political aftereffects on the
stability and the very viability of Mr. Gemayel's Government.''

He has been bitterly criticized by Sharon, currently a Minister Without
Portfolio, for abandoning the Christians and embracing the Druse in his campaign
to build alliances with all population groups in Lebanon. ''The Druse let the
P.L.O. terrorists come in,'' Sharon says. ''The territory that we had won went
right back to the P.L.O. as soon as we evacuated the Shuf.''

Arens defends the decision. ''Being on good terms with Lebanon means being on
good terms with the many ethnic and religious groups in Lebanon. It cannot mean
just being on good terms with one particular constituent element. The fact is
that we were instrumental in carrying out the evacuation of Christian refugees
from the Shuf. Israel was the only party in the area that enjoyed the trust of
both the Christians and the Druse. We were the only ones who could bring off the
evacuation.''

As a result of negotiations with the Druse, Arens claims, Israel saved the lives
of about 30,000 Christians in one small area. ''This is living proof,'' Arens
said, visibly moved, as he watched the operation from a helicopter, ''of
Israel's humanitarian impulses, of our ability to play a major role in
establishing understanding between the Lebanese communities.''

When Arens came home from his trip to Washington last November, he was elated:
''To think that a year ago, the United States was actually ordering us to leave
Beirut and now we are going to sit down and work out joint military exercises!''
But shortly afterward, the first of several diplomatic misunderstandings was to
embarrass him.

Under pressure from Cabinet members and defense experts who were outraged by the
P.L.O. bombing of a civilian bus in Jerusalem, Arens pressed for impeding the
evacuation of Arafat's besieged troops from Tripoli, Lebanon, in December. Prime
Minister Shamir, however, during secret Cabinet meetings urged otherwise, and a
subsequent compromise vote led to the token shelling of Arafat's position, a
move which was criticized for making Arafat look like a hero while dealing him
no damage at all. It was then disclosed, according to Cabinet sources, that
Shamir, without Arens's knowledge, had made a promise to the United States not
to interfere with the evacuation.

When the United States later gave its blessing to Arafat's meetings with both
Egypt's Mubarak and Jordan's King Hussein, both Shamir and Arens, who were not
informed of the meetings beforehand, were piqued.

''They should be more than a little angry,'' Sharon says from his farm in Negev
desert. ''All the high teas and the welcome and the publicity was a deceit.
There is no new era in U.S.-Israel relations. They are still making deals behind
our back.'' Recently, even the United States was embarrassed by its seesaw
diplomacy. A day after Reagan urged a Jewish group to support arms sales to
Jordan, Hussein lambasted him for his ''pro-Israeli'' stand.

But, according to Israeli Government officials, Hussein's comments are being
taken as a measure of the improved relations Arens has helped bring about with
the United States. The Defense Minister himself sees it all as part of the game
of global diplomacy.  ''You've got this pendulum swinging back and forth,'' he
says. ''Whenever there is a strengthening of the bonds between Israel and the
United States, you get all this pressure coming from Arab countries and Arab
Ambassadors in Washington and U.S. Ambassadors in their countries, doing who
knows how much damage. Then Washington has to bring about some kind of
'correction.' ''

When Arens speaks about Egypt, his voice becomes more edgy. ''All Egyptians have
seen on their television screens Mubarak embracing Arafat and, boy, I can tell
you, Egyptians know exactly who Arafat is. Egyptians know that he is the
arch-terrorist, and I'm concerned about the conclusions the Egyptian population
will arrive at regarding Egypt's policy.

''Israel gave up the entire Sinai for peace with Egypt, and now they haven't
even got an ambassador here.''

According to his aides, Arens offered to give up almost all of the area still in
dispute between the two countries when he came into office, if his Egyptian
counterpart would meet with him. But the overtures were rejected.

The halls outside Arens's office at the defense ministry are filled with men
striding about in open-necked shirts and sweaters, looking as though they belong
at the front of an M.I.T. classroom. Most of them have no strong political
affiliation. They come from all backgrounds and professions, an ecumenical,
eclectic staff, all in the service of the campaign for national unity and
security. To that end, they oversee the running of the national defense forces -
165,600 regular army, navy and air force personnel with an additional 400,000
reservists available on 24-hour mobilization, out of a population of about four
million - with an annual operating budget of $6.24 billion, representing 31.6
percent of the national budget.

Arens has surprised his staff with his unprecedented ''bridge-crossing''
adventures. He made a dramatic visit to headquarters of the Histradut, the
national labor union, to talk to its leaders face to face about wage disputes.
And at the invitation of the writer Amos Oz, he visited a kibbutz to try to woo
back this traditionally Labor Party institution which Begin had snubbed. He also
regularly visits the families of slain Israeli soldiers.

Where both Begin and Sharon were wont to make spot decisions, Arens subjects his
to the scrutiny of a patent pending. ''On his first visit to Lebanon, we were
sloshing around in the rain and the Chief of Staff - it was still Rafael Eytan
then - said he needed to redeploy some of Haddad's troops to another area,''
recounts Nachman Shai, one of Arens's chief assistants and a former military
correspondent for Israeli television, referring to the since-deceased
pro-Israeli Christian Maronite military leader. ''Arens said, 'Sorry, if you
come to my office we can discuss it. Out here is not the right way to decide
anything.' Eytan was shocked. He was used to having Sharon give his orders on
the field.''

The decision to withdraw Israeli troops to the Awali River last fall was taken
only after a long series of meetings in which proposals, subproposals,
theoretical proposals and practical proposals were submitted. For days, staff
armed with maps paraded in and out of Arens's office looking like a band of
architects bidding for the renovation of the presidential palace. Even on the
very day of the withdrawal, Arens was still sweating over the drawing board. ''I
know we've made a mistake,'' he fretted to aides. ''Maybe we are a few
kilometers too far north in that corner. Let's see in the next 48 hours what
happens. We can always retreat farther.''

This determination to get everything right sometimes takes on a manic edge.
During last fall's trip to Washington, Arens was dissatisfied with the outcome
of one issue - American military aid in the 1985 fiscal year. Just before his
resignation as Finance Minister, Yoram Aridor had told the Americans that Israel
would agree to a cut in American military aid to $1.275 billion from $1.7
billion if the money were given in outright grants instead of half in loans.
''Arens was furious about this,'' reports Shai, ''since he was never consulted
and he was stuck with less money than he really needed. The Americans said,
'Sorry, Misha, it's too late to do anything. We cut the aid at Israel's
request.'

''He brooded and brooded about this, about the left hand in Israel doing
something that the right hand doesn't know about,'' Shai says. ''He kept saying,
'I don't believe it. We have trapped ourselves. Israel acting against Israel.'
''

On the last day of the Washington visit, according to an aide, ''Arens woke up
Shultz at 6:45 A.M. and said, 'George, we have to do something about this. We
are faced with the threat of Syria and Russian missiles. We have to keep
rearming!' All day, Arens was tense and withdrawn, waiting for Shultz's reply.

''Finally, Shultz realized this was something very personal for Arens and he
engineered an increase in aid to $1.4 billion and a letter promising further
assistance in the future if we are hard up.''

Money may be the only form of aid that Israel can finally hope for from its
ally: Real solutions to the problem of the hostile forces that surround it can
come only from its own strategic coffers. Lebanon remains the most urgent
crisis: Arens and his security advisers continue to meet frequently with Druse,
Shiite and Christian groups in the south to negotiate security arrangements.

In one of those paradoxes so common in the Middle East, Syria, having
unsuccessfully tried to rule Lebanon after 1976, appears to share Israel's goals
for this common border country; Syrian President Hafez al-Assad is looking for a
balance of power among the various Moslem and Christian groups so that no one
will pose a threat to his predominance. Israel's major difference with Syria is
that Syria would be willing to have the Palestinians as one of these independent
entities and to claim a victory in the eyes of the Arab world by driving the
Israelis out of Lebanon.

Arens has to do a delicate balancing act to try to counteract Syrian
machinations while convincing an Israeli public, restless about casualties in
Lebanon, that Israeli troops must remain in their positions for the duration.

''Syria is helping Shiite extremists to go into the south to create incidents
and to agitate the local populace against Israeli troops,'' says a top adviser
to Arens. ''We have made great strides in helping to organize the Druse and, of
course, the Christians into militias. The Shiites are still divided and in
disarray and we have a lot to do to organize them.''

There is some doubt whether Israel can succeed with local groups in an
environment where betrayal and ephemerality are the hallmarks of all alliances.
''Arens is plain naive, and he always has been,'' says one member of the
Cabinet. ''I remember when he first took over, he had great ideas about lasting
peace between all the factions in Lebanon. He was even talking about the day
when Israeli tourists would be able to go there regularly. He is flexible to the
point of weakness, and too influenced by too many sides.''

A veteran military observer noted that Arens does not yet have the strength of a
Sharon in dealing with an entrenched military establishment which is reluctant
to take orders from anyone not in the battlefield.

Government operatives, however, insist that Arens has a workable strategy, which
alternates persuasion with force. ''Actually, it's rather a subtle combination
of the two,'' says an Arens adviser. ''We will strike, and strike again, at
suspected P.L.O. targets while sitting down over coffee with those who allow
terrorists to infiltrate. Friendliness and force make a good cement in the
Middle East. I'm talking only about an understanding, you know, for it should be
clear to everyone now that there are no firm deals anymore in this part of the
world.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Moshe Arens addressing Israeli troops in Lebanon; photo of
Ariel Sharon; photo of Moshe Arens with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir; photo of
young Moshe Arens in uniform; photo of Lebanese waiting to cross Awall River

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New York Intelligentsia

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 507 words


To the Editor:

Nathan Glazer was perhaps overgenerous in his assessment of the New York
intellectuals in his recent essay, ''New York Intellectuals - Up From
Revolution'' (Feb. 26). To write that they sometimes got their facts wrong is
putting it mildly. One example: In 1947 Irving Howe (in many ways the best of
the lot) solemnly assured his readers that the Soviet economy would be dependent
upon forced labor for the indefinite future. Today no reputable scholar holds
this view.

Were the New York intellectuals really such a beleaguered minority in their
anti-Communism? Mr. Glazer should be more specific in his periodization. It may
have been true for the period of the Popular Front (1935 to 1939) and for the
duration of World War II after Hitler invaded Russia. But from the onset of the
cold war it is perverse to see them as an unheeded, despised minority. How much
courage did it take to hop on the bandwagon of American nationalism, the secular
religion par excellence of the 20th century? How much courage was required to be
a cooperative witness, as some were, before Congressional investigating
committees? How much courage did it take to be a pitchman for the largest
concentration of military force ever assembled?

If Mr. Glazer (or anyone else) must argue in this way, then the prize should go
to the rank-and- file members of the American Communist Party (though not the
apparatchiks and party intellectuals), many of whom paid heavily during the
McCarthy era for the courage of their political convictions, however misguided
they were. Mr. Glazer advances the sole criterion, Was one or wasn't one a
staunch anti-Communist? The late James Wechsler was closer to the mark in
arguing that the true sign of political courage and decency in the 50's was to
be against both Joe Stalin and Joe McCarthy.

Is Mr. Glazer serious in his implication that American ruling circles
(presumably mostly WASP and west of the Hudson River) were so effete and bemused
by Stalin as to require political guidance from the New York intelligentsia? For
sheer parochialism and chutzpah, this takes the cake. Ironically, it parallels
the position of the Communists during World War II that their services were
essential - in the Federal bureaucracy, the Office of Strategic Services (the
forerunner of the C.I.A.) and the armed forces - if the war was to be won.

But the most striking thing of all about the New York intelligentsia, to which
Mr. Glazer makes only the slightest reference, is how far to the right so many
of them moved - up to and including support of the Vietnam War, Richard Nixon
and Ronald Reagan. Ideas do count, and these people have proved themselves to be
formidable polemicists and ideologues. Nathan Glazer deals with them lightly and
tenderly. But to the considerable extent that they helped prepare the way for
the most reactionary Administration America has had in the 20th century,
posterity will take a far harsher view of them than the one Mr. Glazer has
provided.  JOSEPH WHITEPittsburgh

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3433 words


FICTION

THE MAN IN THE GRAY FLANNEL SUIT II. By Sloan Wilson. (Arbor House, $16.95.)
Back in the 1950's Sloan Wilson wrote a novel, ''The Man in the Gray Flannel
Suit,'' that caught the essence of what was then becoming known as the rat race.
It was the story of a chronic worrier, Tom Rath, whose desire to be himself
could not be reconciled with his ghostwriter's trade. A paratrooper in World War
II, Tom hoped for peace as a Westport, Conn., commuter. But there were the usual
money demands of a growing family, the need for a bigger house and the strain of
a marriage to a woman who had grown up in a wealthy family expecting everything.
There was also the lurking secret of the illegitimate son Tom had fathered in
Rome in the war. The novel had a happy conclusion. Tom inherited grandma's big
house, and his wife, Betsy, forgave his wartime infidelity. But now, a
quarter-century later, we learn in a sequel that the Raths' contentment was
momentary. Tom Rath, as the new novel picks him up in his middle age, is just
the same old worrier. He still loathes writing for other people, he still frets
because his paycheck can't meet occasional extravagances. Moreover, his teen-age
children present a whole new set of exasperations. His relationship with his
wife is outwardly calm, but he is ready for a fling. The fling, with a
good-humored woman who is not a worrier, makes the story. Sloan Wilson writes of
dalliance with a sure touch. But, in pursuit of another happy ending, he
contrives an unreal conclusion. It so happens that Tom and Betsy are each ready
for divorce and each relieved to learn the other has been two-timing. The mutual
rush to forgive and separate is hard for the reader to swallow. Could any
divorce ever have gone so smoothly, shedding contentment on everyone involved?
But if the novel as a whole is unconvincing, it has its idyllic moments. Readers
will respond to the character of the woman who teaches Tom Rath not to worry.
John Chamberlain

* ABENG. By Michelle Cliff. (The Crossing Press, Cloth, $16.95. Paper, $6.95.)
This novel explores Jamaican society through the eyes of a 12-year-old girl.
Light-skinned Clare Savage is torn between the rural culture of her mother,
Kitty, and that of her father, ''Boy-Boy,'' descendant of a once wealthy line of
British plantation owners. The book depicts Clare's rite of passage, her
physical maturation paralleling her growing awareness of the gulf created by
color and caste. Though this is basically a mixed-breed world, social status is
jealously guarded by a light-skinned elite eager to deny its origins. Clare, an
idealist who has been influenced by Anne Frank's ''Diary of a Young Girl,''
attempts to resist these prejudices by emphasizing her connections to her
mother's world. Forgotten history is the real subject of ''Abeng.'' Its style -
a series of short vignettes that often digress from the linear narrative - is an
almost polemical exhuming of Jamaican mythology (''abeng'' refers to the conch
shell the rebel maroons of Jamaica used ''to pass their messages and reach one
another''). At times this free-ranging technique distracts from the characters
and setting. Dramatic situations are eschewed for sometimes grandiose historical
generalizations (''the freedom which followed on abolition turned into veiled
slavery, the model of the rest of the western world''). But Michelle Cliff has a
keen eye for detail - the congregation whose singing drowns out its British
minister's anomalous harpsichord, the deranged white woman who atones for her
mixed child by refusing to wash herself for 35 years. The novel's narrative
inconsistencies are made up for by the author's gift for pithy anecdotal
descriptions that bring Jamaica's present and past to life. - Francis Levy

* DAU: A Novel of Vietnam. By Ed Dodge. (Macmillan, $13.95.) Morgan Preston, the
protagonist of ''Dau,'' is a relentlessly average middle-American youth who
joins the Air Force at 17 and goes to Vietnam. Early on he is injured during a
minor skirmish. Recovered and returned to duty, Morgan finds his Vietnamese
girlfriend missing; she later turns out to be a casualty of My Lai.  He requests
a transfer to a remote northern outpost and when it is overrun he makes his way
south alone through hostile territory. In this section, the book's strongest, he
begins to hear voices, and by the time he's rescued he's completely psychotic,
though able to hide his symptoms. His friends die horribly all around him, the
last a suicide. Morgan survives and returns to the United States where his
worsening psychosis leads to a soul-destroying stay in a Veterans Administration
hospital. Technically cured, he escapes to the anonymity of Los Angeles, where
he finds work and a wife, Rhonda, who nurses him through more paranoia and a
bout with alcoholism. Finally Morgan finds a therapist who breaks down his
defenses, allowing him to acknowledge his losses and exorcise the ghosts of
friends who plague his dreams. Unfortunately, the numb detachment that
characterizes Morgan's response to Vietnam also afflicts Ed Dodge's prose style;
Morgan becomes most individual when he's crazy. ''Dau'' has much force of truth
but little of art; it's best touch is its title, the Vietnamese word for
''pain.'' - Madison Bell

* LA REGENTA. By Leopoldo Alas Translated and introduced by John Rutherford
(University of Georgia, $20.) This 733-page novel - published in 1885 and
translated now for the first time into another language - was largely scorned
when it initially appeared in Spain. The apparent reasons were its attack on the
church and its recognition of the importance of the sexual drive to the
understanding of human behavior. Some 15 years ago it was rediscovered, and we
are told in the introduction that it is now considered a classic by most critics
in Spain. It is a rich, complex study of life among the aristocrats in a small
northern Spanish town. But the story - a love triangle that leads to an
amateurish duel - emerges slowly. The many and varied characterizations are
detailed and convincing, and the descriptions of the town and its mores are
persuasive. On the negative side, ''La Regenta'' may well tell rather more than
the average reader will want to know. The three principal characters are the
lovely, madonna-like Ana (the judge's wife and La Regenta of the title), the
rather fusty judge Don Victor and the elegant Don Alvaro, Ana's lover. Also
important on the scene is the canon Don Fermin, who is thought of ''as a wise
theologian, philosopher and lawyer'' and about whom we learn much that is not
consistent with his public image. The novel's rather formal style is leavened by
a sardonic outlook that gives it life. A reader with eccentric imagination might
speculate that if Evelyn Waugh by some unlikely chance had been a 32-year-old
professor of Roman law at the University of Oviedo in 1885, he might have
written ''La Regenta.'' No such frivolous conceit, however, will be put forward
here. - Robert P. Mills

* CROSSOVER. By Wayne Karlin. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $13.95.) Once more
across the bridge of suspension of disblief; this time, the international
hanky-panky gives us an idealistic young Israeli secret agent, Josef Ascher. He
is assigned, as he believes, to assure the safe arrival in Israel of an aged,
renowned Russian Jewish dissident scientist, a crystallographer named Yitzhak
Abramov, who is about to be deported along with other Russian Jews on a sealed
train to Austria and the West. Abramov has become a symbolic figure whom the
P.L.O. wants destroyed, Josef's bosses at Mossad, the Israeli intelligence
agency, tell him. Josef must infiltrate Belgrade to get a line on Nasir Razak,
chief of the P.L.O.'s European operation. He is accompanied by Hanita Kahan, a
female agent. The plot is never as neatly ordered as Abramov's crystals; it's
more like the layers of an onion that must be peeled away. It may be that a Nazi
butcher who knew Josef's father and is thought dead is really alive and after
Abramov. And perhaps Mossad's motives aren't all as idealistic as Josef thought
at first. In fact, Josef is finally driven to accepting ''the knowledge of
betrayal . . . the whoring we did to stay alive.'' Still, I, for one, resent
having blood-and-thunder thrillers told in the first person - so that I'm always
sure of at least one character who's going to survive. But ''Crossover'' does
have one great thing going for it - a ripsnorting, whistle-blowing train
hijacking. In books or movies, whether it's Buster Keaton's ''General'' or
Donald Westlake's ''Kahawa,'' you can hardly go wrong with a train hijacking.  -
Sherwin D. Smith

NONFICTION

* THE WRITER AND HUMAN RIGHTS. Edited by the Toronto Arts Group for Human
Rights. (Anchor/Doubleday, Cloth, $17.95. Paper, $10.95.) It is no secret that
among the many people in the world imprisoned, abducted or interned in
psychiatric wards by tyrannical governments are hundreds of writers and
journalists. ''The Writer and Human Rights'' is an anthology of statements made
at a 1981 conference in Toronto held ''in the name of those victims of political
brutality who no longer have voices.'' The book starts out to be an examination
of the plight of those writers and what can be done for them. But many
participants in the conference seemed concerned less about the bludgeons of
dictators than about persecutions within what was referred to, pejoratively, as
''bourgeois democracy,'' a phrase that, to cite one speaker, masks the ''brutal
things, the truly monstrous things that are happening in our society.'' Thus we
find Rick Salutin saying, ''I'm just horribly embarrassed to be a part of all
this.'' Mr. Salutin is talking about his own country, Canada, a place he seems
to find self-evidently repugnant. Plenty of this sort of whining was to be heard
in Toronto, which is what may have led one participant, the German writer Hans
Magnus Enzensberger, to complain of writers who insist not just on freedom but
on special treatment in their own countries, ''as if they were the pets of
society and should be given some kind of especially delicious dog food.'' Mr.
Enzensberger is one of the writers who redeem this volume from its mediocre
posturings. Among the others is Susan Sontag, who makes a rigorous effort to
define political standards. The book is worth its price for the remarks of the
exiled Czechoslovak author Josef Skvorecky, whose tempered wisdom points to the
worst threat posed to the liberty of writers in free societies. It comes from
the confusion and ignorance of those who would fail to defend ''bourgeois
democracy'' because they entertain the illusion that some cathartic upheaval,
usually called a revolution, will replace it with a more just society.  -
Richard Bernstein

* THE AESTHETICS OF MOVEMENT. By Paul Souriau Edited and translated by Manon
Souriau (University of Massachusettes $22.50.) When Marcel Duchamp's nude
descended the staircase in 1912, she was following the lead of Eadweard
Muybridge, whose stop-action photographs a generation earlier pioneered the
scientific study of motion. Like Duchamp, the French philosopher Paul Souriau
(1852-1926) was inspired by Muybridge, whose photographs of human and animal
locomotion illustrate this first and excellent translation of ''The Aesthetics
of Movement'' (1889). In the book's text and photographs, movement is dissected
- birds in flight, water cascading over rocks, a gymnast on a balance beam,
fireworks, ice-skating. Soriau believed in the sovereignty of science as those
of an earlier age believed in the infinite wisdom of God. ''Ideally,'' he wrote
''aesthetic judgement would be entirely based on reason.'' But first the study
of beauty must be removed from philosophy and relocated in the realm of physics,
physiology and psychology. That is the plan of this study, as Souriau attempts
to divorce judgments of taste from the subjective anarchy of feelings by
developing a scientific esthetic based on principles derived from mechanical
laws. Informed by this fin de si ecle industrial consciousness, Souriau's
standard of beauty, unsurprisingly, turns out to be functional efficiency -
''the intelligent adaptation of things to their end.'' Souriau's eloquent prose
conveys both a scholar's dispassion and a preacher's righteousness, but his
rational estheticism is not simply a testament to a bygone era. Like the
Cubists' decompositions and the Futurists' dynamism, Souriau's systematic
approach to movement adds dimension to our perception of the world.  - Sue M.
Halpern

* FURTHER UP THE ORGANIZATION. By Robert Townsend, (Knopf, $15.95.) In 1970
Robert Townsend, the former head of the Avis Rent A Car System, wrote ''Up the
Organization,'' a compilation of his irreverent ideas about running a business
that was packaged as a manual for chief executives. Now he has reisssued his
best seller with a new title, 30 new chapters and a number of updates. This time
there is more emphasis on corporate democracy, or what he calls ''participative
management.'' The formula, however, is unchanged. In 1970 Mr. Townsend - whose
success at Avis is credited partly to the ingenious ''We try harder''
advertising campaign - urged corporate bosses to fire their advertising
departments and replace their advertisiing agencies; he suggested the same fate
for public relations departments. In this edition, he extends the recommendation
to industrial relations departments, which, he contends, only create antagonism
between workers and management; he also inveighs against consultants and newly
minted M.B.A.'s. This being the 1980's, he throws in some unprofound guidance on
computers and on small business. (''Work out of your home as long as you can.
Then your garage.'') Mr. Townsend has the same breezy, no-nonsense tone that
made the first edition of his book so readable, and much of his advice has merit
for certain kinds of companies. (At others it would be disastrous.) But the
shock value of the original work has worn off, and following hard on the
publication of several more serious books about management, ''Further Up the
Organization'' does not have much to add.  - Sandra Salmans

* SUPERSTARS: How Stellar Explosions Shape the Destiny of Our Universe. By David
H. Clark. (McGraw-Hill, $17.95.) ''Superstars'' is really two books shuffled
together into one. The first reads like a lecture in freshman astronomy, all
about stars and why they shine and what they're made of and how far away they
are. The second could be a worried professor's attempt to Carl Sagan-ize his
subject, lest by midterm the hall be empty. Readers who want the science will
not be disappointed, only a bit frustrated by David H. Clark's breathlessness
about ''our ultimate roots among the stars.'' Readers who like science served
with a dollop of cultural history will get some satisfaction too. But whether
Mr. Clark can keep everyone's attention is debatable. His thesis is that
exploding stars, known as supernovas, have had a profound effect on the physical
universe and humankind. There is no doubt about the first part - stars are the
powerhouses of creation, and whatever happens to them is of fundamental, if
somewhat distant, importance. Just how important supernovas have been for human
history, however, should perhaps be decided by nonastronomers. Mr. Clark
discusses theories of the stars' effect on human history from the ancient
Chinese obsession with celestial portents to Aristotelian philosophy. The
appearance of new stars in 1572 and 1604 certainly did occur during a crucial
epoch, when the Roman Catholic Church was getting nervous about heaven's perfect
immutability. But how all this fits into what Mr. Clark calls our ''continuing
cosmic adventure'' may not be amenable to scientific inquiry. His inclusion of a
wonderful quotation from Mark Twain alludes to the problem: ''There is something
fascinating about science. One gets such wholesale returns of conjecture out of
such a trifling investment of fact.'' - Wayne Biddle

* THE GOOD HIGH SCHOOL: Portraits of Character and Culture. By Sara Lawrence
Lightfoot. (Basic Books, $19.95.) There aren't many social scientists brave
enough to give an esthetic dimension to their work, but Sara Lawrence Lightfoot
has tried to define what's good in our high schools by bringing the ''empathetic
regard'' and ''discerning gaze'' of the portraitist to six of them. As she says,
adjusting her metaphor somewhat, she has tried to create a tapestry, ''a
textured piece with shapes and colors that create moments of interest and
emphasis,'' conveying ''the tone, style and tempo of the school environment as
well as its more static structures and behaviorial processes.'' Mrs. Lightfoot's
good schools fall into urban, suburban and private categories. They were chosen
for her ''by school people throughout the country who were knowledgeable about
the educational landscape.'' Mrs. Lightfoot explains the choices but does not
comment on her decision to omit parochial schools - a curious one when there is
considerable interest in them. Good schools, she concludes, tend to have
inspired principals, superior teachers given the respect they deserve, sensible
attitudes toward adolescents, institutional integrity and coherent objectives.
These characteristics may not always be evident in her portraits, but then
goodness turns out to be relative, ''a holistic dimension whose interpretation
requires an embeddedness in context.'' If Mrs. Lightfoot means that each school
can only be judged with reference to its particular circumstances, she hasn't
helped us very much. Nonetheless, her portraits are remarkably successful. -
Judith K. Davison

* THE BARBARIC COUNTER-REVOLUTION: Cause and Cure. By W.W. Rostow (University of
Texas, $13.95.) Seekers of untried paths will get encouragement from W. W.
Rostow's ''Barbaric Counter-Revolution,'' which offers a program to dispel the
''virtual intellectual and policy bankruptcy in the two major political
parties.'' Mr. Rostow, the Rex G. Baker Professor of Political Economy at the
University of Texas, did a stint as a special assistant to President Johnson. He
thinks ''the fatal flaw'' in Ronald Reagan's supply-side strategy was trying to
mix economic expansion - through tax cuts and other concessions to the private
sector - with tight monetary controls. The incompatible measures, he says,
brought us high interest rates and a hard-to-shake recession. Mr. Rostow's prose
is relentlessly polysyllabic. He seems reluctant, moreover, to explain what he
means by ''barbaric,'' a term that suggests the sacking of Rome more than it
does the slicing of budgets. The closest he comes is to point out that our
failure to achieve full employment without inflation constitutes ''a truly
barbaric performance for a rich, well-educated, technologically resourceful,
democratic nation.'' In place of barbarism, Mr. Rostow holds out hope for a
''civilized synthesis,'' the chief feature of which would be annual wage-policy
agreements among business, labor and Government. Only ''a sense of communal
purpose transcending special interests,'' he concludes, can redeem our fortunes.
- Richard J. Margolis

How the Camera Became Candid Unposed pictures were a virtual impossibility for
many decades after the invention of photography. Cameras were simply too bulky
and the necessary exposure times too long to allow for such informality. It
wasn't until faster film and compact cameras with faster lenses were introduced
in the early 1900's that the starch was finally taken out of the photograph. For
a young German painter and printmaker, Felix H. Man, one such camera, the
Vest-Pocket Kodak, was a significant creative and journalistic tool. In 1915,
while serving in the trenches, he took the candid photographs of soldiers that
would later inspire him to help develop a new visual form - photojournalism.

* MAN WITH CAMERA: Photographs from Seven Decades (Schocken, $29.95) is a
retrospective of his photographs culled from the seminal picture magazines for
which he worked. Through informative commentaries, Mr. Man not only traces his
professional life but also offers a firsthand history of the photo essay, a
uniquely German approach to narrative picture journalism that he and the editor
Stefan Lorant fine-tuned. Mr. Man also chronicles many of the special
assignments that introduced him to important political and religious leaders,
artists and writers. And for more than 70 years he unmasked them with the glass
eye. - Steven Heller

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Benito Mussolini

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FAME IS THE BEST REVENGE

BYLINE: By Frank Rich

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1382 words


Frank Rich is chief drama critic of The New York Times.  AUTOMATIC VAUDEVILLE

Essays on Star Turns.  By John Lahr.  241 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.

IN his new and highly polemical collection of essays,

John Lahr sets forth a merciless critique of some of

the most celebrated ''star turns'' in Anglo-American culture. In Mr. Lahr's
view, Woody Allen mistakes ''gravity for seriousness'' and turns death ''into a
commercial proposition.'' Stephen Sondheim makes death ''spectacular'' and
packages a society's anguish as a ''mass product.'' No"el Coward was a
''professional charmer'' who compromised his art and sacrificed his life for
public favor. Eugene O'Neill's plays ''did for pessimism what the American
musical did for 'pep': made it sensational.'' Even old Walt Whitman is hauled
across the hot coals of Mr. Lahr's sensibility: Having ''ushered the cult of
personality into American literature,'' the poet set the stage for the
narcissistic self-perfection craze of contemporary America. ''Song of Myself''
just may be the spiritual precursor of ''I've Got to Be Me.''

Of course, these harsh judgments, though representative of the author's tone,
tend to sensationalize the content of ''Automatic Vaudeville.'' Mr. Lahr has
some approving things to say about most of his victims (Joan Didion, the book's
sole female subject, excepted), even if he does tend to sprinkle the word
''brilliant'' on Mr. Sondheim and Mr. Allen as if he were tossing pennies at a
pair of vagrants. More important, Mr. Lahr has an argument to go with his
invective. He sees fame and stardom as forms of ''vindictive triumph'' by which
artists remove themselves from a democratic society, become ''heroes of free
enterprise'' and retreat into a self-absorption that cripples the reach of their
art. If Mr. Sondheim's musical about Victorian class warfare, ''Sweeney Todd,''
and Miss Didion's report on El Salvador tell us more about the emotional states
of Mr. Sondheim and Miss Didion than the lives of the proletariat, it may be
because fame has imprisoned these writers in the bourgeois status quo.

Mr. Lahr's thesis is passionately and often forcefully argued. The essay on
Coward - a distillation of the author's full-length ''Coward: The Playwright'' -
may well be definitive. Coward's strengths and weaknesses as a writer all
converge in a shrewd analysis that encompasses the man's crowd-pleasing public
persona, lost private self and enormous literary output. By viewing Eugene
O'Neill's obsessive hunger for artistic greatness as a form of self-imposed
emotional isolation as crippling as James O'Neill's greed for money, Mr. Lahr
adds a dimension to his ecstatic appreciation of ''Long Day's Journey Into
Night'' - even as he bolsters his demolition jobs on the High Seriousness of
''Strange Interlude'' and ''Mourning Becomes Electra.''

But sometimes Mr. Lahr wields his thesis as a club to bash entire careers into
pigeonholes - and sometimes his chosen evidence is highly selective. The
discussion of Mr. Allen devotes far more attention to ''Stardust Memories'' than
''Annie Hall.'' No attempt is made to separate Mr. Sondheim's contributions to
''Sweeney Todd'' and ''Follies'' (itself a dissection of empty ''automatic
vaudeville'') from those of his principal collaborator, Harold Prince. Mr.
Lahr's sketchy discussion of Sam Shepard is trenchant on the early work - ''He
clung to the romantic notion that somehow the ragged edges of his plays were
authentic, when they were just sloppy'' - but shortchanges the later plays.
(''Buried Child'' is dismissed only on the grounds that it is ''accessible.'')
Miss Didion and her husband, John Gregory Dunne, are branded as court jesters of
the Hollywood establishment, yet a passing, approving mention of ''The Studio''
by Mr. Dunne doesn't give that journalistic report on 20th Century-Fox full
credit for its rudeness to movie industry powers that be. Though Mr. Lahr makes
incisive ancillary points in all these essays - whether he's dealing with the
absence of characters in Sondheim musicals or the preponderance of up-scale
proper nouns in Didion prose - the broader arguments too often rest on
jerry-built foundations.One might also question whether Mr. Lahr is always fair
in using biographical material (much of it culled from journalistic sources) to
judge an artist's motives. Dredging up an old interview in which the composer
Milton Babbitt says that the young Mr. Sondheim, a former student, had a ''very
Park Avenue'' social life, Mr. Lahr gloats as if he'd caught Mr. Sondheim with a
smoking gun. From this evidence, it's only a small step to the ad hominem
attack, vis- a-vis ''Sweeney Todd,'' that ''there is nothing more hollow than a
lecture on poverty by the well-fed Broadway elite, idealists with servants.''

Nor is the author above jettisoning rational argument entirely for sweeping
rhetoric. Speaking of the Dunnes, he writes that ''only a society indifferent to
literature could tolerate their pretensions to excellence.'' Though the Beatles
are rather grudgingly praised for letting ''the old and good times roll,'' they
are damned for singing that life is getting ''better, better, better . . . all
the time'' at the height of ''the Vietnam War and massive urban unrest'' - and
in general for their inability to bring about a lasting revolution in the
1960's. It's a failure they shared with the entire population, radical activists
included.

Mr. Lahr is such a fine writer and critic it seems a shame he's misplaced the
sense of humor that informed ''The Autograph Hound'' (1973), his bleak novel
that also dealt with the pathology of fame in American life. Except when he's
quoting lines from the book's funny men, he's resolutely glum here, and he's
disinclined to give credit for humor and irony as practiced by others. However
self-regarding Miss Didion's reports on the American scene (or those of another
Lahr target, Hunter S. Thompson), they're still far more valuable than the one
extended example of firsthand reportage in ''Automatic Vaudeville'' - a flat and
deadly earnest account of contemporary Dallas in which football is described as
''a paradigm of the corporate struggle'' and the spendthrifts at Neiman-Marcus
are dutifully contrasted with disenfranchised Chicanos. Instead of serving as a
model of selfless journalism of the Agee or Orwell school, the piece becomes a
sample of disembodied, automatic writing in which rich and poor alike serve as
faceless pawns in the author's unassailably right-minded morality play.

''Hog Heaven: Scenes From Dallas'' - as this article is almost predictably
titled - is not the book's only piece of filler. A mash note (however deserved)
to the rock and roll songsmiths Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller is a cheerless
exercise in nostalgia in which caution is thrown to the winds so we can be told
that ''Yakety Yak'' and ''Hound Dog'' were ''more than art - they were life.''
The brief essays on the Australian comic Barry Humphries (a Lahr hero who mocks
''every bourgeois value'') and the ''media celebrity'' Studs Terkel fail to
persuade. But it will come as no surprise to admirers of Mr. Lahr's essential
biography of Joe Orton (''Prick Up Your Ears'') that his tightly condensed
summation of Orton's oeuvre nearly proves the proposition that the playwright
was the ''master farceur of his age.''


IN the book's final and most corrosive essay, ''Notes

on Fame,'' Mr. Lahr brings his whole argument together. ''Fame is democracy's
vindictive triumph

over equality: the name illuminated, the name rewarded, the name tyrannical,''
he concludes. ''Writing is an act of penetration, celebrity of presentation. The
two are often at odds. In America, the writer strives to develop his singularity
and his popularity - an impossible task because fame, which demands conformity
to the standardized rituals of success, is promiscuous with talent.''

Like Thorstein Veblen, whose ''Theory of the Leisure Class'' is recast by this
book in an esthetic framework, Mr. Lahr delivers a stinging indictment of a
''frenzied yet monotonous'' democratic culture. That target is firmly nailed in
''Automatic Vaudeville'' but not before the author's stray bullets nick some
artists who share his point of view.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of scenes from movies

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS March 25, 1984Fiction 113

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1250 words


THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  247

SMART WOMEN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  337

ALMOST PARADISE , by Susan Isaacs. (Harper & Row, $16.95.) Three generations of
show-biz people play out their destinies on two continents.  4221

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  5530

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?  created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  6630

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  7103

LORD OF THE DANCE, by Andrew M. Greeley. (Bernard Geis/Warner, $17.50.) In
seeking her long-lost cousin, a teen-ager probes the mysteries of life and
death.  8740

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  9119

THE STORY OF HENRI TOD, by William F. Buckley Jr. (Doubleday, $14.95.) Superspy
Blackford Oakes carries out a mission in Berlin at the time The Wall goes up.

1092

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about the
nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  1086

NIGHT SKY, by Clare Francis. (Morrow, $16.95.) Three intertwined lives in
occupied France during World War II.

12152

UNTO THIS HOUR, by Tom Wicker. (Viking, $19.95.) Three days in August, 1862,
when a battle was fought at Manassas, Va.  13127

THE JOURNEYER, by Gary Jennings. (Atheneum, $17.95.) Marco Polo's journey to the
Orient in the 13th century.  141214

BERLIN GAME, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $15.95.) Espionage on both sides of the
Iron Curtain.

15 2

DREAM WEST, by David Nevin. (Putnam, $17.95.) The life of the 19th-century
explorer John Charles Fremont in fictional form.


 Nonfiction 116

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.  2227

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  325

LINES AND SHADOWS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $15.95.) Adventures of
the San Diego police force that stalks bandits along the Mexican border.

4122

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W. Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  5421

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a California preacher.  6530

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  7712

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.

8143

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty. (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  9663

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.
10117

PEOPLE OF THE LIE, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A
psychiatrist's prescription for ''healing human evil.'' 111012

APPROACHING HOOFBEATS: HORSEMEN OF THE APOCALYPSE, by Billy Graham. (Word Books,
$11.95.) The evangelist's interpretation of the Book of Revelation.  1296

TOUGH-MINDED FAITH FOR TENDERHEARTED PEOPLE, by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $14.95.) More inspiration from a California preacher.  13828

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Selections from the writings
of the Yorkshire veterinarian.

141580

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.

14 4

RUSSIA: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams, by David K. Shipler.  (Times Books,
$17.95.) A former New York Times Moscow correspondent probes Soviet society.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 126

WEIGHT WATCHERS' FAST AND FABULOUS COOKBOOK.  (New American Library, $15.50.)
Recipes for tasty dishes dieters can prepare in a hurry.

2 1

PUTTING THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER TO WORK, by Kenneth Blanchard and Robert Lorber.
(Morrow, $15.) Increasing your productivity and that of those with whom you
work.  3167

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  4541

CREATING WEALTH, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) Making money in
real estate.  546

WEBSTER'S NINTH COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard
work updated in 1983.



The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ANOTHER LIFE and THE HOUSE ON THE EMBANKMENT, by

Yuri Trifonov. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Two novellas by a

Soviet writer whose specialty is the life of the intelligentsia.

AUSTIN AND MABEL: The Amherst Affair & Love Letters of

Austin Dickinson and Mabel Loomis Todd.  By Polly Longsworth.

(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $24.95.) An account of the adulterous

affair of Emily Dickinson's brother and her neighbor.

THE KING'S WAY: Recollections of Fran,coise d'Aubigne, Marquise

de Maintenon, by Fran,coise Chandernagor. (Harcourt Brace

Jovanovich, $15.95.) An elegant novel in the form of an

autobiography of the remarkable second wife of Louis XIV.

PASSAGE THROUGH EL DORADO: Traveling the World's Last

Great Wilderness, by Jonathan Kandell. (Morrow, $15.95.) An

investigation of efforts to develop South America's interior.

THE POEMS: A NEW EDITION, by W. B. Yeats. Edited by Richard

J. Finneran. (Macmillan, $19.95.) Almost 200 pages longer than

the 1950 collection, this edition is a landmark, enforcing a new way

of reading Yeats's poetry as a whole.

RIGHT IN HER SOUL: The Life of Anna Louise Strong, by Tracy B.

Strong and Helene Keyssar. (Random House, $22.95.) How a pious

girl from Nebraska became a propagandist for Communism.

TESTING THE CURRENT, by William McPherson. (Simon &

Schuster, $15.95.) A 9-year-old boy's passage from innocence to

wisdom in pre-World War II Wisconsin, told in a first novel that is

intelligent and powerful.

A WARSAW DIARY 1978-1981, by Kazimierz Brandys. (Random

House, $17.95.) Sensitive, occasionally moving vignettes of

everyday life in a police state by one of Poland's foremost writers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1189 words


Robert Barnard used to be a professor of English literature. It is true that he
taught in Norway, but perhaps academics are alike everywhere. In Mr. Barnard's
latest novel,

 SCHOOL FOR MURDER (Scribners, $12.95), the locale is a private school for boys
in England. It is a terrible school, thanks to a pompous headmaster and his
avaricious, stupid wife. If not out of ''Nicholas Nickleby,'' it is only a
cousin thrice removed. The headmistress even doses her boys with vile nostrums.

The headmaster appoints a new head boy who is smart, cynical and amoral. He
promptly starts leading campaigns against teachers and striking at the school's
very existence. The faculty knows him for what he is, but not the headmaster.
Eventually someone gets himself killed. Inspector Michael Pumfrey is put on the
case, and he has to turn over the private lives of the boys and their teachers
before breaking the case.

''School for Murder'' is an orthodox, if slow- moving, mystery. It is
slow-moving because other things are on the author's mind. What interests him
more than murder and the solution of a mystery (though when he gets started,
things pursue a satisfactory course) is a close look at a certain kind of
English school. And Mr. Barnard, in his polite, graceful but lethal manner,
looks very closely indeed, taking the faculty apart, noting the sexual mores of
the students, examining the social structure of the establishment and also
saying a word or two about parents.

Mr. Barnard writes from the viewpoint of an experienced teacher, and at the end
he indulges in a Shavian flight of sophistry. A young teacher, realizing just
how bad this school has been, tells the new headmaster she wants to quit. He
agrees with her estimate. Of course it's an awful school, he says. But ''You're
looking at it entirely the wrong way round, my dear. You're asking what sort of
education this school gives boys. You should be thinking about what kind of
people it gives jobs to.'' All of us on the faculty have failed in one way or
another, he continues. The school - Burleigh - gives a profession to people like
us. ''You want to teach classes full of young geniuses with an aptitude for
classics. You never will, you know. You may one day have one such pupil, and
it's as likely to be at Burleigh as anywhere else. Now, think about it.''

Yes. Think about it.



The third Michael Spraggue mystery,

DEAD HEAT by Linda Barnes (St. Martin's, $11.95), is upon us. Spraggue is the
very rich (old Boston money) young man who has an aunt living by herself in the
family mansion. Nice, smart, rich old Aunt Mary helps him in his detective work
when she is not cornering the market in wheat or pork bellies or whatever. But
Spraggue in this book has let his private investigtor's license lapse. He is now
a full-time actor determined to make it on his own. That includes living in his
own house, his quarters bare of luxuries except for the odd van Gogh or Picasso.

He gets mixed up with a former policeman he had known. Now a bodyguard to the
United States Senator from Massachusetts, the man asks Spraggue to help him. It
seems that the Senator has been receiving death threats. And while training for
the Boston Marathon, he is shot at. Then comes the marathon. The Senator is
given a flask of water; he and his bodyguard drink from it; the bodyguard dies,
and the Senator has to be hospitalized. Suddenly the case becomes a very
personal matter to Spraggue.

The plot is rather complicated, but Miss Barnes handles it very well, and the
ending may come as a surprise. Like its predecessors, ''Dead Heat'' is worth
reading. It has a civilized aura (Spraggue is, after all, a Brahmin) combined
with tough police routine. Characterizations are well worked out, and when evil
gets its comeuppance, the reader may start cheering.



Albert Ashforth's

MURDER AFTER THE FACT (St. Martin's, $13.95) is a first novel about a computer
engineer returning home after many years. His aunt, who reared him after the
death of his parents, has died, and he must take care of the estate. Among the
papers she has left him is a note confessing to a murder about 30 years ago.

But did his aunt really commit the deed? The visitor starts nosing around and
soon finds he has walked into something he doesn't understand. He also gets
beaten up. But he is a Vietnam veteran, and he knows how to take care of
himself. This is a well-done book - clear, well plotted, well written - and a
sympathetic look at going home, which is not always pleasant.



Doubleday's Crime Club in recent years has degenerated into a sort of catchall
for dull mysteries by dull writers, the kind of book that ends with ''And so we
walked slowly into the moonlight, hand in hand, away from the bad dreams.'' One
has learned to approach Crime Club with a certain amount of suspicion, and that
held true for

SWEET, SAVAGE DEATH by Orania Papazoglou (Doubleday, $11.95).

Surprise! The book starts out promisingly by kidding the conventions of romantic
fiction. Will the author maintain the tongue-in-cheek approach? You bet.
''Sweet, Savage Death'' does have its serious moments. The heroine - a
6-foot-tall writer of romantic fiction - finds a dead body in her room. Other
murders ensue, and the fair maiden is the No. 1 suspect. There is a fair amount
of heavy action before she clears herself. But otherwise the book is a
sophisticated and often amusing romp. It also contains a look at the inner
circles of romantic fiction - its writers and their fans, agents and publishers.

It is an area that males normally do not inhabit. Thus most of the characters
are women, romance writers who are as temperamental as operatic sopranos. Some
are as rich too. And some are exotic in their sexual habits (though Miss
Papazoglou avoids bad taste). The writing is breezy and marked by deft turns of
phrase. As for the mystery, there is a locked- room puzzle and the usual
face-to-face confrontation with the killer. Miss Papazoglou has not broken new
ground. But the book is an attractive first effort, and the chances are this
author will not stop here.



Mignon Warner is a British writer who has presented the world with several books
about Mrs.  Edwina Charles, who turns up once again in

ILLUSION (Doubleday, $11.95). Mrs. Charles is described as a ''clairvoyante.''
There was a time when it was considered genteel to call a woman pianist a
''pianiste'' and a woman violinist a ''violiniste,'' so technically there is
nothing wrong with ''clairvoyante.'' But it does suggest a gentility that is
carried through in this thoroughly dreary Crime Club book.

There is an Agatha Christie situation. The cast of a musical is stranded in a
big country house. The phone lines are cut. The automobiles have been sabotaged.
People start getting popped off. The situation is entirely artificial, and so is
the writing. Eyes narrow. Eyes get round. People look at other people
searchingly. Or they fling contemptuous looks. Miss Warner leaves no cliche
searchingly unexamined. At the end, the killer explains all in a long, long
letter.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1197 words


ALL GOD'S DANGERS: The Life of Nate Shaw, by Theodore Rosengarten. (Vintage,
$8.95.) ''One does not read this book - one listens to it . . . Nate Shaw
strides directly off the page,'' H. Jack Geiger declared in 1974 in a review
that called Shaw ''a black Homer, bursting with his black Odyssey'' and able to
tell it with passion and awesome intellectual power. A National Book Award
winner, ''All God's Dangers'' is the autobiography, constructed by Theodore
Rosengarten from extensive interviews, of ''a strong, tough, autonomous,
powerful rural Southern black man'' whose life spanned nearly 90 years, ending
in 1973.

NEVERLIGHT, by Donald Pfarrer. (Dell/Laurel, $4.95.) Swinging back and forth
between battleground and home front, ''Neverlight'' centers on Richard Vail, who
chooses to return to Vietnam after being wounded and sent home to his wife in
New England. ''The author's sense of place is as sharp throughout as his
portrayal of (a) couple caught in a personal and national tragedy . . . his
tragic sense of life and ability to charge language with philosophical feeling
never waver,'' Alan Cheuse said in his review.

THE MAKING OF THE WIZARD OF OZ: Movie Magic and Studio Power in the Prime of MGM
- and the Miracle of Production N1060, by Aljean Harmetz. (Limelight Editions,
New York, $8.95.) Making ''The Wizard of Oz'' involved four directors, 10
screenwriters and a slew of accidents, and the mystery of how ''anything so
wonderful (came) out of an experience so disastrous and chaotic for so many of
the principals'' is at the heart of Aljean Harmetz's book, which Nora Ephron
reviewed in 1977. It is ''full of absolutely fascinating details about the movie
and the studio that produced it.'' Film fanciers may also be interested in

HITCHCOCK - The Murderous Gaze , by William Rothman (Harvard University Press,
$10.95), an analysis of five movies with 600-odd frame enlargements; and the
latest edition of

HALLIWELL'S FILMGOER'S COMPANION by Leslie Halliwell (Scribners, $10.95).

THE SELECTED POETRY OF RAINER MARIA RILKE, edited and translated by Stephen
Mitchell. (Vintage, $7.95.) Generous samples from Rilke's entire career appear
in this collection and our critic, Denis Donoghue, found the translations
excellent on the whole. Stephen Mitchell ''has tuned Rilke's poems, so far as
possible, to the common style of contemporary American poetry, a loose-limbed
style more concerned with mobility and transitive ease than with density of
diction or any particularly oppulent mode of allusion.''

FATE IS THE HUNTER, by Ernest K. Gann. (S&S/ $9.95.) The author of ''The High
and the Mighty,'' who flew for both commercial airlines and the military,
''steps from behind the shield of fiction to stand autobiographically exposed''
in ''Fate Is the Hunter.'' Martin Caidin said in his 1961 review that it draws
readers ''into the shielded sanctum of the cockpit'' and lets them share ''the
secrets as well as the great beauties of flight.'' The book's theme is that fate
largely determines the life spans of career fliers.

DISTANT RELATIONS, by Carlos Fuentes. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $7.95.) In all
his books, Carlos Fuentes ''draws tight a tense conjunction of opposites''; in
''Distant Relations'' - a novel featuring a sophisticated world traveler in his
80's who tells a story to a Mexican novelist named Carlos Fuentes in order to
understand an experience that may never have happened - ''these tensions operate
in a cat's cradle of a plot, crisscrossing each other to make a puzzle worthy of
Poe or Borges,'' according to Guy Davenport's admiring review.

TERRA NOSTRA by Mr. Fuentes, which first appeared in the United States in 1976,
is also now available in paperback (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $13.50).

THE LOVE YOU MAKE: An Insider's Story of the Bea

tles, by Peter Brown and Steven Gaines. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) Peter Brown, who
was executive director of NEMS Enterprises, the Beatles' management company, and
Steven Gaines, who writes often about people in show business, designed this
book not as ''a tedious documentary, or the definitive Beatles' biography'' but
rather as a ''look at the saga of the Beatles' lives.'' Their illustrated best
seller is gossipy and detailed.

WHITE MISCHIEF, by James Fox. (Vintage, $4.95.) The body of Josslyn Hay, Earl of
Erroll, was discovered on Jan. 24, 1941, shortly after he had left his latest
mistress and her much older husband in the English enclave Happy Valley in
Kenya. The unsolved murder fascinated Cyril Connolly. James Fox, who began
investigating it with him in 1969 and continued after Connolly's demise, here
portrays the tragedy of a weak man driven to murder but also offers grotesquely
amusing glimpses of Happy Valley life and delightful accounts of bizarre
characters he and Connolly drew into their net, as Peter Quennell's review
pointed out.

THE SACRED AND PROFANE LOVE MACHINE, by Iris Murdoch. (Penguin, $4.95.) A
psychoanalyst with a thriving practice, his wife and his self-educated,
penniless mistress are the central characters in Iris Murdoch's 1974 novel,
which - our reviewer, John Wain, wrote - ''tackles one of the most well-worn of
all subjects: a man and two women, with the man torn by unresolvable conflicts
of love and duty and preference . . . with such power and authority as to make
one feel that one is reading about it for the first time.''

SCIENTIFIC TEMPERAMENTS: Three Lives in Con

temporary Science, by Philip J. Hilts. (S&S/Touchstone, $7.95.) This captivating
account of how the personalities of three scientists ''shaped their
contributions to science and how, in turn, science shaped their lives'' covers
''Robert Wilson and the Building of Fermilab,'' ''Mark Ptashne and the
Revolution in Biology'' and ''John McCarthy and the Evolution of Artificial
Intelligence.'' Our reviewer, Peter Engel, thought it weak as history but
compelling as a collection of profiles.

THE SHATTERED EYE, by Bill Granger, (Pocket, $3.95.) Bill Granger ''writes
knowingly about the curious love-hate relationship between the United States and
the Soviet Union, as revealed through our respective intelligence-network
computers'' in ''The Shattered Eye.'' ''Both a spy tale and a multilevel love
story,'' in the words of our reviewer, Evan Hunter, it's an ''expectedly
exciting'' novel that ''touches the mind and heart'' as it conveys ''the true
poignancy of lives wrecked by the business of espionage.''

VOICES FROM COOPERSTOWN: Baseball's Hall of

Famers Tell It Like It Was, by Anthony J. Connor. (Collier, $7.95.) Anthony J.
Connor uses the words of 65 baseball Hall of Famers to create a ''mural of a
century of baseball viewed from the inside.'' Replete with illustrations, his
book (originally entitled ''Baseball for the Love of It'') focuses on sequential
stages of a career in sports as it juxtaposes comments from players in different
eras under headings like ''Idols and Mentors,'' ''Boners, Losses and Slumps''
and ''The Veteran.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ray Bolger

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
WILSON'S VIEW OF CHEKHOV

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 12, Column 6; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 979 words


TO many, Lanford Wilson is modern America's premier playwright, if not our most
prolific. Indeed, the Missouri- born Wilson has been called the theatrical poet
who ''hears America singing.''

With two of his most recent plays regarded as overviews of World War II
(''Talley's Folly'') and the post- Vietnam era (''Fifth of July''), why should
the 46-year-old Mr. Wilson turn to translating the Hartford Stage Company's
production of Chekhov's ''Three Sisters,'' a Russian masterwork?

Reasons abound. Still smarting from last season's Broadway failure of his play,
''Angels Fall,'' Mr. Wilson acknowledged that ''my last commercial theater
venture did me in. I don't want to hear anything about contracts and
negotiations.''

The play had moved to Broadway from Circle Repertory Company, an Off Broadway
organization co- founded by Mr. Wilson in 1969 and where he remains a ''resident
playwright'' and an active force, he said. Before its New York opening, the play
had tryout performances at Lucille Lortel's White Barn Theater in Westport. That
was Mr. Wilson's only previous work in the state, although he attended Yale
University for one year in 1971, when he won a film course fellowship.

Miss Lortel was one of the Broadway sponsors of ''Angels Fall.'' Mr. Wilson and
the Circle Repertory plan to return to the White Barn this summer for an
extension of their Manhattan plays-in-progress series, he said.

When Mark Lamos, the artistic director of the Hartford Stage Company, who is
staging the Chekhov play, asked Mr. Wilson for a new ''Three Sisters''
translation, the playwright was exhilarated by the prospect of a change of pace,
He said. Mr. Wilson's translation opened Friday and runs through April 22.

''I have no responsibility for creating characters, story or setting,'' he said.
''The only thing people can say is I did a lousy job. I had no idea for a new
play. Very few things crossed my mind. This, then, is like a parenthesis in my
work and a restorative. I had to get away - even though it hasn't helped a bit
in what I want to write now.''

For all the acclaim heaped upon Mr. Wilson of late, including the 1981 Pulitzer
Prize for ''Talley's Folly,'' the playwright has hardly entered the commercial
mainstream. Best known for lyricism and language, he has been proclaimed as the
successor to Tennessee Williams. However, his musings and metaphors have not
been balanced by sex, violence and eccentricity, as were Mr. Williams's works,
which could be why Hollywood producers have not grabbed at any of Mr. Wilson's
plays, which number over 40.

''The Hot L Baltimore,'' an Off Broadway success, was the basis for a television
series that did not last. At this point in a relatively late-blooming career,
his earliest works are being rediscovered and restored.  ''Serenading Louie''
(1976) was revived Off Off Broadway last month and ''Balm in Gilead'' (1965)
will be seen at the Circle Repertory in May.

As much as the need for what he calls ''a busman's holiday,'' translating
''Three Sisters'' was, for Mr. Wilson, the chance to explore his ''favorite play
ever.''

''A flock of translations exist and we were unhappy with everyone of them,'' he
said. ''They have no imagination, no poetry, no soul.''

He expressed special disdain for an English production with Laurence Olivier,
Joan Plowright and Alan Bates.

''The Three Sisters'' is often reduced to a static cliche in which characters
mope, complain about living in the provinces and long to go to Moscow.

''Maybe people will learn it really has nothing to do with going to Moscow,''
Mr. Wilson said.

''What Chekhov has done is so seamless, it's a miracle,'' he said. ''You can't
find the power in the play. There's no reason why these foolish characters
should generate such incredible empathy by the end. It's an endless repetition
of certain chords - detail, detail, detail - and it's just flabbergasting. When
it's over, you know they're prepared to survive - but at what a cost.''

Although he insists on using the word ''translation'' as opposed to
''adaptation'' - ''I haven't cut anything and I've stuck to the intention of
every word as best as I understand it'' - Mr. Wilson and Mr. Lamos have agreed
on markedly different approaches to certain characters and motivations.

Natasha, for example, is usually seen as villainous, rather than a victim.

''She's not just a shrew babbling,'' Mr. Wilson said. ''She's a sad, lonely
petunia in an onion patch, warm and needing and not shallow. She can break your
heart, but she's the life force of the play.

''And Irina is completely different here, too, traveling from selfishness to
usefulness. People are either going to be enlightened or appalled. There are
moments when I think, 'here's where 15 critics and 75 professors just threw
their programs down and stormed out of the theater.' ''

In preparation for translating the Chekhov play, Mr. Wilson listened to a taped
performance by the Moscow Art Theater and studied Russian for a hundred hours.

''It seemed like 100 years,'' the playwright said. ''Three hours a day, five
days a week for over two months. I still don't understand Russian and it messed
up my English but I understand 'Three Sisters' because I memorized it. Even if
you know the language perfectly - it's so gorgeous, all the word endings agree -
you can't get to the bottom of the play. Every word has ramifications and colors
and I've tried to make some of the language sing.''

Although the translation is true to time and place, Mr. Wilson said, ''I'm not
using words Chekhov wouldn't have used if he wrote it in America or phrases that
weren't in common usage in 1900.

''I want people to say 'this is Lanford's best play, but I can't imagine why he
chose to write it about Russia in 1900.' I think it's going to be a classic. I
really think I've written a classic!''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lanford Wilson and Mark Lamos

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAGING PHYSICIANS' ASSISTANTS

BYLINE: By SHARON JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 12; Page 33, Column 1; Careers Supplement Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words


BECAUSE of rapidly rising medical costs, the buzzword in health care today is
productivity, and that is good news for the career prospects of physician
assistants: persons whose two-year training program prepares them to perform
about 70 percent of the clinical procedures traditionally completed by
physicians in general practice.

Hospitals, health-maintenance organizations, prisons and rural clinics are
hiring physician assistants because they have found that they can save money by
having them treat patients with colds, minor sprains and other common problems
so that the doctors, more highly paid and highly trained, can concentrate on
patients with more serious problems.

''The profession has grown rapidly,'' said Joyce Emelio, program specialist for
physician-assistant programs in the Bureau of Health Professions, a branch of
the Federal Department of Health and Human Services. ''In 1983 there were an
estimated 15,100 physician assistants, an increase of 36 percent from 1980.''
And by 1990 there will be 24,000 of them, according to projections of the
American Academy of Physician Assistants, a professional organization in
Arlington, Va.

''There are now more job openings than physician assistants to fill them,'' said
Charles G. Huntington, academy president. ''Jobs are opening up in every section
of the nation as employers have found a physician working with a physician's
assistant can offer more services for less cost per patient.'' For example, the
Kaiser-Permanente group-practice plan in Portland, Ore., found it saved about
$20,000 a year per physician assistant.

Technological advances have created many new jobs for physician assistants.
Heart surgeons, neural surgeons, cardiologists and other physicians have hired
them to work as liaison with other doctors and patients. These assistants
counsel patients and keep other doctors up to date on patients they have
referred for surgery. They also work in operating rooms and intensive-care
units, where they participate in surgery and do physical examinations of
postoperative patients.

''Although there is some overlapping in what nurses and physician assistants do
in preventive medicine and patient education, there is a significant
difference,'' said Dr. Reginald D. Carter, associate director of the
physician-assistant program at Duke University. ''Unlike nurses, physician
assistants are dependent practitioners who perform medical tasks delegated to
them by supervising physicians.''

A typical example is Molly Backup, who received a bachelor's degree from Harvard
University in 1972 and then began looking for a career in the health
professions. ''However, I didn't want to spend eight years completing medical
school and residency training, so I decided to enroll in the program of
physician-assistant training at Yale.''

Today Miss Backup and Dr. Gary J. DeBrino, a physician who has specialty
training in family practice, treat about 1,000 patients from three rural
counties at the Capital Area Community Health Plan in Canaan, N. Y. ''I love my
job because it is like being an old-fashioned country doctor,'' Miss Backup
said. ''On a typical day, I might counsel a patient who wants to stop smoking,
give a baby an immunization shot, do a Pap-smear test, and work out a diet for a
patient who has a high risk of developing heart disease.'' About 75 percent of
physician assistants work in primary care, which includes general medicine and
family practice, but an increasing number of positions are opening up in highly
technical specialties such as heart surgery and trauma and emergency-room
medicine. Physician assistants like Richard H. Gemming, who works for Dr. James
R. Malm, a cardiovascular surgeon at Presbyterian Hospital in New York City,
have completed a special training course in surgery that prepares them to work
with highly complex equipment in the operating room and intensive-care units.

''One of the most important parts of my job,'' said Mr. Gemming, ''is counseling
patients and their families. People often have questions about these highly
technical procedures, and I can explain it to them in laymen's language.''

The first training program for physician assistants began at Duke in 1965 with
four students who had served as medical corpsmen in Vietnam. Now there are 80
students in the two-year course.

''The object of the program,'' said Dr. Michael A. Hamilton, its director, ''was
to take people who had some experience in health care and to give them knowledge
and education in the basic sciences and clinical medicine so that they would be
qualified to work with physicians in rural areas and inner cities where there
was a shortage of doctors.

Although the more than 50 training programs across the nation are still
attracting former corpsmen, orderlies and nurses' aides, more entering students
have degrees today'' Dr. Hamilton added. ''Over two-thirds of those who enrolled
in 1980 were college graduates.''

ATYPICAL physician assistant will earn about $24,000 this year, according to the
American Academy of Physician Assistants. Those in health-maintenance
organizations, hospitals and doctors' offices earn slightly more than those in
clinics.

Job satisfaction is high, according to a survey conducted by Dr. Carter of Duke.
He found, unlike in some health-care fields, few physician assistants had
dropped out. The vast majority, 86 percent, of the 10,500 physician assistants
surveyed were employed, and most said they felt accepted by patients,
supervising doctors and other health-care workers.

''There was some dissatisfaction with opportunities for career advancement,''
Dr. Carter noted. ''Some physician assistants felt limited in their roles
because of state laws, hospital procedures and reimbursement policies, but these
things are beginning to change.''

For example, physician assistants in 14 states are now permitted to write
prescriptions under the supervision of the cooperating doctors. Since 1978, the
Air Force has appointed physician assistants as commissioned officers, which has
enabled them to move up the career ladder in military hospitals.

Probably the greatest challenge to the career opportunities of physician
assistants is the increased number of doctors. From 1975 to 1980 the number of
medical- school graduates went from 12,716 to 15,673, and there is concern that
physicians might replace physician assistants if an oversupply of doctors
develops.

''The long-term prospects of physician assistants are difficult to assess,''
said Donald Clark, an economist in the Bureau of Labor Statistics. ''So many
factors will affect them - state laws regulating their practice, reimbursement
policies, the supply of foreign medical school graduates, and the role of
health-maintenance organizations.''

Physician assistants like Mr. Huntington remain optimistic, however. ''There is
no competition between us and doctors,'' he said. ''Our major support comes from
the doctors who use us because we enable them to do their jobs more
efficiently.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Gemming

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MORALISM, PRAGMATISM AND IRRATIONALITY

BYLINE: By Michael Kinsley

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1126 words


Michael Kinsley writes the ''TRB from Washington'' column for The New Republic.
A TIME OF PASSION

America 1960-1980.  By Charles R. Morris.  270 pp. New York: A Cornelia &
Michael Bessie Book/ Harper & Row. $17.50.

CHARLES R. MORRIS is an amateur in the best sense, and this book is an
old-fashioned sort of project. A lawyer and businessman with extensive
government experience, Mr. Morris is clearly a man of wide reading and sharp
judgment but of no special expertise on what he is writing about. He substitutes
an amateur's enthusiasm, wandering eye and fearlessness. Imagine: two turbulent
decades of American history described and assessed by one man in less than 300
pages, including a six-page disquisition on Keynesian economics, a one-paragraph
genealogy of rock and roll, a five-page aside on William James and John Dewey
and a footnote explaining how the Eurodollar was invented in Moscow.

On the whole, he pulls it off. On subjects I know something about, Mr. Morris's
judgments seem sound. On other subjects, he seems at the very least provocative.
Is it true, for example, that ''Virtually all the techniques of management
control now routinely used by large businesses . . . were either invented,
developed, or refined in (Robert) McNamara's Pentagon''? Or that one reason for
the rise of the social worker was that this career served as ''a next-best
answer for Jewish men - a way to satisfy their strong professional orientation
short of attending law school or medical school''? True or not, nuggets like
these are fun to chew.

Mr. Morris's overarching theme is roughly as follows: President Kennedy's New
Frontiersmen were pragmatic social engineers, heirs of James and Dewey, who were
uninterested in transcendent moral questions and believed that government is a
straightforward matter of solving practical problems. This notion foundered on
the shoals of the 1960's - first, on the moral claims of the civil rights
movement, which made their pragmatism seem ''arid and unfeeling''; second, on
Vietnam, where Ho Chi Minh's lack of interest in ''game theory, 'minimax'
concepts, and microeconomic maximization principles'' confounded Mr. McNamara's
''defense wizards''; and third, on attempts to cure poverty and social decay. He
writes: ''All of the planning suffered from a kind of nominalist hallucination -
if juvenile delinquency was a problem, the creation of something, anything,
called a 'juvenile delinquency program' would fix it. It was rationalism run
amok. The slightest scraps of data and the broadest sociological associations .
. . were used to underpin huge, wobbly towers of interventionist hypothesis.''

By the mid-60's, the theory goes, ''a growing distaste, even disgust, for the
aridly reductionist bias in American pragmatism'' led to a renewed burst of
moralism and irrationality. Thus we had the youth culture, the antiwar movement,
riots and violence, and so on. But this trend too ran its course, and ''by the
late 1960's, through a kind of Gresham's law of motive and emotion, soul-felt
protest at genuine injustice was being drowned out by the cawing of
revolutionary dilettantes.'' And so Leonard Bernstein had a cocktail party for
the Black Panthers. This behavior lasted through most of the 70's, until America
was ready to start all over again with Ronald Reagan, whom Mr. Morris sees as
strangely similar to John F. Kennedy.

Mr. Morris's last book, about the New York City fiscal crisis, was called ''The
Cost of Good Intentions.'' This pegs him as a neoconservative. A key tenet of
the neoconservative creed is that well-intended liberal interventionism often
results in bad unintended consequences. Mr. Morris's analyses of Keynesian
economics and the Great Society follow this pattern. He is entranced by the
Kondratieff ''long wave'' theory of economics, which holds that economies rise
and fall in cycles of about 40 years no matter what anybody tries to do about
it. He sees similar long waves in the world of ideas. And he thinks that human
nature - among the poor and criminals, for example - tends to be unchanging and
unchangeable.

Mr. Morris has earned his pessimism. Some of the most vivid moments in this book
come when he stops the rush of history to describe incidents from his own time
as a poverty-program and prison administrator. He truly has been ''mugged by
reality,'' in Irving Kristol's famous definiton of a neoconservative. But his
political views are full of surprises. For example, he finds it
''understandable'' that black militants would turn to violence to force the pace
of the civil rights movement, and he rejects the neoconservative idea that the
riots of 1967 and 1968 were merely ''for fun and profit.'' Overall, his book
radiates a generosity and good will that set it apart from the typically sour
neoconservative creed.

One bit of good will many will find hard to stomach is Mr. Morris's treatment of
Richard Nixon. Vietnam he blames exclusively on Mr. Nixon's Democratic
predecessors, saying that when Mr. Nixon inherited the war, ''the brutality was
at its height'' and his ''actual withdrawal was about as direct and rapid as was
possible.'' In fact, Mr. Nixon's ''actual withdrawal'' took almost five years,
which is longer than Lyndon Johnson spent fighting to win the war.

''Nixon's record on social legislation,'' Mr. Morris argues, ''bears comparison
with that of any other President.'' He points to food stamps, to a reform that
eliminated taxes for most of the poor and to the ill-fated Family Assistance
Plan, all of which emphasized letting people have money instead of trying to
change their behavior. Though one could quibble, Mr. Morris's case here is
something of an eye-opener. But he goes too far in suggesting that because of
misplaced liberal opposition to the Family Assistance Plan, Mr. Nixon ''had
begun to weary of the battle for his domestic agenda and was more prepared
simply to return spite with spite'' - in other words, that liberals were
responsible for Watergate.

As for Watergate itself, Mr. Morris concedes that Mr. Nixon, as a sitting
President, was ''involved in a serious felony.'' But he points to suspicious
behavior by other Presidents that was never investigated and complains of the
''gleeful malice'' of Mr. Nixon's critics. Finally, he explains away the whole
business with uncharacteristic cheap psychologizing - ''my own guess is Nixon
just didn't know how to be a winner.'' Mr. Morris's brief for Mr. Nixon is no
doubt sincere, but I suspect it also derives in part from a desire to be
perverse.

''A Time of Passion'' shows us our own time from Mr. Morris's somewhat eccentric
viewpoint, and in dozens of little ways, this changes the way we will see it
ourselves from now on.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 26, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
IF I FORGET THEE...

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 799 words

DATELINE: SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico, March 25


Four years ago, in the heat of the Republican primaries, Ronald Reagan came to
New York to assure supporters of Israel of his firm conviction that (a)
Jerusalem must remain an undivided city and (b) that ''the sovereignty is
Israel's.''

However, when asked if he would dramatize that pledge as President by moving the
U.S. Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, Israel's capital, candidate Reagan
replied that he did not want to ''get into trouble the way Joe Clark did.'' He
was referring to a promise to move the Canadian Embassy to Jerusalem made in the
late 70's by Canada's conservative candidate for Prime Minister; once in office,
Mr. Clark was publicly humiliated when Arab oil pressures forced him to
repudiate his promise.

In the weeks before New York's 1984 Democratic primary, this issue of a moral
obligation to respect an ally's choice of capital has surfaced with more urgency
than before. Now legislation is before Congress to require the President to
locate our Embassy in Israel's capital, and Presidential candidates must take a
position.

Mr. Mondale (who as Vice President twisted Senator Muriel Humphrey's arm into
voting in favor of F-15 sales to Saudi Arabia) has consistently favored the
Embassy move. Senator Hart (who steadfastly refused to go along with the Awacs-
selling and general Israel-bashing in 1981 and '82) at first resisted the
Embassy move unless it could be used to extract other concessions from Israel,
but finally reversed his position to appeal to New York's Jewish voters, at some
cost to his anti-special-interest image.

Politics permeates the issue: In the U.S. Senate, Republicans see Senator
Moynihan's proposal as a Democratic device that would elicit a Reagan veto and
further alienate Mr. Reagan from Jewish support.

As the corrupt judge said when offered a bribe from both sides, ''I'll take the
money from each of you - now let's try the case on its merits.''

One argument for the move of our Embassy to Jerusalem is moral: Since the U.S.
believes Israel to be sovereign in Jerusalem, and since that nation has an
unmatched record in guaranteeing the freedom of all religions there, we should
put our Embassy where our mouth is - in our ally's chosen capital. It is wrong
for us to pretend that Israeli sovereignty there may be negotiable.

A second pro argument is diplomatic: An example should be set to demonstrate
that double-crossing the U.S. has its consequences. The Saudis took our Awacs,
persuaded us to stop Israel from defeating the P.L.O. and Syria in Lebanon in
1982, and double- crossed Mr. Reagan by selling out to Syria and its
anti-Christian allies this year.  Similarly, Jordan's King Hussein promised to
support Mr. Reagan's plan to snatch the West Bank from Israel, then chickened
out and now irately blames Mr. Reagan for the mess - in a swing of mood that
calls into question more than his political instability. Such behavior deserves
a U.S. reaction.  The first argument against the Embassy move is despicable: A
U.S. diplomat sarcastically told senators to let him know if the vote carried so
that he could abandon his post of duty in the face of expected terrorist
attacks. Such a self-fulfilling prophecy insults every brave Foreign Service
officer. Yesterday, a bomb exploded near the British Embassy in Amman; Queen
Elizabeth will not cancel her visit.  The second argument against the move is
outdated: that ''moderate'' Arabs will be offended by our recognition of reality
in Jerusalem. Syria proved in Lebanon this year that Riyadh, Amman and Cairo
have enormous respect for a fait accompli.  The third argument against the move
deals not with substance but with method, and is, I must grimly mutter,
compelling.  Congress should not be making this diplomatic decision; this is
what we elect Presidents to do. After Vietnam and Watergate, the pendulum of
power swung too far away from the executive branch. The War Powers Act is now a
reform in need of reform. With his predilection for bipartisan, authority-
diffusing commissions to skirt controversy, Mr. Reagan has further weakened the
Presidency.  Congress can and should deny funds and arms to nations that it
believes act contrary to our national interest, but it should not seek to take
over the business of diplomacy. In this embassy case, a nonbinding,
sense-of-the-Senate resolution would send the message without warping the
Constitution.  A future U.S. ambassador to Israel will surely be located in that
nation's capital. The issue drawn by Senator Moynihan has already committed two
candidates for President to send our ambassador there. That decision must be
made by the chief executive, and not forced upon him by the legislative branch;
it will then stand as an unchallengeable act of American moral authority.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 26, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NURSE HELPED TO EXPOSE MEDICAL DEGREES FRAUD

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words

DATELINE: MERRIFIELD, Va.


Her cover name was Odette Bouchard, and her cover address was 575 Main Street,
Roosevelt Island, N.Y.

But in real life she is a nurse working for the Veterans Administration in the
District of Columbia who went under cover to help Federal investigators expose
trafficking in fraudulent medical credentials prepared at a university in the
Dominican Republic.

Miss Bouchard never attended medical school, yet in December 1982 she was
awarded a Doctor of Medicine degree by Universidad Cetec in Santo Domingo after
paying $19,200 to Pedro de Mesones, who is now serving a three- year prison term
for mail fraud.

Federal prosecutors in Virginia have delayed making public Miss Bouchard's
actual identity until she takes the stand to testify as a Government witness in
what may be a series of trials of others involving the manufacture and sale of
false medical credentials.

Scheme for Fake Degrees


''We are not going to let anyone near her until we absolutely have to in a court
of law,'' said Theodore S. Greenberg, an assistant United States Attorney in
Alexandria, Va. He and his associates have declined further comment about Miss
Bouchard.  According to court documents, interviews in New York with a doctor
who attended Cetec and interviews with Federal postal inspectors based here,
Miss Bouchard had several meetings in New York with Mr. de Mesones. He has
admitted being one of the architects of a scheme that produced bogus degrees for
at least 100 people, at a cost to them of $1.5 million.

Postal inspectors said they first received complaints about Mr. de Mesones in
1981 from two people who answered advertisements he had placed in newspapers and
magazines offering help in securing medical school degrees. People were urged to
write to his company, Medical Placement Inc.

''We heard that he was telling people, 'You can buy a medical degree if you want
one; I can arrange it for you,' '' said David P. Cyr, the postal inspector in
charge of the de Mesones investigation. The postal inspectors enlisted the aid
of Miss Bouchard, who wrote to the company asking for help.

2 Meetings in New York


According to court documents, Mr. de Mesones, who was born in Peru and is a
naturalized citizen of the United States, met with Miss Bouchard in the
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan. He initially asked for $16,500 and received
a down payment of $5,600. Later payments were made in the T r a v e l o d g e
Hotel at Kennedy Airport.

''Mr. de Mesones told Miss Bouchard to obtain stationery with a hospital
letterhead, and when she did so he dictated to her a letter attesting to the
fact that she had spent 72 weeks at the hospital doing the clinical rotation
needed for graduation,'' Mr. Cyr said, adding that Mr. de Mesones then signed
someone else's name to it.

A month after making the final payment Mr. de Mesones and confederates at
Universidad Cetec arranged for her to be present at the institution's graduation
ceremonies in Santo Domingo. It was the first time she had set foot in the
Dominican Republic.

On graduation day, dressed in cap and gown, she took the Hippocratic Oath and
received a degree of Doctor of Medicine as well as a transcript certified by an
agency of the Government of the Dominican Republic that she had been a student
there for four years.

Documents Called Realistic


As a check on the degree of sophistication of the credentials, the postal
inspectors said, they were submitted to the Educational Commission on Foreign
Medical Graduates in Philadelphia, ''where they stood up under examination.''

Also at the graduation ceremony was George Douglas Hanley of Brooklyn, a Marine
Corps veteran of Vietnam who had graduated from the University of California and
completed the four-year medical curriculum at Cetec after being denied admission
at 26 medical colleges in the United States.

''I first met her a few days before graduation at the swimming pool of the Santo
Domingo Hotel,'' Dr. Hanley recalled. ''She told me she was a nurse with the
Veterans Administration in Washington. I thought there was something odd because
she told me she had started medical school in Mexico, then transferred to Cetec,
yet she didn't speak Spanish.''

Dr. Hanley said his suspicions were further aroused by the appearance at
graduation of ''100 other persons whom we who had been students there had never
seen before in any of our classes.''

White Patent Leather Shoes


Mr. de Mesones, according to Dr.  Hanley, had 17 ''students'' in tow whom he
took in a school bus from the hotel to the university and back again for
meetings with various officials.

''De Mesones looked like a used-car dealer,'' Dr. Hanley said, ''He was dressed
in a flashy gray suit and white patent leather shoes.''

On the basis of Miss Bouchard's evidence, a search warrant was served at Mr. de
Mesones's home last summer, and 10,000 documents detailing his business of
manufacturing medical credentials were collected. He pleaded guilty in December
to mail fraud and conspiracy in Federal District Court in Alexandria, Va.

Mr. Cyr said the Federal inquiry into fraudulent medical credentials ''has
widened so that we are now looking at others who may have acted as brokers, as
well as some institutions.''

Federal officials have stated that several other schools in the Caribbean and
one in Mexico have come under scrutiny, as well as 10 hospitals in the United
States where fraudulent training certificates may have been concocted.

Inquiries in 2 Nations


The disclosures in the de Mesones case have led the Government of the Dominican
Republic to investigate Universidad Cetec, an acronym for Centro de Estudios
Tecnologicos. Agencies in at least 15 states have begun looking into the
documentation of several thousand doctors.

In New York at least 100 persons are under investigation by the Office of
Professional Discipline, headed by William L. Wood Jr.

''New cases are coming under priority investigation every day, more recently
because hospitals have been examining the credentials of their doctors and
reporting any suspicions to us,'' Mr. Wood said.  Daniel J. Kelleher, Mr. Wood's
chief investigator, said 60 people are assigned to the state inquiry and that
every hospital in the state has been visited by an investigator.

In California, Kenneth Wagstaff, director of the State Board of Medical Quality
Assurance, said the arrests of 54 people in the Los Angeles area this month on
charges of defrauding the state's Medicaid agency had spurred a new
investigation.

''Twenty of those arrested were doctors, most of whom had almost identical
credentials,'' Mr. Wagstaff said. ''We are now looking into the possibility that
the credentials are fraudulent.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dr. George Hanley

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 26, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FROM A STREET PEDDLER, VISION OF THE CITY

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 883 words


For years, George Forss spent his days on the streets of Manhattan, peddling his
photographs. His sidewalk display showed the city in all of its power and
beauty: the Brooklyn Bridge and the World Trade Center sparkling in sunlight,
the Avenue of the Americas in the rain, Central Park at dawn.

At night Mr. Forss retreated to his crude darkroom in the Flatbush section of
Brooklyn.  Only his customers on the street, who bought his photographs for $5
and $11 apiece, knew about him.

But now, it seems that the world is about to discover George Forss. The
43-year-old Mr. Forss has taken a leave of absence of sorts from the streets to
finish a book of his photographs, to be published in the fall by McGraw-Hill.



'Discovered' by Photographer

His could be a classic discovery story, the kind reputed to happen only in New
York. Four years ago David Douglas Duncan, the photo-journalist, who lives in
France, was in Manhattan when Mr. Forss's sidewalk display stopped him dead in
his tracks on 45th Street. The black-and-white photographs were, to Mr.  Duncan,
unexpected masterpieces amid the the batteries, fake gold chains and cheap
umbrellas usually sold along the streets.

Mr. Duncan bought 14 prints and showed them to friends at Life Magazine, where
he was a staff photographer from 1946 to 1955. ''They said, 'My God, David,
you're really getting good,' '' Mr. Duncan related recently as he walked down
the Avenue of the Americas with Mr. Forss.

''I told them: 'Fellows, this isn't me. This is George Forss.' ''

Mr. Duncan soon became obsessed with the idea of collecting Mr. Forss's
photographs in a book, a project that has taken nearly four years. Mr. Duncan
designed and arranged the book and wrote the text for it.

When Mr. Forss recalls his first meeting with Mr. Duncan, he remembers feeling
pleased about the sale, but uncertain who this tall, enthusiastic man with the
three names was. ''I don't have the kind of mind that knows who's in and who's
out,'' he said.



Photos 'Rearrange' City

Mr. Forss's vision of New York is the work of a poor man who prefers to see the
city as it ought to be. ''I rearrange it to my liking,'' he said.

He was born and raised in the South Bronx. His photography training, he says, if
it could be called that, came from his mother, who dressed her six children in
different costumes and photographed them instead of sending them to school.
Many nights she rode the subway into Manhattan, where she hung around the
theaters, waiting for such stars as Joan Crawford, Judy Holliday and James
Stewart to emerge so she could take their pictures. She became the official
photographer for the All Star Fan Club, wielding a box camera she had bought for
$3.55, including flash gun.  ''My mother,'' Mr. Forss said without judgment or
regret, ''was the neighborhood nut.''

His father, a Swede, returned to his native country years ago.  The family's
life style apparently alarmed their neighbors back in the South Bronx. ''The
rabbi and the priest came after us, trying to save us,'' Mr. Forss said. He was
sent to an orphanage when he was 11 and stayed until age 16.

''Just being out was so exciting,'' Mr. Forss said. ''I did a lot of just
walking around. I got extremely lazy. I couldn't hold down a job.''



A Variety of Jobs Tried

He worked sporadically, as a coffee wagon vendor, a printing trainee, a worker
in a Q-Tip factory. Then he found a job as a messenger and, at 28, inadvertently
discovered his calling.

''One day I saw a watercolor artist pulling his cart up Fifth Avenue,'' he said.
''He had beautiful paintings of animal faces and flowers. That kind of freedom
appealed to me. I thought as long as I was wandering around the city making
deliveries, I might as well take pictures.''

He bought his first camera in a pawnshop on Eighth Avenue and was slowly guided
by his customers on the street, who wanted pictures of the familiar sights: the
Brooklyn Bridge, the World Trade Center, the Statue of Liberty.  Traveling by
bicycle, Mr. Forss pursued his subject - the city.

Nine years ago he moved his troubled family - his mother, now an invalid, his
brother and sister, both on welfare - from the South Bronx to a house he rents
for $150 a month in Flatbush. Everything on the block feeds off the same power
line, and when the mechanic at the garage next to his house turns on his battery
charger, Mr. Forss says his darkroom power plummets, ruining his prints.

Largely through the well-connected Mr. Duncan, who has received acclaim for his
photographs on everything from the Korean and Vietnam Wars to Pablo Picasso, Mr.
Forss has received offers for assignments that would broaden his range. But few
have worked out. An advertising company wanted him to shoot promotional pictures
of Mercedes-Benzes, but Mr. Forss's photographs, by all accounts, were terrible.

Another prospective employer proposed to send him to photograph a series of
American cities, beginning with Cleveland. Mr. Forss said he never heard
anything after that interview, which went badly.

''What do you photograph in Cleveland, anyway?'' he said, clearly more relieved
than disappointed. ''There's no place like New York.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George Forss; photo of George Forss photograph

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ALBANY AGREEMENT SETS INCREASE IN AID AT PRIVATE COLLEGES

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 325 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, March 26


As part of an agreement to hold the line on tuition at the state's public
universities, legislative leaders agreed today to a large increase in aid to
students at private colleges in the state.

Declining enrollments have forced public and private institutions to compete for
students and state aid.

''The tuition gap has been getting worse and worse,'' said the president of the
Commission of Independent Colleges and Universities, Henry D. Paley. ''Now, at
least, we've stopped it.''

The State University Chancellor, Clifton R. Wharton, said, ''It looks very
good.''

Rise in Tuition Assistance


Last year, public and private institutions were so far apart that a meeting to
set a joint legislative agenda broke down in disharmony before it began.

Under the agreement, which was reached as part of budget negotiatons, the
Legislature will eliminate tuition increases of $200 a year for the state and
city universities. The action would cost the state $32 million.

The tuition assistance program for needy students would provide at least $48
million in additional aid, with $38 million for students at private schools,
according to negotiators. The program cost $340 million last year.  The state
would provide $3.2 million for tuition for Vietnam veterans and $11 million for
part-time students.

State Senator Kenneth P. LaValle, Republican of Port Jefferson, L.I., who is
chairman of the Higher Education Committee, said the money for part- time aid
would be set aside in the budget.

'There Is a Lot of Money'


Much of the impetus to aid private universities came from Senate Republicans.
The majority leader, Warren M. Anderson, Republican of Binghamton, repeatedly
linked the issues in negotiations. Assembly Democrats said privately that they,
too, favored increasing tuition aid.

''There is a lot of money,'' State Senator John J. Marchi, Republican of Staten
Island, said. ''Everyone wins.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By William E. Farrell and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 666 words


Marines Seeking Help

Four marines, all posthumously awarded the nation's highest military decoration
for bravery in battle, are to have ships named in their honor, and the Marine
Corps is seeking the assistance of the public in locating any of their
relatives.

The extant military records of the four heroes, all of whom were given the Medal
of Honor, have failed to turn up any of their relatives. Anyone with any
information is asked to contact Maj. Paul Wisniewski in Washington at (202)
694-2589 or (202) 654- 2812 or (202) 654-5375. These are the four:

Pvt. First Class Eugene A. Obregon, killed in Korea in 1950 while saving a
wounded comrade. The medal was presented to his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Peter R.
Obregon, whose last known address was 624 Evergreen Avenue, Los Angeles.

Pvt. First Class James Anderson Jr., killed in Vietnam in 1967 when he protected
other marines by shielding an exploding hand grenade with his body. He was born
Jan. 22, 1947, in Los Angeles and attended Centennial Senior High School at
Compton, Calif., then Los Angeles Harbor Junior College before enlisting in the
Marine Corpss Feb. 17, 1966.

First Lieut. Baldomero Lopez, killed in Korea during the landing at Inchon Sept.
15, 1950, also because he jumped on an exploding grenade. He was born in Tampa,
Fla., on Aug. 23, 1925. At his death, he was survived by a brother, Jose P.
Lopez.

Sgt. William R. Button of St. Louis, who died in Haiti in April 1921 in action
involving the pursuit of outlaws. At the time of his death, he was survived by
his father, Dr. William P. Button of 4323 Manchester Avenue, and his mother,
Sarah M. Harris of 2907 Easton Avenue. Both addresses were in St. Louis.

Reagan on Cameras

President Francois Mitterrand

and President Reagan were

seated in the Oval Office posing for photographers the other day during Mr.
Mitterrand's state visit. Scanning the room, the French leader asked Mr. Reagan
if he was patient about the constant press attention. Mr. Reagan replied, ''Not
always, but I've become so.''

Mr. Reagan told Mr. Mitterrand that he became inured to cameras in his years as
a Hollywood movie actor. Making a film, Mr. Reagan said, was like going to war:
''There are long hours of boredom punctuated by a few seconds of intense fear.''

Gridiron Guests

The Gridiron Club, an assemblage of journalists that presented its annual roast
of public figures on Saturday night, has rigid rules about invitations, which
are primarily dictated by space limitations. Spouses of officials are generally
not invited to the white-tie-and-tails dinner and spoof, where costumed
reporters dabble at satiric song and dance.  One of the guests, Joe Jacoby, a
tackle for the Washington Redskins, was unaware of the no-guest protocol. He
arrived at the dinner, where every seat had been earmarked and listed on a
program by name, with his fiancee.

Mr. Jacoby, who towers over the club members and outweighs the heftiest by a
good 75 pounds, politely asked where his fiancee was to be seated. Several club
officials hemmed, hawed and finally decided, ''Joe, we'll find her a seat.''

On Public Relations

Public relations is a big business

in Washington, where interest

groups are mightily concerned about selling their points of view. The interest
groups pay high-powered publicity people, known in the trade as ''flacks,''
handsome fees to promote their goals. The speed with which some of these people
move is sometimes impressive.

Recently a New York business news editor visited Washington on temporary
assignment. Barely had he settled in at a borrowed desk than mail from
Washington public relations firms, addressed to him by name, began arriving.

The editor was a bit stunned, since several his colleagues in the Washington
office did not even know who he was. How, he wondered, had these publicity
outfits latched onto him with such alacrity? The question went unanswered as the
editor finished his stint in the capital and headed home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 28, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JACKSON TELLS SYRACUSE STUDENTS THEIR VOTES IN PRIMARY ARE VITAL

BYLINE: By JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: SYRACUSE, March 27


The Rev. Jesse Jackson told 700 Syracuse University students today that ''your
time has come'' to help change the direction of American politics and bring
about social justice at home and peace abroad.

He said 28 million people between the ages of 18 and 24 could make the
difference in the 1984 Presidential election if they focused on the nuclear arms
race, women's rights and education.

He added that they should not be sidetracked by the ''nit-picking'' primary
fight between his two rivals for the Democratic Presidential nomination, former
Vice President Walter F. Mondale and Senator Gary Hart of Colorado. He said the
two were concentrating on hair styles and age changes instead of on substance.

In campaign stops here and in Buffalo, Rochester, Ithaca, Utica and Albany, Mr.
Jackson asked for volunteers and money for the coming week of his New York
campaign. ''We have the poorest campaign with the richest message,'' he said.

A Call to Participate


He urged people to take vacation time and sick leave to ring door bells and make
telephone calls. ''Don't feel guilty about taking sick time,'' he said.
''Because you are sick of what's going on.''

Mr. Jackson ran into another reminder of his reference to Jews as ''Hymies''
when he arrived at Hendricks Chapel on the Syracuse University campus. A young
man holding up a sign that read ''This is Hymie U'' followed him as he made his
way through a crowd of students into the building.

Mr. Jackson did not refer to the sign or to the controversy, but he touched on
the issue obliquely when he said leaders must be judged by their total effort
and not just their mistakes.

He said Jim Brown, the football player who had starred at Syracuse before
turning professional, ''scored a lot of touchdowns but occasionally got tackled
behind the line.''

Role as Activist Cited


He said, ''I paid my dues,'' and detailed his role in the campaigns for voting
rights, public accommodations, open housing and to end the Vietnam War, as well
as his role in bringing Navy Lieut. Robert O. Goodman Jr. back from Syria.

He then said, ''Christ said let he who is without sin cast the first stone, and
no one moved, because everyone makes mistakes.''

Mr. Jackson called Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart ''advocates'' of civil rights, but
said his role was that of an activist, and he argued that he has earned the
support of groups dedicated to improving human rights in the United States.

The 700 people who tried to enter the State Theater in Ithaca included a larger
percentage of whites than in most of Mr. Jackson's audiences. John Currey, the
area coordinator for the campaign, who is white, said, ''Maybe this will be the
place they remember when they tried to call the Rainbow Coalition all black.''
Mr. Jackson argued, as he had during most of his campaign, that the country must
cut back on its military expenditures and use the money to restore cuts made in
social programs. He said, ''We must freeze nuclear weapons before they burn the
people and freeze the planet.''

His strong antinuclear stand has won him the support of a number of groups. He
plans to join an antinuclear vigil planned for 4 A.M. tomorrow at the Three-Mile
Island nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania before heading for New York City to
debate Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart.

Mitchell Kaidy, who produces television programs in Rochester, said the Jackson
campaign ''is reshaping the Americal electorate, but only time will tell if it
will have a lasting effect.''

By Mr. Jackson's own reckoning, as much as 20 percent of his support is coming
from people who never voted before. This is one reason, Mr. Kaidy said, why they
are not showing up in public-opinion polls and why Mr. Jackson is able to
surprise some people by the strength of his vote in certain areas.

With his voice getting hoarser at each succeeding stop, Mr. Jackson addressed
more than 600 students at Utica College for 40 minutes and then flew to Albany
where he addressed a rally at the Wilborn Temple Church of God in Christ.

In every city he has visited in the last two days, black churches have provided
forums and fund-raising opportunities.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of the Rev. Jesse Jackson with Musa Raqib

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 28, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE AND HART CLASH ON CENTRAL AMERICA

BYLINE: By FAY S. JOYCE

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: PITTSBURGH, March 27


Walter F. Mondale and Senator Gary Hart have become ensnarled in a sharp dispute
over Mr. Mondale's stance on United States policy in Central America.

On Monday the Senator charged that Mr. Mondale's policies on Central America
''go beyond even that of Ronald Reagan.'' Today the former Vice President
retaliated sharply.

Mr. Mondale accused the Colorado Senator of ''profoundly misdescribing'' his
position on the use of United States forces in Central America and said Mr. Hart
had also ''misrepresented his own record'' on the withdrawal of United States
troops from Lebanon.

Campaigning here for votes in Pennsylvania's April 10 Presidential primary, Mr.
Mondale stopped short of calling Mr. Hart a liar.

Mr. Hart's charges, made Monday to reporters outside the United Nations in New
York City, were that Mr. Mondale favored a permanent military presence in
Central America and that his policy would lead to a large loss of American life
in the region.

Denies Both Assertions


Mr. Hart also likened Mr. Mondale's views on military involvement in Central
America to those of President Reagan, a charge that Mr. Mondale also hotly
contested. He said both assertions were false.

''Perhaps no one over the last three years more consistently challenged the
basic premise, direction and policies of the Reagan Administration in Central
America than I did,'' Mr. Mondale said at a news conference moments after
addressing the Pennsylvania Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
Organizations.

''Whether it's my opposition to the covert action, whether it's my insistence
that any aid to El Salvador be conditioned on human rights progress and the
ending of the death squads, whether it's my strong support for the Contadora
negotiations, all of those things are at war with Reagan policies, including my
opposition to the Big Pine maneuvers and the rest.''

However, Mr. Mondale appeared to flounder on Monday as he attempted to reply to
the Coloradan's charge that he favored maintaining a permanent military presence
in Honduras and would ''not remove our troops until some vague negotiations are
conducted with the Sandinista Government.''

Mr. Hart calls for the withdrawal of all American troops from the region, a
position Mr. Mondale derides as ''pulling the plug on Central America.''

Mondale's Initial Response


Questioned by reporters in Brooklyn Monday, Mr. Mondale said that as President
he would substantially reduce the number of American soldiers in Honduras from
the present level of 700 to 800 and said he envisioned no combat role for those
that remained.

But he said he ''might leave a modest number, a very modest number,'' in
Honduras. ''And I might take them out, too,'' he added.

He said he would not use those forces as a bargaining point to press for Cuban
withdrawal from Nicaragua. But then he said he would leave some American troops
so as not to undermine the goal of a mutual withdrawal of all forces.  The
American troops now engaging in maneuvers in Honduras are widely viewed as
putting pressure on Nicaragua's leftist Sandinista Government. Asked if he would
bring those Americans home if the Cubans did not leave Nicaragua, Mr. Mondale
said it would depend on the circumstances.

Today Mr. Mondale defended the role of American noncombatants in protecting
Honduras, which he described as a democracy in need of American technical
advice.

''I wouldn't terminate that kind of help,'' he said. He foresaw a force of 200
''nonmilitary soldiers'' or less while he again pledged to end covert operations
in Honduras and repeated his opposition to permanent American military
facilities in the area.

Conditions for Ending Aid


He would end even that modest military assistance to Honduras, he said, if the
Nicaraguans agreed to a policy of mutual nonintervention, the Cubans withdrew
from Nicaragua and peace was established in the region.

Mr. Hart is hitting Mr. Mondale hard on this question. In a television
commercial for the Senator that shows a lighted fuse burning down, an
announcer's voice recalls Vietnam and warns that Mr. Mondale would leave a
permanent military presence in Honduras.

In contending that Mr. Hart had misrepresented his record on the Marines in
Lebanon, Mr. Mondale said that while Mr. Hart said he called for their
withdrawal long ago, ''nobody can find a record of it.''

In an earlier appearance at New York's Metropolitan Hospital focusing on women's
issues, Mr. Mondale cited two instances of Mr. Hart's support for keeping the
marines in Lebanon.

Shortly before American marines were attacked by terrorists in Beirut, he said,
Mr. Hart co-sponsored a resolution to keep the marines there for six more
months. The resolution was a Democratic alternative to a Republican proposal to
keep the marines there 18 more months, and Mr. Mondale conceded that he had
favored it himself.

In another instance, Mr. Hart made a speech on the Senate floor urging that the
marines remain in Lebanon, Mr. Mondale said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WAR POWERS TEST BY SUPREME COURT WEIGHED IN SENATE

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1118 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 28


Some Senate leaders and White House officials have discussed petitioning the
Supreme Court to rule on the constitutionality of the War Powers Act in the
aftermath of the Lebanon crisis, a Republican senator said today.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz, who has been highly critical of the limits
the act sets on the President's role as Commander in Chief, today cautiously
approved the idea of asking the Court to take up the question. But in testimony
before a Senate subcommittee he suggested it might be better for Congress and
the Administration to work out ''a common sense'' solution.

The War Powers Act, which was approved in 1973 after the United States had ended
its involvement in the Vietnam War, has again emerged as an issue between
Congress and the executive branch because of Congressional efforts to use it as
a vehicle to limit the Administration's ability to keep American troops in
Lebanon.



'Extremely Important Issue'

Testifying before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice,
State and Judiciary, Mr. Shultz said, ''How the Congress and the executive
branch should interact in the field of foreign affairs, particularly of matters
of great moment, is an extremely important issue and it has moved in recent
years very much in the Congressional direction.''

''It ought to be thoroughly discussed, preferably in an atmosphere not having to
do with some particular action we're struggling with, but on a more general
plane,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''I would welcome a more thorough review, including
getting the lawyers into the act, and so on, because I think myself that we're
getting off the track.''

Mr. Shultz repeated before the committee his opposition to the bill to move the
American Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem, and appealed for $10.5 million in
emergency funds to augment security at American installations, particularly in
the Middle East.



Threat Expected to Grow

Noting the bombings and assassinations of the last year that have led to more
than 300 American deaths, Mr. Shultz said, ''The most recent intelligence
estimates offer no reason to believe that this threat will diminish.'' He said
the Administration must assume the threat to Americans will increase.

Most of Mr. Shultz's discussion over the War Powers Act was with Senator Arlen
Specter, Republican of Pennyslvania, who has publicly taken the view that no
American forces should be engaged in combat except through a Congressional
declaration of war. At an earlier hearing, Mr. Specter elicited from Mr. Shultz
the statement that both the Korean and Vietnam conflicts were ''wars.''

Mr. Specter argued that Presidents engaged American troops in those ''wars''
without seeking and receiving the necessary Congressional declarations of war.
The War Powers Act was an attempt to get around the declaration of war issue by
prohibiting the President from keeping United States troops in combat situations
for more than 90 days unless Congress declares war or otherwise approves use of
the troops.

Last October, Congress approved a resolution, based on the act, authorizing the
marines in Lebanon to remain for 18 months, but President Reagan in a statement
indicated he did not accept the Congressional limits.

Test Case Is Discussed

Mr. Specter said ''there has been some discussion between the Senate leadership
and the White House to formulate a test case that would go to the Supreme Court
of the United States which would decide this question in a nonconfrontational
context.''

He said he agreed with Mr. Shultz on trying to work out differences on the issue
when there is no specific crisis. For instance, he said if the President refused
to withdraw troops from overseas after 90 days, as required by the War Powers
Act, Congress would have no other action open than to cut off funds, something
it would be unlikely to do if American troops would suffer.

Any court action at that time would undoubtedly take too long, he said.

Later, in a telephone interview, Mr. Specter said he and the majority leader,
Howard H. Baker Jr., had met with Fred F. Fielding, the White House counsel, and
lawyers from the Justice Department to discuss a Supreme Court test. A spokesman
for the majority leader confirmed the meetings, saying that Mr. Baker agreed
with the Administration that the language in the act needed to be changed
because constant confrontation between the two branches served no useful
purpose.

Major Problem Is Noted

Mr. Specter said that so far the Justice Department was opposing the test.
Moreover, Mr. Specter, a former district attorney from Philadelphia, noted a
major legal problem.

The Supreme Court, he and other lawyers said, has traditionally ruled that it
and other Federal courts have no constitutional authority to provide advisory
opinions to other branches of government or to anybody else.

Under the Constitution, the jurisdiction of Federal courts is limited to
deciding ''cases'' and ''controversies,'' which they said have traditionally
been interpreted to mean real disputes with a factual content as opposed to
abstract legal disputes.

Nevertheless, Mr. Specter said he believed that if the President and
Congressional leaders made a direct appeal to the Supreme Court to take up the
War Powers Act, it would do so.

Mr. Shultz has argued previously that the continuing debate in Congress on
whether the marines in Lebanon should have remained there, and what their
mission was, contributed to the inability of the United States to bring about a
diplomatic solution in Lebanon and to the eventual withdrawal of the marines in
what was perceived as a setback for the United States.

'Capacity for Decisiveness'

''It seems to me,'' Mr. Shultz said, ''that if you say the President is the
Commander in Chief and then you have a piece of legislation that says he can be
put into a position by the Congress that if the Congress does nothing then he
must move forces within some period of days, how can you say he is the Commander
in Chief under those circumstances. '' ''There has to be a capacity for
decisiveness under certain circumstances,'' he said. ''There has to be an
ability to go along without being constantly undercut or surrounded by so many
conditions that you don't have room for maneuver.''

In his formal presentation, Mr. Shultz asked for $10.5 million in emergency
allocations to increase security at American installations overseas. ''We can
only assume,'' he said, ''that the overall threat level against our overseas
activities, particularly in the Middle East region, will grow even further,
fueled by such events as the continuing civil conflict in Lebanon and the
Iran-Iraq war.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of George Shultz with Sens. Warren Rudman and Dennis DeConcini (p
A12)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HART AND MONDALE CLASH REPEATEDLY IN SIXTH DEBATE

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1485 words


Gary Hart and Walter F. Mondale criticized each other heatedly on foreign policy
and arms control issues last night in a nationally televised debate marked by
sharp accusations about campaign tactics in the Democratic Presidential contest.

As the Rev. Jesse Jackson tried to quiet them, Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale battered
one another in a heated exchange in which the former Vice President protested
that Mr. Hart was misrepresenting the Mondale position on the American military
presence in Central America and the Senator from Colorado replied that his own
policies were being misrepresented as well.

''Why do you run those ads that suggest that I'm out trying to kill kids when
you know better?'' Mr. Mondale asked, referring to Mr. Hart's campaign
advertising. ''I think you ought to pull those down tonight.''



Blunt Language Exchanged


''I would answer by asking you a question,'' Mr. Hart retorted. ''Why have you
questioned my commitment to arms control and civil rights when you know that I
have just as much commitment to both of those as you do?''

The exchange was the emotional high point of the campaign's sixth debate, one
that produced some of the bluntest language that has passed between the two men.
As the two competitors glared at each other across a small table at Columbia
University in New York City, Mr. Jackson stepped in to suggest that the two were
engaged in a meaningless dispute that would detract from the seriousness of the
debate.

''Tomorrow the issue will be this rat- a-tat-tat,'' the civil rights leader
said, appealing to the moderator, Dan Rather of CBS News, to stop the arguing.
''The fact is, the reason why they're having such a kinship struggle is there's
such a similarity in policies.''



Important Vote Tuesday


Mr. Jackson's intercession won him the only bursts of applause from an audience
of 200 people at the Low Memorial Library who witnessed what was almost
certainly the most tense of the debates.

The dramatic confrontations reflected the importance that all candidates attach
to the primary voting in New York on Tuesday. It also seemed to stem from the
increasingly open expressions of hostility between Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale.

Mr. Mondale stayed on the offensive throughout the evening, seldom missing a
chance to attack Mr. Hart's voting record. As Mr. Hart glared at him, Mr.
Mondale accused the Senator of voting with ''big oil'' and of coming late to the
nuclear arms control movement.

Mr. Hart fired back, accusing Mr. Mondale of having failed to learn the lessons
of Vietnam and of advocating outdated Democratic policies that place ''special
interests'' above the ''national interest.''

Yet Mr. Hart at times seemed taken aback by the vigor of Mr. Mondale's attacks.
The former Vice President's authoritative-sounding condemnations forced Mr. Hart
to spend a lot of time defending such Senate votes as the one he cast against a
Federal loan for the Chrysler Corporation.

As a result, Mr. Hart was able to devote less time to his ''new ideas, new
generation'' theme than in the earlier debates, while Mr. Mondale insistently
repeated his theme that he is better qualified by experience to be President.



Military Policies at Issue

Their highly charged exchanges often centered on Mr. Hart's contention that Mr.
Mondale advocated military policies that could lead to Vietnam-like situations
in the Middle East or Central America.

''I don't think we ought to lose American lives fighting for someone else's
oil,'' Mr. Hart said in a typical sally.

''Don't worry about Walter Mondale and American lives,'' the former Vice
President shot back sharply. ''I'll stand strong on that.'' He accused Mr. Hart
of drawing ''the wrong lesson'' from Vietnam, that of ''pulling the plug'' on
American commitments.

The debate opened one of the most important two-week periods in the Democratic
campaign. Strategists on both sides believe that a candidate who manages to win
both the New York primary next Tuesday and the Pennsylvania primary April 10
will be the leader in the race for the nomination.

Mr. Mondale, by winning a majority of the 252 delegates to be chosen in New York
and the 172 at stake in Pennsylvania, could also expand his advantage in the
delegate count. He now has 698 delegates of the 1,967 required for nomination.
Mr. Hart has 429 and Mr. Jackson has 87.

Rising Animosity


For Mr. Hart, New York and Pennsylvania offer a chance to build a string of
successes based on his decisive victory Tuesday in the Connecticut primary. By
winning in at least one of those states, Mr. Hart hopes to raise renewed doubts
about Mr. Mondale's ability to get votes.

The encounter last night came at a time of steadily rising animosity between Mr.
Hart and Mr. Mondale as a result of their exchanges over issues of foreign
policy and Presidential character. Over the past few days, Mr. Mondale has
characterized Mr. Hart as an uncertain friend of Israel and of the United
States' allies in Europe.

For his part, Mr. Hart has argued that Mr. Mondale, by stationing United States
troops in Central America, would repeat the mistakes of Vietnam.

'Weaknesses' Are Sought


At the outset of the debate, each candidate was asked by Mr. Rather about his
''weaknesses.'' Mr. Hart said that ''in terms of my qualifications as President,
I would have liked to have spent more time traveling around the world getting
acquainted with foreign leaders.''

Mr. Jackson said it was ''difficult to break through'' in the campaign on
various issues such as aid to South Africa.

Mr. Mondale said one of his ''most difficult problems'' was that he had served
in public life for many years. ''I picked up a lot of scars,'' the former Vice
President said. Mr. Mondale said he had been unable to ''effectively argue the
case'' that his experience was a positive factor in his drive for the Democratic
Presidential nomination. ''That is one of the difficulties I have.''

Asked about the sacrifices they would seek from Americans, Mr. Mondale cited his
work as Vice President on the Carter Administration's Federal loan guarantees to
the Chrysler Corporation to head off bankruptcy, an issue he has used against
Mr. Hart. ''It was really a thrilling experience,'' Mr. Mondale said.

Mr. Hart said that ''in a period of transition and change, what the nation has
to do is forgo its individual special interests and unite behind the national
interest.'' Mr. Hart said he had a ''fundamental disagreement'' with Mr. Mondale
on the Chrysler legislation.

''I don't think the Chrysler bailout is the proper pattern for the kind of
sacrifice this country needs,'' the Senator said. He added that the loan
guarantees were an effort of ''trying to patch up a leaking boat of the past
rather than hold the ship of state out of the water and overhaul that ship
altogether.''

Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart crossed swords over the issue of Mr. Hart's opposition
to the extra tax on newly discovered oil. Mr. Mondale said Senator Hart had
failed to stand up to ''special interests,'' while Mr. Hart responded, ''Vice
President Mondale doesn't always characterize the record accurately.''

Hart 'Voted With Big Oil'


He said he was one of 13 Senators to support a Carter Administration tariff on
imported oil. ''I'm now being attacked for it,'' he said.

On the subject of the tax on crude oil, Mr. Hart said he proposed, ''as opposed
to a Carter 'windfall profits' tax,'' a 100 percent tax on imported oil supplies
in order to spur energy independence in the United States.

''The oil companies, as Fritz Mondale knows, desperately opposed that,'' he
said.

Mr. Mondale said, ''When the vote was needed as to whether a quarter of a
trillion dollars of the public's money would go to big oil, Gary Hart voted with
big oil.''

On arms control, Mr. Mondale accused Mr. Hart of ''taking seven basic
inconsisent positions'' and said the Senator ''simply has not passed the
threshold of credibility on the issue of our times.''

Mr. Hart, asserting that ''the Vice President had four years to achieve an arms
control agreement and unfortunately he didn't achieve any,'' said, ''No one in
the Senate did more than I did,'' to endorse various arms control measures,
including the nuclear freeze and a strategic arms limitation treaty.

The other two differed with Mr. Jackson on a pledge to forgo the first use of
nuclear arms.

''I'll be willing to say we should not be the first,'' the civil rights leader
said.

Mr. Hart shook his head. Until conventional forces are modernized, he said, he
would not ''take the finger off the nuclear trigger.''

Mr. Mondale nodded. First, he said, conventional forces must be ''adequate.''

When Mr. Mondale said America's allies should not be left ''on their own'' if
the Persian Gulf was closed, Mr. Jackson said American troops had been used for
''intervening in third-world matters.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HOW WAR POWERS ACT WORKS

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 28


The War Powers Act of 1973, passed in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, puts
limits on the ability of the President to send American troops into combat areas
without Congressional approval.

Under the act, the President can only send combat troops into battle or into
areas where ''imminent'' hostilities are likely, for 60 days without either a
declaration of war by Congress or a specific Congressional mandate. The
President can extend the time the troops are in the combat area for 30 extra
days, without Congressional approval, for a total of 90 days.

The act, however, does not specify what Congress can do if the President refuses
to comply with the act. Congress could presumably suspend all funds for such
troops and override a Presidential veto.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
China Reports Firing On Vietnamese Plane

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 143 words

DATELINE: PEKING, March 28


China said its air force gunners fired on a Vietnamese spy plane today, damaging
the intruding aircraft and forcing it back to Vietnam.

There was no independent confirmation of the Chinese claim, which was carried by
the official New China News Agency. It was the first reported firing at a plane
this year by either side on the tense Chinese-Vietnamese border.

The Vietnamese MIG-21 was fired on as it flew over Pingxiang in the southwest
Guangxi Zhuang autonomous region, the agency said.

''The plane was on a reconnaissance mission,'' it said. ''The aircraft turned
back to Vietnam after the incident.''

China and Vietnam were once allies, but relations deteriorated because of a
border dispute and Vietnam's 1978 invasion of Cambodia and overthrow of the
Chinese- backed regime.  The Chinese invaded Vietnam in 1979, resulting in a
monthlong war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MORE DATA SAID TO LINK YELLOW RAIN TO BEES

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 28


Two American scientists who recently returned from Southeast Asia say they are
more convinced than ever that the ''yellow rain'' there, which has been
described as a form of chemical warfare, was actually nothing more than
''massive defecation flights by wild honeybees.''

Dr. Matthew S. Meselson of Harvard University, an expert on chemical warfare,
and Dr. Thomas D. Seeley, a bee expert at Yale University, based their
conclusion on observations of such flights in Thailand. They did not visit
either Cambodia or Laos, where refugees say they have come under chemical attack
by the forces of the Soviet- and Vietnamese-backed regimes there.

The scientists said today that they were caught in a five-minute shower of bee
feces that left yellowish splotches on them and their Land Rover on a field trip
to Thailand last week.

They also said in a statement released at a news conference at Harvard that they
had found 10 other swaths of yellowish bee feces as they searched through
various parts of Thailand for evidence of a possible natural explanation for the
yellow rain phenomenon.

Officials Ridicule Theory


The two scientists previously offered their bee theory as a hypothesis that
might explain much about the reported yellow rain ''attacks'' in Southeast Asia.
Their hypothesis was ridiculed by Government officials and other scientists who
contend that yellow rain is a form of chemical warfare waged by the Soviet Union
and its allies in Laos, Cambodia and Afghanistan.

A State Department official who requested that his name be withheld said today
that ''it stretches one's imagination'' to believe that the defecation flights
of bees were relevant to the chemical warfare issue. He acknowledged that some
of the reported chemical attacks in Laos and Cambodia involved yellow material
falling from the sky, that many samples of this material contained pollen and
that some samples might actually contain bee feces.

But he said other environmental samples from the sites reportedly attacked
contained no pollen or bee feces at all. He also stressed that the bee
hypothesis in no way explained why mycotoxins, which are fungal poisons, had
been found in some samples of yellow rain residues and in some alleged victims.

Spots Said to Contain Pollen


Dr. Meselson and Dr. Seeley called the bee feces they found
''indistinguishable'' in terms of color, size, pollen content and shower
patterns from the samples and descriptions of yellow rain previously obtained
from Laotian refugees by the American Government and other investigators. The
spots were various shades of yellow, from nearly white to brownish; ranged in
size from tiny specks to almost a quarter of an inch in diameter, and contained
a high percentage of pollen, which bees eat in large amounts.

The two scientists called their findings the ''first scientific demonstration''
that Southeast Asian honey bees perform defecation flights and shower yellowish
spots on everything beneath them.

The scientists brought back samples of the bee feces and of certain foods for
chemical analysis to determine if they contained mycotoxins like those reported
to be chemical warfare agents. Dr. Meselson said in a telephone interview that
he strongly suspected these mycotoxins were in fact produced naturally by
funguses in southeast Asia and then contaminated both the bee feces and the food
supply of the villagers.

Dr. Meselson said he had sought a visa to visit Laos, the site of many reported
yellow rain attacks, but had got no response. He said he visited areas in
Thailand that were roughly comparable to the Laotion areas said to have been
attacked, in terms of rainfall, temperature, humidity and floral composition.

Visit to a National Park


The two scientists arrived in Thailand March 16 and left March 25. They were
accompanied in Thailand by Prof. Pongthep Akratanakul, a Cornell-trained bee
expert at Kasetsart University in Kamphaeng Saen, about 30 miles east of
Bangkok.

Dr. Meselson said the team first found yellowish bee droppings on leaves at
Kasetsart University. The team then went to a large national park, Khao Yai,
about a three-hour drive from Bangkok, where they discovered a ''huge swath'' of
bee droppings emanating from two trees that had nests of wild bees roughly 90
feet above the ground. The swath led more than 500 feet away from the trees and
was about 130 feet wide and contained hundreds of thousands of spots. An intense
shower of bee droppings occurred in one 30-minute period while the scientists
took measurements, they said.  Then the team visited the city of Chiang Mai, in
northern Thailand, near the Burmese border, where they were unexpectedly hit
with a five-minute shower of bee feces in a field about 10 miles south of the
city, they said. They had been watching nests of giant honey bees through field
glasses from a distance of about 500 feet when the bombardment started, and when
it ended there were about 200 spots per square yard on the hood of the Land
Rover and about a dozen spots on each of the three scientists. The scientists
said they could neither see nor hear the bees in the bright sky overhead but
could see them, barely, through field glasses near the top of the distant,
100-foot-high trees.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE RECORD: THE DEMOCRATIC DEBATE;
TRANSCRIPT OF DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES' DEBATE IN NEW YORK

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 9059 words


Following is a transcript of a Democratic Presidential debate at Columbia
University last night by Senator Gary Hart, Walter F. Mondale and the Rev. Jesse
Jackson, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of CBS News.
Dan Rather, the CBS News anchor, was the moderator.




Mr. RATHER: Good evening and welcome. For a year that was supposedly so
politically predictable, 1984 has turned out to be anything but. With that in
mind, with the New York primary less than a week away, with the Pennsylvania
primary less than two weeks away and with the field of Democratic candidates
whittled down now to three, we believe this to be a good time to try to sort
some things out, try to shed some light on the developing campaign.

Around this table we hope not to get pat answers, not to get prepackaged
responses. We hope to have meaningful straight talk, a dialogue among three men
who aspire to one of the highest honors and the most responsibility that the
people of the United States can bestow.

The fundamental responsibility of the President is to lead. With that in mind,
we selected as our theme for tonight - leadership. That is the thread with which
we hope to knit together this debate.

Now, gentlemen, I'll ask each of you the same questions. You'll have the
opportunity to reply. If you find yourself in disagreement with your opponents,
we will certainly try to make time for that as well.

Now you've already shaken hands, so let's come out debating.



PANEL DISCUSSION




Chief Weakness


Q. Mr. Hart, the first question to you. We all know that knowing one's strength
is important for a leader and understandably you and the others have talked a
great deal about your strength during the campaign. But it's also important to
know your weaknesses. What do you consider to be the one main weakness of you as
a person?

Mr. HART: Well, in terms of my qualifications for President, I would like to
have spent more time in the past 10 years traveling around the world becoming
acquainted with foreign leaders. I have had an opportunity to do a good deal of
that, I think some 20 countries, twice to the People's Republic of China and
once to the Soviet Union. And I've made a point particularly of locating those
leaders who will be the leaders of the 1980's and 90's in their political party
and in their nation. and in that experience I have begun to realize that this
country is in fact changing and the world is changing, our policies of the past
are not working.

I would have hoped over those 10 years that the duties of the Senate would have
permitted more of that international contact but I think what I have certainly
prepares me for the Presidency.


Q. Mr. Jackson, what do you consider to be your main weakness as a person?

Mr. JACKSON: I suppose the greatest weakness has been the inability to get to
the broad American public the idea of going on the offensive relative to the
problems, as opposed to defensive ways.

For these past few years we have struggled so diligently to raise the issues of
social justice in ways of being inoffensive and a lot of times, for example,
trying to get this nation to see the advantage of enforcement of the Voting
Rights Act. We haven't been able to do that. I really don't think I have but I
keep struggling to that end. Our policies relating to the third world have been
inadequqte and insensitive. I've struggled diligently during this campaign to
get more focus on South Africa, for example. and third-world problems and
seemingly it's difficult to break through. I feel some need to keep pressing
these issues and raising them and somehow I feel that I have not yet been able
to accomplish that.


Q. If I may, Mr. Jackson, the question that we hear as a person less than a
politician. As a person what do you consider your principal weakness?

Mr. JACKSON: Well, to that extent my personal weakness is my inability to get my
basic points across. And of course it comes down to the inability to communicate
in one level adequately to get the views out. I think, Dan, that when you raise
a question like what our weaknesses are, I spend so much time on maximizing my
few strengths. I don't have a lot of dialogue about my weaknesses.




Q: Mr. Mondale?

Mr. MONDALE: I would think that one of my most difficult problems is that I've
been in public life for a long time. I was elected Attorney General - became
Attorney General - in 1960, served as Attorney General, served 12 years in the
Senate, four years as Vice President of the United States - and you pick up a
lot of scars. And while I personally believe that that experience is
indispensable to effective leadership - that going through these battles are
important to the training, to the sure-footedness necessary for your future - I
would say up until this time I've been unable to effectively argue that case.

People still believe that you're tied to the past. I do not think that's the
case at all. And that is one of the difficulties I have. I hope to overcome it.
I think I am, but it's one of the difficulties that I face.

Asking Sacrifice

Q. To unite a people, to unite a country, the essence of leadership, part of it,
at least, is to be able to get individuals to sacrifice for the greater common
good. Let's talk about sacrifice. I ask you, if you will, to be specific. What
would be the principal sacrifice that you would ask of individual Americans if
elected President, Mr. Jackson?

Mr. JACKSON: I suppose, inasmuch as I think that our future is built around
developed minds, as opposed to guided missiles, I would go straight to
education. And for young people, it means the commitment to put education over
entertainment as a basic life style - to teach them that the laws of convenience
lead to collapse, the laws of sacrifice lead to greatness. And one of our
problems now is that in addition to a crisis in opportunity - whereas Mr.
Reagan's cutback on Head Start and food stamp programs and breakfast and lunch
programs - young America is still watching an average of five hours of TV a
night.  The same kind of sacrifice that makes us winners in the Olympics and the
motor skills can make us winners in the academics and the cognitive skills.

And so the sacrifice really begins in young America. That is to say that we must
fight for opportunity, which is what the Government can afford, but effort must
always exceed opportunity. The greatness to become doctor, lawyer, nurse, judge,
architect, builder, lies in the willingness to engage in short-term pain for
long-term pleasure.

Q: Mr. Mondale, what would be the first sacrifice you would ask about?

Mr. MONDALE: One of the examples that I would like to see repeated all over this
country was one that I was involved in. A few years ago the Chrysler Company was
going broke. Management-labor was growling at each other, the Government was
watching from the sidelines. As Vice President I worked to get them together,
and it was really a thrilling experience because it's something they wanted to
do but never did. The labor, the workers gave up $1.3 billion in wages.
Management, for example, Mr. Iacocca worked for $1 a year. The American people
extended a loan of over $1 billion. Everybody put something in the pot. And out
of it came one of the great success stories of modern times.

All through the American economy we have industries that are very important to
our future - steel, rubber, basic industries which are in trouble. And as
President of the United States, I'd like to get everybody together to cooperate,
to put something in the pot, to forgo some short-term benefits in order to make
everyone of those fundamental industries totally competitive in the world again.
And that means competition.  Q: Mr. Hart, do you agree with that as the
principal sacrifice?

Mr. HART: I would state it differently. In a period of transition and change,
what the nation has to do is forgo its individual special benefits and interests
and unite behind the national interest. I'll come to the Chrysler instance
because Fritz and I have a fundamental disagreement as to whether or not that
was the pattern, as to what ought to be sacrificed.

What we have fragmented is this society in a period of plenty. And as we have
benefited, as the entire pie has grown, people have carved out their special
slice of that pie. And then the pie quit growing in the 1970's.

It led to the whole period of bailouts, not just Chrysler but Lockheed and
others. And what we didn't have at that time was political leadership which said
to people, not just company by company, Lockheed, Penn Central, Chrysler:
''We're going to step in. We, the Government, the taxpayers, are going to step
in and bail this company out.''

What we didn't have was the anticipation of the tremendous tides and changes in
the world. International competition, the decline of our own industries, the
shift of our own base from manufacturing to services.

And because of that lack of leadership we're now in a terrible bind, and this
President is dividing this country even further.

I don't think the Chrysler bailout is the proper pattern for the kind of
sacrifice this country needs. If that package had been presented as an entire
industrywide agreement, perhaps, but it wasn't. It was a failed company poorly
managed. Its workers would have been protected under other management.

And I think it was an instance of trying to patch up a leaking boat of the past
rather than pull the ship of state out of the water and overhaul that boat
altogether, that ship altogether. I think we're going to have to have a
President who will say no to individual interests, including some of those
constituency interests in the Democratic Party, and identify with a clear
national vision what is the national interest and say to the American people,
''You must unite behind this national interest if our country is to make it.''

Q. Mr. Jackson, I gather you disagree with that?

Mr. JACKSON: I think that we have to deal with the extremes. On the one hand, if
a leaking boat has 600,000 American jobs in it, that's a boat worth saving.
There must be enough flexibility to relate the specifics with the principal. The
principal should be not to go around just bailing ships per se, but one with
600,000 jobs in it is worth saving.

On the other hand, when Chrysler was saved that was not the obligation.
Therefore you did not have shared sacrifice. To that extent, Chrysler has now
made a profit and Iacocca is a hero. But there are 15 plants still closed, there
are still 22,000 workers without their jobs. Chrysler still has 2,200
dealerships, less than 10 are owned by blacks or Hispanics. And so once they
made their profit, there was no obligation to lift the boats stuck at the
bottom.


Q. Senator, you had your hand --

Mr. MONDALE: Yes, one point: Chrysler is the highest percentage minority
employees of any member of the auto industry. And one of the reasons I worked so
hard to try to save that company was the appeal by minority leaders around that
if that went down in cities like Detroit, and so on, the best employer that they
had was going to lose out. And so I think that it was very important from that
standpoint as well.

I wanted to make another point, however, with respect to Senator Hart: Senator
Hart's position on this - like so many other things - is that when Chrysler
needed help, he voted against them because he wanted to do more. But the fact of
it is Chrysler needed help right then. Some of us stood up and made the
difference.

The second point I wanted to make is that when we talk about sacrifice, some
people have already sacrificed terribly in this economy with their jobs, with
unfair taxes, with the retreat - and they, middle- and moderate-income
Americans, have taken it on the chin from this Administration, while other
industries have made out just impressively.

And one of the key fights about who was going to sacrifice and whether it was
going to be fair in America was the windfall profits tax. That's where - in that
issue we were talking about whether a quarter-of-a-trillion dollars that the
American people were paying would go to big oil or whether it would be part of
the public treasury to be used for public purposes.

Only eight Democrats voted with big oil, and one of them was Gary Hart. I think
that's a good example where sacrifice and fairness was at stake, where we
should've stood up to powerful interests and one of my opponents did not.



Mr. HART: Well, I have to respond to that if I may. Vice President Mondale
doesn't always characterize the record accurately. The crisis this country faced
in the 1970's, as you all recall, was our over-reliance on foreign supplies of
oil. The Carter-Mondale Administration tried desperately to figure out what a
policy should be, and that included, among other things, a tariff on imported
oil. I was one of the 13 that voted for that and are now being attacked for it.
But also, what we needed to make ourselves independent of foreign supplies of
oil was production in this country. I proposed, as opposed to a Carter windfall
profit tax, a 100 percent tax on existing oil supplies. The major oil companies,
as Fritz Mondale knows, desperately opposed that, and also in that package,
incentives for production of new supplies so this country would not get itself
into war in the Persian Gulf, which I thought was the Carter-Mondale policy in
the 1970's.

Mr. MONDALE: I've got to have one comment on that, if I . . .


Q: Mr. Jackson?

Mr. JACKSON: On the one hand, when Gary is willing to forgo certain specific
crises - a crisis, by definition an emergency situation, must be spoken to
specifically. But our auto, steel, electronics, rubber, textile and agricultural
industry is in trouble. Since it's the backbone of our nation, it's worth a
bailout. On the other hand, what is the obligation to the bailed out? If they
get a tax break there must be an obligation with that break to reinvest in this
economy and re-industrialize this economy and retrain this work force. If
they're bailed out with our loans and bailed out with our tax breaks and then
ship our jobs to cheap labor markets abroad, that indeed serves limited
interests.

Therefore, if we allow these companies to take our tax dollars, our consumer
dollars, and then acquire and merge and get these interest-free loans, on the
one hand, take our jobs to cheap labor markets in South Africa, Taiwan,
Singapore, on the other, then we just have jobs in a very limited sense. There
is no future in that.  Jobs are not enough even for minorities. For everybody to
have a job - that is not enough, you know, we have to have some capacity to
produce and have self-respect and self-government. I do not look forward to
everybody being employed with a Japanese or European boss. What makes a
superpower a superpower is the ability to produce and consume and distribute
jobs as well.


Q. Gentlemen, I do want to move on to something else. Mr. Mondale - briefly, you
wanted to respond?

Mr. MONDALE: Yes. This is a typical response by Gary Hart, because when the vote
was needed as to whether a quarter of a trillion dollars of the public's money
would go to big oil or remain in the public treasury, Gary Hart voted with big
oil. Then he said, but I've got another plan. But another plan doesn't mean
anything. It's known as a get-well amendment in the trade. After you've voted
wrong, you introduce an amendment that has no hope, to get well. And we all know
what it is when we needed him on one of the most fundamental issues of our time
- the biggest deliberate transfer of public wealth to a big special interest -
he voted with only eight Democrats to permit it.

Mr. HART: Mr. Rather, Mr. Mondale knows better than that. The amendment was
offered beforehand - a 100 percent tax on existing oil supplies - higher than
the Carter- Mondale Administration - and incentives to make this country
independent of Persian Gulf oil. No, I have laid out an energy policy in this
campaign and Vice President Mondale has not.

Mr. MONDALE: Yes I have.

Mr. HART: What he has said is we'll continue to rely on Persian Gulf oil and if
necessary sacrifice American lives in a fight for that oil. I don't think we
ought to lose American lives fighting for someone else's oil. Because a war in
the Middle East and the Persian Gulf - all we'll get is war and we won't get
oil. And we'll lose a lot of American lives in the process.

Mr. MONDALE: Don't worry about Walter Mondale and American lives. I'll stand
strong on that. The issue that we were talking about is why you voted to give a
quarter of a trillion dollars to big oil.

Mr. HART: No I didn't.

Mr. MONDALE: Somehow, then, The Congressional Record is a fraud, because you're
recorded as one of eight Democrats to transfer a quarter of a trillion dollars
--



Mr. HART: No, that was not the vote and you know it wasn't.

Mr. MONDALE: It wasn't? Everybody else thinks it is.

Mr. HART: Well, everybody doesn't think it is.


Q. We want to come back to domestic policy in a moment.

Mr. JACKSON: We can solve that through commercials.


Q. No commercial or other breaks in this broadcast, as we said in the beginning.
Let me move on to foreign policy.




Incentives to Soviet


Q. Effective leadership also means getting things done in the world as well as
at home, particularly with the Soviet Union. Now President Reagan yesterday
challenged you to tell us what incentive you expect to use to get the Soviets to
the bargaining table - I'm reading from here because I want to get the quote
from President Reagan direct. ''Good will and sincerity will get them a smile
and a glass of vodka. What incentives would you use to get them - the Soviets -
to the bargaining table?'' Now that's the quote from President Reagan, and I'd
like to have a specific from you. What incentive would you use, Mr. Mondale, to
get the Soviets to the bargaining table.

MR. MONDALE: This is a classic example of why Mr. Reagan has to be removed. The
fact of it is that we're building everything. We're building a B-1 bomber. We're
building MX, we're building cruise missiles, we're building Tridents, we're
building Pershing missiles, we're building ground-launch missiles, submarine-
launch cruise missiles. We're building every conceivable kind of weapon, and
we're spending, the defense budget, in excess of anything that makes sense or
anything that's necessary to our defense.

There is an incentive. As different as is the Soviet system from ours - and it
is profound - the incentive is that with a reasonable defense, they don't want
to be destroyed and incinerated any more than the United States wants to. And
past Presidents, from Kennedy, through Nixon, through Ford, through Johnson and
Carter - everyone of them was able to make progress in arms control until this
one.

Now here we are well beyond the third year of this Administration, all arms
control talks broken off, a serious arms race under way. For over 25 years his
theory is that arms control is weakness, when, in fact, sensible arms control is
strength and essential to our survival and he's believed that an arms race leads
to arms talks. What he has proven is that an arms race leads to an arms race. He
has made this a less safe world and we need a President who knows what he is
doing. On this, the most important issue of our time, the control of nuclear
weapons.



Q. Mr. Hart, do you agree as to the principal incentive to get the Soviets to
the bargaining table?

Mr. HART: Well, I don't think just rehearsing the record answers the question. I
think the answer to the question is reasonableness. And that's not being
exercised by this Administration.

The Soviets do have a self-interest in reducing nuclear weapons. We have to
offer them a negotiating posture which demonstrates that we are willing to give
up something for equal value on their side.

Fritz is right. This Administration has not done that. What it has done is use
its bargaining posture as political rhetoric in an effort to increase hostility
between ourselves and the Soviets. It wants to build every weapon.

Statements by key Administration officials indicate that they don't want to have
any bargaining at all which is the Reagan position going into the 80's. Until
they get the MX, until they get the B-1, until they get all the weapons systems.
The Soviets are prepared, in my judgment, to achieve an interim agreement in
Europe on the INF talks, intermediate range nuclear force talks, holding down or
reducing SS-20's in exchange for a freeze on our deployment or perhaps reduction
and I as President would be prepared to offer that agreement to them.

They tentatively accepted an agreement like that in 1982 and it was torpedoed,
so far as I am able to tell, by this side. I think this country is strong enough
to bargain. I think as we modernize and reform our conventional forces, which I
support and have proposed in great detail, that takes enormous pressure off the
nuclear deterrent as our principal bargaining position or our principal
strength.

I think as we negotiate down nuclear weapons, we defend this country and its
allies by the modernization and reform of our own military institutions and
those of our NATO partners.



Q: Specifically, how do you intend to get the Soviets to the bargaining table,
and a specific answer to President Reagan's statement?

Mr. JACKSON: The Soviets have a - I was waiting for one. The Soviets have a
neutral interest in survival. The Second World War we lost about a half-million;
they lost about 22 million people. They understand death real well. The Soviets
are alive tonight because we decided not to kill them. And we're alive because
they decided not to kill us.

We have no defense, it's simply deterrent. We are trusting each other without
even talking with each other.

Since we have the capacity to overkill them many times and they want to live,
that's the basis of mutual interest - a mutual desire to live. We need
leadership that will step in the gap. We can kill you, you can kill us. Now
let's focus on the ways to live, a peace policy: trade, agriculture, technology,
reduce the tensions and then the moneys that are now being used in capital in
tested killer weapons can be used to make our societies more profitable and more
abundant.

And to me that's when we move from arguing about which is the latest strength of
missiles as to who has - to begin to use leadership capacity to meet with the
Soviet leadership any place, any time of day or night and meet until we get a
new direction. When we get that new direction, we reduce the need. I cannot
reconcile the raise in the military budget as Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart want to
do. You cannot have missiles in one hand and doves in the other. You must make a
judgment. I choose to fight for a peace policy.

Freeze is the most important citizens' initiative in modern times to tell their
Government that they'd had enough of flimflammery and to get on with the crucial
issue of arms control. I was first, I was early, I was consistent and I know
what I'm doing.


Q. Mr. Mondale. I'm sorry.

Mr. JACKSON: . , , didn't fall for that is because he may have been slow and
that you were slow on coming out of Vietnam, and slow on the invasion in
Grenada, and slow on the second primary system, which is impeding progressive
progress in the South .

So the issue is not about who has a given weakness in a given point in time in
my judgment. The issue is how can we deal with the Soviet Union. What must we
have. We have - we inherit the capacity to destroy them. And their leadership,
the capacity to destroy us. We inherit the negative. What shall we do with this
power. Shall we reinforce it, shall we get bigger bangs for the buck or shall
we, in fact, have the vision to go another way.




Q. Mr. Hart, if you will, a quick response, please.

Mr. HART: I'd like to respond because Vice President Mondale knows better than
to say what he's saying.

Mr. MONDALE: I know exactly what I'm saying, Mr. Hart.

Mr. HART: Let me speak if I may. Thank you. While Vice President Mondale was
generally silent through '81 and '82 on the issue of arms control, a number of
us, including myself, were working out proposals that not only sought to halt
the arms race but reverse it, including sharp reductions in the multiple warhead
land- based systems which the Carter-Mondale Administration was promoting for
four years, and build in crisis management, end proliferation of nuclear
technology.

And the Carter-Mondale Administration, over the Nuclear Regulatory
Administration's objections, sold enriched uranium and nuclear technology to
India - that's increasing proliferation.

That SALT proposal was put forward before the freeze. There were those of us who
were promoting a broad-based arms control agenda that, in fact, went farther
than the freeze. And I sought throughout '82 and '83 to incorporate that freeze
into that agenda.

Vice President Mondale knows that very well. He also knows that he is no more
committed to arms control than I am.

Nuclear Arms


Q. Gentleman, I'm sorry. It's that point, I want to follow up on a question.
Please. President Reagan has consistently refused to say that the United States
of America would not be the first to use nuclear weapons in Western Europe. Are
you willing, tonight, to say that we will not be the first to use nuclear
weapons in Western Europe? Mr. Jackson.

Mr. JACKSON: I will be willing to say that we should not be the first to use
nuclear weapons. I think that we have the time right now to make decisions the
day before, so there will not be a day after.

That's why our leadership, while we still yet have time, must aggressively seek
to meet with the head of the Soviet Union and avert that mutual disaster.

Because if we use it first, they have the capacity to respond. It's back again
to mutual destruction, to mutual annihilation. So to me, first becomes
irrelevant when both of us are simply six minutes away, or less, from destroying
each other.


Q. Mr. Hart, are you willing to make that commitment?




Mr. HART: My recollection is that no administration has made that commitment,
including the Carter- Mondale Administration and it's for this reason: We are
not prepared at the present time to defend ourselves with conventional forces in
Europe. We and our allies. Reverend Jackson and I disagree on the defense
budget. I would like to be able to cut it 25 percent or some arbitrary amount
myself. I don't think we can take the finger off the nuclear trigger in Europe
or anywhere else without modernization of our conventional forces, not only ours
but those of our allies as well. When that happens we will not have to rely on
the nuclear deterrent and I will be prepared to say that we will not use it
first.


Q. But you're not prepared to say that now?

Mr. HART: Not at the present time.


Q. Mr. Mondale.

Mr. HART: I wouldn't rule it in either.

Mr. MONDALE: What we need to do is to move away as quickly as we can from what's
the first-use doctrine. That's what you're talking about. But to do that we need
to have a conventional deterrent in Western Europe which is adequate. That's the
reason that Kennedy and all the Presidents over the years have used the
first-use doctrine. McNamara, Bundy and others have talked about the happy fact
that we now have the state of the art, which, if we had strong leadership from
the President, to strengthen the conventional deterrent in NATO very soon, over
the next few years, we could drop what is a very embarrassing and dangerous
doctrine called the first-use doctrine and that's why I have solidly supported
that strong increase in conventional deterrent in order to drop the first-use
doctrine.







Committing Troops

Q.Let me follow up on that phrase ''conventional deterrent.'' Setting aside our
traditional commitment to our traditional allies in Western Europe, where in the
world is there anyplace in the world where you are prepared to commit America's
conventional forces including ground troops? Mr. Hart?

Mr. HART: Well, a number of places. They're already committed in Europe under
the NATO agreement, and I would fulfill that agreement to the fullest. That
doesn't mean that we can't rearrange our relative burdens under that arrangement
- under that alliance - and I have proposed some ways in which that can be done
by agreement and by negotiation over a period of time. We have treaty
obligations to the security of Korea. I think those have to be recognized. We
have treaty obligations to the defense of Japan. We have treaty obligations to
Australia and other nations. I am prepared fully to honor those treaty
obligation.

There are others that have been around for a long time that may or may not
deserve our continued support. We'd have to look at those. We have to defend
this nation and its vital interests. That has been a moderate mainstream
position since World War II and all Presidents, Republican and Democrat, have
been prepared to meet those as I would as well. We cannot permit Soviet
offensive systems in this hemiphere. President Kennedy was the first to state
that doctrine and I would fully support that.

But I don't think the issue is where we would fight. The issue of leadership, if
I may say so, is also to know when not to fight. I have disagreements with Vice
President Mondale on this question. I think some of us learned a lesson from
Vietnam and that is military might in the third world is not always going to
work. That's why I opposed continued presence of our marines in Lebanon, why I
fundamentally disagree with Vice President Mondale on continued military
presence in Central America.

You have to know if you're a leader in this country not only where to commit
your forces but where not to commit your forces.


Q. Mr. Mondale, he suggests you did not learn the lesson of Vietnam but keep in
mind if you will, the question is, where in the world other than Western Europe
are you prepared to commit American ground troops?

Mr. MONDALE: Let me respond to his question and then I'll get back to yours. The
fact of it is that there is a lesson to be learned from Vietnam. I was late in
opposing that war, and I've admitted it - it's the worst mistake in my life.

I'm proud of the fact that I spent five years fighting that war, and I would say
the problem with the Reagan Administration is that they didn't learn anything,
which is why we're in Central America the way they are today.

And I think the problem with what you're saying is that you learned the wrong
lesson. The fact of it is that there is a proper role for American power in the
world, that the toughest task of Presidential leadership is the sophisticated,
knowledgeable use of that power.

Unlike what you suggest in Central America in your ads where you talk about me
wanting to go out and kill American kids, the fact of it is I have been a strong
and powerful opponent of this President's policies in Central America.

I have come out against the covert action in Nicaragua. I've been against Big
Pine and all the military actions in Honduras. I've been for very strong and
severe restraints on aid to El Salvador conditioned on human rights and the end
of those death squads, I've been the strongest proponent of the Contradora
negotiations, which bring about nonintervention and the rest. My policies are
strong and solid. Where I differ from you is your position of just pulling the
plug and walking out of there.

I think, for example, Honduras has some legitimate rights to military assistance
and some technical trainers and advisers. I disagree with you, for example, when
you say that if the Persian Gulf explodes, the allies are on their own.

In the Middle East, where we have these dreadful problems in perhaps the most
dangerous area in the world, we simply cannot get into a position where the
world's largest supply of oil and the tinderbox of the world is - that if
there's trouble they're on their own. What we will do - certainly force ought to
be the last resort and not the first resort, but what we do ought to be matters
that we work out together and we ought not to forego anything and imply to the
Soviet Union that there's an area of great importance we are not involved.

And I did it that way because the one area not mentioned by Gary Hart was that
Persian Gulf. I believe that we've got to work with our allies, with our friends
in the Middle East, Israel and so on, to make certain that the American interest
in stability and keeping that area out of the reach of the Soviet Union is kept
in mind by the world.


Q. All right, so you would commit there. Mr. Jackson, where in the world would
you commit U.S. troops other than Western Europe?

Mr. JACKSON: It would be determined, based upon where our national interests
were threatened. Given where we are now, there are no winnable nuclear wars, so
I would put that in a box. Those troops in Western Europe now can in fact be
reduced. We ought to be more aggressive in mutual reductions policy between the
U.S. and the Soviet Union.

We cannot have the $300 billion a year military budget, pay $150 billion a year
to defend Japan and Europe and 6 or 7 percent of our G.N.P. or Japan - both for
the use of about 1 percent, Europe about 3.3 or 3.5 - and in fact bankrupt our
own economy in that process.

I would go a step further. At this time if we are more aggressive with a human
rights policy based upon mutual respect and reciprocity using economic leverage
and technology and education, we have less need to confront. By and large what
we're doing with our conventional forces are - is - intervening in third-world
matters using our forces as in Grenada, as in Lebanon or as in Honduras as
opposed to using aggressive diplomacy.

I would think in the Middle East that if, say that we have such great friends in
the Persian Gulf - and we do - we have a great friend in Israel - and we do -
leadership must reconcile our friends.

We cannot, in the Middle East, keep running with the rabbits and hunting with
the hounds. Leadership must expand the Camp David accord. That's a peace as
opposed to an irritating war policy there. This nation has the power to
reconcile warring factions there, get an understanding proving that there are
more advantages in trading with Israel than fighting Israel and we can use less
conventional forces and use more mental and spiritual forces.







Palestinian Rights


Q. I want to pick up on your mention of the Middle East and Mr. Mondale, you
mentioned it and I believe you did as well, Mr. Hart. Question: Do you believe
that the Palestinians have a right to what they would consider to be their
homeland? Mr. Mondale.

Mr. MONDALE: Ah, the only way that that's ever gonna be handled is under the
Camp David accords. The Camp David agreement provides that among other things
the parties will negotiate a solution to the Palestinian problem in all of its
aspects. This begins, in my opinion, with a strong strategic cooperative
relationship with Israel, something I've supported all my life and as a public
leader. It involves not trying to prenegotiate those agreements and, above all,
it requires that King Hussein show the courage of President Sadat and sit down
and negotiate.


Q. Specifically, Mr. Mondale, do you believe the Palestinians are entitled to
something that they would consider to be their homeland?

Mr. MONDALE: No. No. No. I oppose a homeland. I want to make it clear. I oppose
a homeland because the Camp David accords, in my opinion, provides the only
responsible resolution of this dispute and Israel is a signator and has agreed
to negotiate. Hussein refuses to sit down.

Mr. JACKSON: The Palestinians deserve a homeland just as other nations deserve a
homeland. It should be a nonmilitarized state that allows the people, the
Palestinian people, to engage in self-government and self- development. So long
as we ignore that basic right and that basic quest we can only prepare for war
in the Middle East as opposed to peace.

And that's where leadership really comes in. It is that realization that we must
face the fact, Israel deserves the right to security within internationally
recognized boundaries. The Palestinians likewise are a distinct people who
likewise deserve a homeland. We furthermore must normalize our ties with the
Arab world. Our nation is the only nation at this point that has authority to
convene those warring factions. But so long as our leadership becomes weak-kneed
in the face of that challenge, we'll not have peace in the Middle East.

Q. Mr. Hart do you agree with that?

Mr. HART: Reverend Jackson and I agree on an awful lot of things, including how
this party ought to structure itself and open itself up. One fundamental
disagreement we have, however, is in the region of the Middle East. A problem,
Jesse, with the formulation that you've suggested is that there are rabbits and
hounds. And the problem is the hounds are out to destroy the rabbits.

Now if everyone in the region was a rabbit, I think we could treat them equally.
But there are nations surrounding Israel, as you well know, whose solemn pledge,
and of course the organized entity of the Palestinians, the P.L.O., has a solemn
covenant to destroy the state of Israel.

I think we can, in fact, achieve some resolution of the Palestinian issue,
autonomy or whatever. But only after the other nations in the region are willing
to abandon that commitment to destroy that one nation.

Mr. JACKSON: Our nation has the capacity to bring about that abandonment because
we have the ability to change the course. You know, Jesus made a very
interesting observation about this enemy business, whether you talk with your
enemy or not.

Jesus said we should do something more radical than that. We ought to love our
enemy. What was the wisdom of that? If you love your enemy, number one, you
observe your enemy. Two, you might neutralize your enemy. Thirdly, you might
convert your enemy. Fourthly, you may have done something to help make your
enemy your enemy.

You never approach a negotiation self-righteously. But rather with an open mind.
We must reconcile warring factions there and not contribute to terror by not
facing facts.

Mr. HART: But the way we love our enemy is not to sell the Saudi Arabians F-15
aircraft as the Carter- Mondale Administration did. And -


Q. Mr. Hart, I'm awfully sorry for the interruption but we do want to move
along, but Mr. Mondale has something you ought to respond to and it will give
you a brief chance as well.

Mr. MONDALE: Incidentally, a sale which you said you would approve had it been
presented procedurally different and which I opposed in the private councils of
the Carter Administration. But I want to make another point. I want to make
another point. There's a lot of hypocrisy in the Middle East about this
Palestinian problem. When the Palestinians tried to take root in Jordan they
were bombed and many of them slaughtered by that Government. They didn't want
them around.

When the Palestinians then moved to Lebanon and tried to take root there, the
Syrians and the others kept moving them out. And so what they always say is
solve the Palestinian problem and Israel you handle it. It's your problem. Don't
get involved. If no one else'll get involved, they put it all on Israel's lap.

Israel, through Mr. Begin meeting with Sadat, agreed in a solemn agreement that
if someone would sit down them, Hussein, that they would sit down and negotiate
a range of problems including the solution of the Palestinian problem in all of
its aspects. They've agreed to do that. Unfortunately, no one other than Sadat
has agreed to sit down and I do not think that we can impose nor would I impose
a solution on Israel in the absence of the willingness of Hussein and others
representing their country to sit down . . .

Mr. JACKSON: I just mustered this. What's happening is that the 40- or 30-year
history of pain and agony is so great, with the Palestinians not really
appreciating Jewish suffering and anguish, and Jews in many instances not
appreciating their anguish and suffering. There is too much hurt between the two
for them to ever sit down and assume an initiative.

And this is where America's leadership comes in. My interests there at one level
is America's national interest. What can we do to create a peace right now where
there is war. Neither of them have the strength as they rehearse the bloodshed
and destruction to each other. We have the - who would have thought that Egypt
and Israel could have been at the bargaining table?

Neither had the strength to come to that table. There was too much bloodshed,
too much agony, hurt and pain. Our leadership has the ability to negotiate it. I
could convince Arabs that they have more long-range interests in trading with
Israel than in fighting with Israel, that they have - they are next-door
neighbors and they indeed must go another way.

We might as well quit preparing for terror because it's unstoppable. We might as
well stop talking, stop the no-talk policy and begin to talk. And then act and
change things. Suppose we couldn't have talked with Egypt because Egypt and
Israel had been in a war? We would not have Camp David to brag about. Somebody
had to believe and then act. And that's leadership.






Q. I do want to move along, and I remind all of you the time is beginning to
grow short. Senator Hart, I'm going to give you a chance to speak last on this
as you haven't had your time to respond, and then we'll move on to another
question.

Mr. HART: Two brief responses. I'm puzzled when Vice President Mondale says he
doesn't want to pull the plug in Central America. We don't have a plug inserted
except for the Reagan exercises of military forces. We have no agreement to
permanently station military forces in Honduras. There is no commitment of
American forces in that region, so to say we're going to pull the plug if we
withdraw the troops that are deployed there for exercise purposes is to
misunderstand the fundamental commitment we have there.

No.2, in the Persian Gulf. I cannot believe that this country is going to
sacrifice young American lives fighting for oil in the Persian Gulf if we can
make ourselves independent. Now I have said consistently that this nation can
back up our oil-importing allies at sea and in the air if they want to fight for
oil in the Persian Gulf if it gets cut off. But I can't believe that Vice
President Mondale is prepared to send American people - young men - in there to
fight for oil for West Germany.




Mr. MONDALE: Can I say two things?


Q. Shall we move on to the next question? Yes, however, I believe in the nature
of what Mr. Hart said, that you should have an opportunity to respond.

Mr. MONDALE: I'm inclined to agree with that. I found it rather peculiar that we
were talking about the Middle East and suddenly we ended up in Honduras, which I
didn't know was a part of the Middle East.

Now the fact of it is that no one has opposed Reagan policies more than I have,
and you've run ads saying I'm supporting Reagan and that a lot of kids are going
to get killed down there, when I'm totally opposed to the presence of combatants
down there.

We have a modest military assistance program for Honduras, a democracy that
deserves that help, that is under threat, and I wouldn't pull the plug on that
kind of help. That's right. I do not want America just to withdraw without any
interest at all in that isthmus, which is important to us.

Secondly, why do you run those ads that suggest that I'm out trying to kill
kids, when you know better?

I'm a person who believes in peace. We just talked about the Camp David accords.
I was a central part of the negotiations that brought peace between two nations
that had fought four wars over 30 years and Mr. Begin credited me with being the
spirit of Camp David.

I believe in that process. All my life I've fought for peace. All my life I've
been opposed to any kind of use of American force that isn't totally justified
and sensible under the circumstances. And to run ads as you've run them - to run
ads as you've run them suggests that there's something about my policies that
will lead to the death of American boys. I think you ought to pull those ads
down tonight.

Mr. HART: This is crucial to this election, because I would answer by asking you
a question. Why have you questioned my commitment to arms control and civil
rights when you know that I have just as much commitment to both of those as you
do.  The ads illustrate a point. This country cannot deploy young Americans in
every trouble spot in the third world and expect to solve that problem.

Mr. MONDALE: Who is proposing?

Mr. HART: You did in Chicago.

Mr. MONDALE: In every place in the world? Really?

Mr. HART: You argued in Chicago that we should keep . . .

Mr. MONDALE: No, no . . .

Mr. JACKSON: Tomorrow the issue will be this rat-a-tat-tat without dealing with
direction. The fact is the reason why they are having this kind of kinship
struggle is that there is such similarity in policies. It's a matter of both
going in the same direction - just a little slower. That's all it is. And so
it's interesting to know that one was for disarmament and the other - both are
for arms control.

But then it's interesting that while we would jump back to Central America, for
example, then back to the Middle East, another jumped to South Africa, for
example, and if we're to have foreign policy that America, now, is in disgrace.

It's South Africa's number one trading partner. We are in disgrace having helped
to make or facilitate a loan to South Africa. If I were President, I would not
like another American corporation to go to South Africa. Those that were there
would have a timetable to come out - unless there's a new formula, and a formula
for peace. That is, enfranchisement of the people, investment -
disenfranchisement, disinvestment. Let's discuss the whole world and put this
matter in some perspective and get off each other's backs.


Q. Mr. Jackson, I'd love to do that - we don't have time this evening. As you
know, we are committed to two- minute summations from each of you at the end,
and we intend to make good on that commitment. Very quickly, and I emphasize to
you we unfortunately have time only for very fast yes or no answers to the
following questions.

Gun Control

Q. Mr. Hart, Gun control. Do you favor it or are opposed?

Mr. HART: I've opposed Federal gun control laws.


Q. Mr. Jackson?

Mr. JACKSON: I favor gun control. In those areas - in the rural areas where they
hunt rabbits, having guns is all right, but in urban America they hunt people.
We need to go another way.


Q. Mr. Mondale. Do you favor or are opposed?

Mr. MONDALE: Yes, I favor control of the so-called Saturday Night Specials -
snub-nosed guns that are only used to kill police and each other - for
concealment. There's no conceivable excuse for their use.



Budget Amendment

Q. One other. Do you oppose or favor a constitutional amendment to require a
balanced budget? Mr. Hart?

Mr. HART: Strongly oppose it.


Q. Mr. Jackson?

Mr. JACKSON: I strongly oppose it.


Q. Mr. Mondale?

Mr. MONDALE: I strongly oppose it. Reagan's trying to use this to protect
himself from the worst imbalanced budget on earth.






Candidate Changes


Q: Gentlemen, last question before we get to your summation, and I do ask you to
be brief because we are running very tight on time here. Running for President
is a quintessentially and peculiarly American experience and a great honor. One
of you at this table may wind up to be the next leader of this nation in a
perilous time. In recognition of that, has it changed you in any significant way
as a person? And if so, how? Mr. Jackson.

Mr. JACKSON.  It has changed me to the extent that I have a greater appreciation
of the need to reach out. I've grown up on the short end of the cash system in
this country, and thus, I've spent a great deal of time on civil rights and
overcoming oppression.

But as a leader of the broader American public, American life really is not a
blanket of one piece of unbroken cloth - it's really a quilt of many patches,
many pieces, many colors, many sizes bound by a common thread. All of it fits
somewhere.

And so, the extent of which I've been involved in this campaign, it has
challenged me to grow and to reach more for the locked out and to reach deeper
for the boat stuck to the bottom.

So my appreciation of North, West and South, East and the extremes of our
country has really increased.


Q: Mr. Hart, again and I must plead for brevity.

Mr. HART.  My fundamental belief in the strength and purpose of the American
people and their character has been enormously strengthened in the past year.
The founding people that put this country together believed that our strength
wasn't in Washington or with our politicians, but with the common sense and good
judgment of the American people.

The past year I've found the enormous wisdom that that contains. I think this
country's going to make it not just because of its political leaders but because
of our people, primarily.


Q: Mr. Mondale.





Mr. Mondale: I guess I've traveled this nation, the last few years, almost more
than any living American and one quickly becomes aware of how much Americans
want to trust again, how much they'd like to have this country really work
without having their hearts broken, how they would like to believe but how
they're reluctant to believe because they've had that heart broken so many times
in the past. And I'd like to be the person who restores their faith.


Q. Gentlemen, you have drawn for turns on the closing two-minute summation last
response. Mr. Mondale, you drew the first to speak.



CLOSING STATEMENTS








Mr. MONDALE: The night before I was sworn in as Vice President of the United
States I had what they call ''the briefing.'' It was in a secret - top secret -
environment. A lot of it must remain classified, but I can say this. In that
secret meeting they told me that I would be in the chain of command and had to
be ready in case of a nuclear attack. They told me about the need to be close to
someone within minutes who could help me if I needed to make the decision in the
case of the incapacitation of the President.

For four years that person was never more than minutes away except in unusual
circumstances. Even when I went fishing he was nearby. And the reason was, as
they told me, that I might be called at any time in the middle of the night -
anytime - and told that Soviet missiles were coming in and I might have 10
minutes, eight minutes, maybe less to decide whether I would fire our missiles
or not.

My whole life I fought to avoid the moment when the President, or someone in his
behalf, would have to make that deadly choice. It could mean the end of the
human species. On Tuesday ask which of us you think is best prepared and most
committed to freeze these God-awful weapons, to press ahead for arms control and
the reduction of those risks and lead us towards a safer world. Vote on Tuesday
as though your life depends on it because it might.


Q. By Tuesday, you mean in the New York primary. Mr. Jackson.







Mr. HART: The great Democratic Presidents of the past, Franklin Roosevelt, John
Kennedy and others are but those who realized that times have changed, that this
country could not stand still and could not go back.

I believe the mid-1980's are those periods - represents that period of change. I
don't believe the leadership that guides this country forward can be leadership
that is cautious. I believe it must be like those great Presidents - leadership
which is bold. I'm running for one simple reason and that is because this
country needs new leadership, a new agenda, a break with the politics of the
past and the old arrangements.

This country cannot afford to stand still and it certainly can't move farther
back into Ronald Reagan's past or even the past of the Democratic Party. But the
American people believe as I do that to preserve and cherish traditional values,
we must adapt the changing circumstances.

Then I think they'll vote for that new leadership here in the New York primary
and in the fall in 1984. I believe this candidacy does represent the best chance
to remove Ronald Reagan from office, which is the very least we owe the American
people for a fair and just and compassionate society, and if indeed, we want to
have a chance to end that nuclear arms race.

The policies of the past are not working in the 1980's. We cannot have
leadership which merely promises to repair and patch up the old arrangements.
This country must be bold. We are a nation that has survived for 200 years
because we were willing to innovate and to change our industrial base, our
education systems, our job training programs, our opportunities for minorities
and women, to clean up this nation's environment, to build the best education
system in the world, to have a foreign policy based upon a helping hand and
Democratic ideal and not mere military deployment.

I believe we must eliminate Ronald Reagan from the White House and I believe the
American people are looking for that kind of bold and innovative leadership
which the Demoratic Party has always provided this country at critical periods
of change in our past and that's why I ask for your help.

Mr. RATHER: Thank you Mr. Hart, Mr. Jackson and Mr. Mondale. We conclude this
debate now.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of candidates

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
FRITZ AND GARY

BYLINE: Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 806 words


George McGovern presciently warned Walter Mondale and Gary Hart that if they
argued too heatedly over ''where's the beef?'' in each other's candidacy, they'd
make hamburger of themselves. Their most recent debate suggests that that's just
what's happening.

And that's too bad, for a number of reasons, including the fact that both are
decent men slipping out of character in these slashing attacks on one another.
They're also laying out campaign themes that Ronald Reagan's political managers
are happily filing away for the future. And they're making it more difficult
every day for the Democratic Party to fall back on what might yet become
necessary - a Mondale-Hart ticket.

Such a joining of forces may seem ridiculous even to talk about after the
vitriolic exchanges of the New York debate. Beyond the usual stuff of campaign
give-and-take - charges of misrepresenting the record, serving special
interests, etc. - Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale were gouging each other substantively
on such cutting issues as arms control, Central America, civil rights and
Israel. When you suggest that your opponent would waste American lives in a
Vietnam-style war, or that he's not a true friend of Israel, there's real
political blood on the floor.

Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale, moreover, seem to have taken a personal dislike to
each other, if their debate performances are any evidence. That doesn't say much
for the political maturity and judgment of either one. Nor is it likely to be
appealing to a public that's shown it likes Ronald Reagan's laid-back style and
lack of personal hostility.

The Hart-Mondale enmity may already have confounded what otherwise would be the
logic of a Mondale- Hart ticket. Both obviously have mounted strong candidacies
and, as things now appear, their race is likely to continue right into the
Democratic Convention in July.

That doesn't necessarily mean a deadlocked convention. Either of the leading
candidates might arrive at the first ballot with a majority of delegates and
still feel the need to take his rival on the ticket with him, or make some other
generous gesture of conciliation. Each obviously represents powerful forces
within the Democratic Party; each has passionately committed supporters who will
need to be kept at work for the party even if their champion loses its
nomination.

John Kennedy faced just such a situation in 1960, and picked Lyndon Johnson for
the Vice Presidency. So did Hubert Humphrey in 1968, but he did little to
mollify Eugene McCarthy's disappointed supporters. Mr. Kennedy won and Mr.
Humphrey lost, both by a hair.  Or perhaps this year, with Jesse Jackson a
strong third presence in the race, no one will enter the convention with a sure
majority (although the last multi-ballot convention in either party was in
1952). In that case, a Mondale- Hart ticket seems highly logical, as the
desperate need to maintain a unified party would make compromise and
conciliation imperative. If Mr. Reagan and George (''voodoo economics'') Bush
could kiss and make up, why not Fritz and Gary?  A deadlocked convention, in
today's political conditions, would hardly turn to an outsider. Candidates and
their supporters who have been in the field for two years or more, who made the
long trek through 30-odd state primaries, who endured the debates, the rigors of
the campaign and the humiliations of fund-raising will not likely step aside for
someone who has paid none of these dues. Nor are today's delegates mere puppets
of powerful bosses, governors and mayors; they can't be traded about by
backstage kingmakers, few of which survive anyway.  So a compromise, if any,
would almost certainly be worked out among the three candidates. For all their
proclaimed devotion to civil rights, neither Mr. Mondale nor Mr. Hart is likely
to demonstrate it by choosing a black candidate for Vice President; nor does it
now appear that Mr. Jackson would be powerful enough at San Francisco to force
himself onto the ticket.  Besides, if present trends continue - Mondale 698
delegates, Hart 429, Jackson 87 - Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart would be the clear
leaders even if neither had a majority. But Mr. Mondale, having already suffered
the Vice Presidency, is less likely to take second place than Mr. Hart, at age
47, might be.  The latter would be accepting, after all, a nomination that - win
or lose in the general election - could boost him toward the real prize in 1988
or 1992. He and Mr. Mondale might well calculate that while their Midwest- West
combination would not be perfect, Democratic unity is a far greater necessity
for defeating Ronald Reagan than ticket ballots.  And if the primary campaign
doesn't grind out too much hamburger, Mr. Hart might reason as L.B.J. is said to
have done in 1960: ''Don't you realize I'll be just a heartbeat away?''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thais Report Capture Of 40 Vietnamese

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 29


The army command said today that Thai troops had captured 40 Vietnamese soldiers
and retrieved five bodies after battling a battalion-size force that crossed
into Thailand from Cambodia Sunday in pursuit of guerrillas loyal to the
Communist Government that was ousted in 1979.

It was the largest number of Vietnamese soldiers reported captured by Thailand
in clashes since Hanoi's forces invaded Cambodia in 1979. In a broadcast
statement, the Thai command said most of the Vietnamese were driven back into
Cambodia Wednesday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPAIGN NOTES;
McCarthy Compares '68 To Hart's Campaign

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 148 words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS, March 29


Eugene J. McCarthy, whose 1968 Presidential campaign was based on his opposition
to the Vietnam War, says similarities exist between his race and the campaign of
Senator Gary Hart.

Mr. McCarthy, speaking Wednesday at Washington University, said both he and
Senator Hart had to fight the Democratic Party's power structure, represented by
labor and special interests.

The former Minnesota Senator said, however, that Senator Hart lacked the solid
issues he needed to overcome Walter F. Mondale for the Democratic nomination or
to beat President Reagan in the November election.

''Hart just doesn't have the issue I did,'' Mr. McCarthy said. ''If he had a set
of issues, I think he would last better. I think he's been a little vague about
what he's really trying to say.''

Mr. McCarthy, who was 68 years old today, left the Senate in 1970 to pursue a
teaching and writing career.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOW THE DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL ASPIRANTS VIEW KEY ISSUES;
DESPITE CAMPAIGN ORATORY, SOME DIFFERENCES ARE SUBTLE

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 5129 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 29


Gary Hart and Walter F. Mondale have been emphasizing their differences on a
wide range of foreign and domestic issues.

But the differences are more complex and more subtle than the campaign oratory
would suggest. Mr. Mondale contends the Senator from Colorado has been weak in
his commitment to civil rights and inconsistent in his support for arms control,
while Mr. Hart contends the former Vice President has vacillated in his support
of Israel. But the record of votes and public statements by the two candidates
provides little to substantiate such allegations.

In foreign policy, Mr. Hart has been eager, above all else, to avoid ''another
Vietnam.'' He has been quicker than Mr. Mondale to criticize the deployment of
American troops in Lebanon, Grenada and Central America, just as he opposed the
Vietnam War several years before Mr. Mondale. Mr. Hart says that he, like
millions of college students in the 1960's, learned ''the lessons of Vietnam,''
including the ''futility'' of military intervention. Mr. Mondale retorts that
''guilt is not a foreign policy'' and that the United States must be ready to
use its military strength because the world is ''a tough, dangerous place''
where ''the enemies of freedom win power by force.''

Variance on the Issues


In a Senate career spanning 12 years, from 1965 through 1976, Mr. Mondale
assisted at the birth of many antipoverty programs. He was still trying to
fulfill the promise of the New Deal and the War on Poverty after many began to
question whether the nation could afford the cost. Mr. Hart says Democrats
''must become the party of economic growth, not redistribution,'' and he argues
that ''the New Deal, although a brilliant response to the problems of the
1930's, cannot solve our problems today.''

Mr. Mondale questions Mr. Hart's commitment to civil rights, asserting that the
Coloradan made virtually no reference to them in his book, ''A New Democracy.''

Mondale aides do not criticize any of Mr. Hart's votes on civil rights
legislation. But Mr. Mondale says ''there's a dramatic difference in the
intensity, the personal commitment'' of the two candidates. Mr. Hart replies,
''I'm not willing to let Vice President Mondale or anyone else in this country
gauge my intensity of commitment to civil rights.''

Thus, Mr. Mondale criticizes Mr. Hart from the left on domestic policy, saying
that his commitment to free- market economic theories has often made him
indifferent to the needs of working people. But Mr. Mondale simultaneously
attacks Mr. Hart from the right on foreign policy, arguing that the Senator is
naive about communism and too quick to renounce the use of military force.

Jackson Differs From Both


The disputes between Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale have become increasingly bitter
and seemed to reach a high point in their debate Wednesday night in New York
City. The Rev. Jesse Jackson, the third major candidate in the race for the
Democratic Presidential nomination, said the ''rat-a-tat-tat'' between Mr. Hart
and Mr. Mondale obscured the similarity of their views. ''The reason why they
are having this kind of kinship struggle,'' he said, ''is that there is such
similarity in policies.''

Mr. Jackson differs in his approach to both foreign policy and domestic issues.
He says the United States must show greater sensitivity to the needs of the
third world, including African, Arab, Asian and Latin American countries.
Likewise, at home, he says the Federal Government must pay more attention to the
needs of blacks, Hispanic people, women, homosexuals, the elderly, the poor and
others whom he would bring together in a ''rainbow coalition.'' But, as a
relative newcomer to national politics, he has not developed his positions on
some issues in as much detail as the other candidates.

Accompanying this article is a summary of positions taken by the three
candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination.

Central America

Mr. Hart says, ''The commitment of United States military force to Central
America cannot be the answer to the problems.'' In newspaper advertisements he
says he has ''called for the immediate withdrawal of U.S. combat troops from
Central America.'' He recently introduced a bill that said, ''The United States
should withdraw military forces introduced into Costa Rica, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras or Nicaragua for training exercises or any other purpose on
or after Aug. 1, 1983.''

He says Mr. Mondale ''shows a frequent unwillingness to challenge the
inappropriate use of American force.''

Mr. Mondale argues, ''The lesson from Vietnam is not that we should forgo power
everywhere at all times.'' Because of his long experience in government, he
says, he would be more ''sure-footed'' in using power.

Mondale Admits 'Mistake'


At the end of 1967, when some Senators were urging the Johnson Administration to
halt the bombing of North Vietnam, Mr. Mondale said he had no ''fundamental
objection to our policy in Vietnam.'' He did not publicly urge an end to the
bombing until September 1968. He later said he was ''one of those that needed to
be brought to his senses on the issue of Vietnam.'' He has called his initial
silence ''the worst mistake of my entire career.''

Mr. Hart says, ''In the third world, the real enemy is hunger, poverty and
disease, not communism.'' Mr. Jackson asserts that the revolutions in Central
America are ''indigenous in origin,'' not a result of an international campaign
backed by the Soviet Union or Cuba. Mr. Mondale says the main problems in the
third world are both communism and poverty.

In February, Mr. Hart introduced a bill stating that the United States should
withdraw its troops from Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala and not send them
back except to ''respond to a clear and present danger of military attack on the
United States.''

While Mr. Hart wants all United States armed forces removed from Central America
by the end of April, Mr. Mondale advocates a more gradual approach. ''I would
draw down the number of our forces in Honduras,'' he said. But before
withdrawing all troops he would seek to negotiate an arrangement with Nicaragua
in which that country would agree to the removal of any Cuban forces, not to use
MIG's in the region, and a nonintervention accord ''that is enforceable along
their borders and throughout the isthmus.''

Mr. Jackson says this country should halt military maneuvers in Honduras, end
covert operations in Nicaragua and make aid to El Salvador contingent upon
improvements in human rights. He would also seek normalization of relations with
Cuba.


Allied Commitments

Mr. Hart calls on American allies in Europe to assume responsibility for a
''greater share of the land defense of the Continent.'' He says the presence of
American ground forces in Europe is less important than the goal of naval
superiority that permits the United States to defend its interests at sea. But
Mr. Hart says it would be a ''moral outrage'' if this country went to war to
protect Middle East oil supplies for itself or Eurpoean allies. ''We never
should be reduced to shedding the blood of a single American in an unnecessary
war for someone else's oil,'' he said.

Mr. Mondale says he would ''keep faith with our European allies.'' He says he
would not reduce the United States troop commitment in Europe and would help
America's allies preserve their access to Persian Gulf oil.

Mr. Jackson has said the United States could reduce its troop strength in
Western Europe.

The Middle East

In the Middle East, Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale have both been strong supporters of
Israel. Mr. Mondale has had more opportunity to demonstrate his commitment, but
American Jewish leaders see little to criticize in Mr. Hart's record.

Mr. Jackson says Israel ''must recognize the Palestinians have a right to
self-determination or a homeland,'' just as he says the Palestine Liberation
Organization should recognize Israel's right to exist. Unlike the other
candidates, he has supported creation of ''an independent Palestinian state on
the West Bank and Gaza.'' The United States, he says, could be a much more
effective mediator in the Middle East if it were willing to talk to the P.L.O.

Mr. Hart voted against President Carter's decision to sell F-15 jet fighters to
Saudi Arabia in 1978 and voted against President Reagan's proposal to sell Awacs
radar planes to the Saudis in 1981. Mr. Mondale, as Vice President, lobbied for
the F-15 sale but he now says he privately opposed it at the time. Many
supporters of Israel opposed the F-15 sale on the ground that it threatened that
nation's security.

Mr. Mondale has said he strongly favors moving the United States Embassy in
Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. Israel has regarded Jerusalem as its capital
since 1949, but the United States has kept its embassy in Tel Aviv on the ground
that the final status of Jerusalem should be decided through negotiations.

Mr. Hart says he supports moving the embassy although his position ''evolved''
over time. Mr. Hart declined to co-sponsor a bill that would require relocation
of the embassy. In a letter last February to an official of a Zionist group, Mr.
Hart said the status of Jerusalem could be resolved only through ''negotiations
involving all sides.'' Mr. Hart later disavowed the letter, saying it was
prepared by his staff and did not reflect his views.

In a statement issued March 16, Mr. Hart said, ''If elected President, I would
move the U.S. Embassy to West Jerusalem,'' and he has reaffirmed that position
since then.


Military Spending

Mr. Mondale says he would allow military spending to increase at a rate of 4 to
5 percent a year, after making up for the effects of inflation. That is
substantially less than the 13 percent increase in military appropriations,
including an inflation catchup, that Mr. Reagan sought in the budget sent to
Congress last February.

In an interview last December, Mr. Hart said he wanted to see military spending
rise at an annual rate of 4.5 to 5 percent, including the inflation catchup. But
in February, when he released a comprehensive budget plan, he said the nation
could meet its ''true national security needs'' with an increase of 3 percent a
year, after accounting for inflation, and this is the figure he now recommends.

In Congress, as a leader of the bipartisan ''military reform'' movement, Mr.
Hart has said the Pentagon should spend more on manpower and combat readiness
and less on procurement of expensive, complex weapons. He has recommended less
emphasis on heavy firepower and more reliance on rapid surprise maneuvers to
disrupt the organization of enemy forces.

Mr. Jackson says there should be ''zero real growth'' in the military budget in
the next five years.

All three oppose proposals for an MX intercontinental missile, a B-1 bomber, new
nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and poison nerve gas.


Nuclear Weaponry

All three candidates support a freeze on the testing, production and further
deployment of nuclear warheads, missiles and other delivery systems.

Advocates of arms control give high marks to Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart. David
Cortright, executive director of the Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy, a
private nonprofit group, said that on this issue ''the differences between Hart
and Mondale are very slight or insignificant.''

Mr. Hart did not co-sponsor a resolution supporting the freeze when it was first
introduced in March 1982. Mr. Hart issued a statement saying the pursuit of
numerical limits, though a ''valid objective,'' was not enough. He offered his
own proposal calling for negotiations with the Soviet Union to prevent the use
of nuclear weapons, to reduce the danger of nuclear war through accident or
miscalculation and to prevent nuclear terrorism.

Mr. Hart did co-sponsor a freeze resolution in the next Congress in January
1983. He also supported a proposal calling for the destruction of two nuclear
weapons systems whenever a new one was built. Mr. Mondale opposed this proposal,
asserting it was inconsistent with the freeze.

However, Mr. Hart argued that there was no fundamental contradiction. He said
the United States could follow such a policy while trying to negotiate a freeze.



Busing for Desegregation

In 1970, Mr. Mondale introduced a resolution to create a Select Committee on
Equal Educational Opportunity, a basically liberal panel that served as a
counterweight to the more conservative Judiciary Committee. Mr. Mondale became
chairman of the select committee, held hearings and led Senate opposition to
President Nixon's proposals to limit the use of busing for school desegregation.

''Busing is the means - and at times the only means - by which segregation in
public schools can be reduced,'' Mr. Mondale said in a Senate speech in 1972.

Mr. Jackson and Mr. Hart have also opposed efforts to prevent the use of busing
as a means of school desegregation.


Affirmative Action

As Vice President, Mr. Mondale urged the Justice Department to make a strong
defense of affirmative action in the case of Allan P. Bakke, a white who
challenged a special admissions program at the medical school of the University
of California at Davis.

In response to a questionnaire from Mayor Koch of New York City, Mr. Mondale
said: ''I strongly support affirmative action to correct past discrimination. I
reject the use of quotas.''

Mr. Hart said: ''I support quotas, as an alternative to so-called 'weaker' forms
of affirmative action, if the use of such a remedy is necessary to remedy the
effects of past discrimination.'' Mr. Hart listed criteria he would use in
evaluating the need for quotas.

Mr. Jackson says that numerical goals and quotas may sometimes be necessary to
eradicate the effects of 200 years of discrimination.


Civil Rights

All the candidates say they have been champions of civil rights, and all
denounce the policies of the Reagan Administration.

Mr. Jackson has spent all his adult life in civil rights work, starting in the
early 1960's, when he led sit-ins and protest marches to desegregate theaters
and restaurants in Greensboro, N.C. He has continued that work in the last
decade as president of Operation PUSH, a civil rights organization based in
Chicago. One of his major campaign promises is tougher enforcement of the Voting
Rights Act.

As a Senator, Mr. Mondale was more prominent in civil rights battles than Mr.
Hart has been. Mr. Mondale was a leader of the bipartisan liberal bloc that won
passage of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, which prohibited certain forms of
discrimination in the sale or rental of about two-thirds of the nation's
housing.

In 1975, Mr. Mondale led efforts to change Senate rules so it would be easier to
end filibusters, which had often been used to block action on civil rights
bills.

Senator Hart has supported extension of the Voting Rights Act, sponsored a
resolution to deny tax exemptions to private schools that discriminate on the
basis of race and opposed President Reagan's efforts to abolish the Legal
Services Corporation.

Right to Abortion Backed


All three candidates support the proposed amendment to the Constitution to
guarantee equal rights for women. All support the right of women to choose
abortion and oppose efforts to restrict access to abortion.

All the candidates support legislation to guarantee that women receive the same
pay as men if they perform work of comparable value. This principle of pay
equity goes beyond the requirements of a 1963 Federal law that requires equal
pay for identical work. Mr. Hart has proposed legislation to forbid economic
discrimination against women.

All three candidates support Federal legislation to forbid discrimination
against homosexuals. All say they would issue an executive order banning
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in Federal employment.

Mr. Mondale says he has not decided whether the ban should apply to the armed
forces. Mr. Jackson says there is ''no reasonable basis'' for excluding
homosexuals from the military. Mr. Hart says ''military employment should not be
restricted because of sexual orientation per se.''



Industrial Policy

Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale both favor more cooperation by business, labor and the
Government to revitalize basic industries. Mr. Hart has been identified as a
proponent of having a formal strategy to assist ailing industries. But Mr.
Mondale also supports ''a coherent industrial strategy,'' including more
investment in job training and education.

Mr. Hart says he would try to negotiate ''industrial modernization and growth
agreements.'' Under such compacts, he says, labor unions would defer wage
demands or make them contingent on improvements in productivity or
profitability. In exchange, employers would guarantee jobs for a specified
period and help retrain employees.

Mr. Hart says Congress should authorize individual training accounts. Employers
and employees could each make tax-deductible contributions to such accounts, and
if workers lost their jobs, they could withdraw money to pay for retraining or
further education.

All three candidates support an increase in public works and highway programs,
which they see as a major source of new jobs.

Mr. Hart's economic policy appears to rely more heavily on financial incentives
to change behavior and less on direct Government subsidies to troubled
industries. As Vice President, Mr. Mondale strongly supported the Carter
Administration's proposal to provide Federal loan guarantees to the Chrysler
Corporation in 1979. In retrospect, supporters of the bill say it saved the jobs
of hundreds of thousands of automobile workers. Mr. Hart voted against the bill
because, he said, it contradicted ''the basic tenets of free enterprise'' and
increased ''Government interference in the marketplace.''

Mr. Mondale strongly supports another bill designed to protect the jobs of
American auto workers. The bill would require the use of specified quantities of
American parts and labor in imported automobiles. It would, in effect, require
foreign car makers to set up factories in the United States if they sold more
than 100,000 cars a year here.

Mr. Hart opposes the bill, saying it would not make the American auto industry
any more competitive and might provoke Japanese retaliation against America's
agricultural exports. Mr. Jackson does not support the bill, either.

Mr. Mondale has made trade policy a central theme of his campaign. In a speech
to the A.F.L.-C.I.O. last October, he said, ''I will match other countries'
export subsidies product for product and dollar for dollar.''

Mr. Mondale says he does not seek a permanent increase in trade barriers. By
adopting a more aggressive trade policy, he says, the United States can persuade
other countries to reduce their export subsidies.

Mr. Jackson would establish ''a noncoercive national economic planning body'' to
help channel investments and allocate resources. Such planning, he says, could
match training with job opportunities and reduce ''the need for protectionist
policies and other forms of corporate bailout.''


Budget Deficits

The Democratic candidates all charge that President Reagan is responsible for
the biggest deficits in the nation's history because he has cut income tax rates
across the board while rapidly increasing the military budget.

A statement issued by Mr. Mondale's office said, ''At the end of his first term,
he would cut the Reagan deficits by more than half.'' Mr. Hart says he could
reduce the deficit to $78.5 billion in the fiscal year 1989. That is less than
one-third of the $248 billion deficit that the Congressional Budget Office
anticipates for that year under Mr. Reagan's policies.

The Mondale and Hart proposals are mere sketches. Neither has anything like the
amount of detail that Congress and the President require when they take action
on the budget.

The Congressional Budget Office says that the Reagan program, if continued,
would lead to Federal outlays of more than $1,200 billion in 1989. Mr.  Mondale
said his proposals would save these amounts in the 1989 budget: $30 billion to
$40 billion in the military; $15 billion in health programs, mainly Medicare,
the health insurance program for the elderly; $10 billion in agriculture
programs, and $15 billion to $20 billion in interest on the Federal debt. In
addition, Mr. Mondale said his tax proposals would generate ''at least $60
billion'' in additional revenue in 1989.

Mr. Mondale said he would spend $30 billion more than the Reagan Administration
expects to spend for education, research and development, job training,
industrial strategy, export subsidies, nutrition programs, legal services and
environmental protection in 1989. Taken together, the proposed budget and tax
changes would, according to Mr. Mondale, reduce the deficit by ''more than $100
billion in 1989.''

Hart Would Trim $170 Billion


Mr. Hart said his proposal for 1989, compared with the Reagan budget for the
same year, would save these amounts: $44 billion in the military; $3.5 billion
in Medicare; $55 billion in interest on the Federal debt, and $1 billion in
subsidies for nuclear power and synthetic fuels. Mr. Hart said his tax proposals
would generate $90 billion of additional revenue in 1989. But he would spend $20
billion more than the Reagan Administration expects to spend for education, job
training, child nutrition, legal services and public works.

Taken together, these proposals, according to Mr. Hart, would reduce the deficit
by roughly $170 billion in 1989.

Mr. Jackson proposes deeper cuts in the military budget than the other two, but
larger increases in domestic spending, so the net reduction in the deficit, $70
billion, would be smaller than under his rivals' proposals. Mr. Jackson said he
could reduce the military budget by $80 billion in the fiscal year 1985, which
begins Oct. 1. About $60 billion, he said, could be saved by requiring the
European allies, Japan and South Korea to pay defense costs now borne by the
United States. The other $20 billion, he said, would come from cutbacks in
weapon programs.

Mr. Jackson said his tax proposals would raise $50 billion of additional
revenue. He would spend $10 billion for ''restoration of a portion of the safety
net'' for poor people and would increase spending on public works by $50
billion.


Tax Increases

All three candidates say they would raise taxes. Such statements are an unusual
act of candor for Presidential candidates, reflecting the depth of their concern
about the deficit.

Mr. Hart proposes a 10 percent surcharge on corporate income taxes. Mr. Hart
also proposes heavier taxation of corporate income derived from foreign sources
and a longer depreciation period for buildings. These proposals would generate
$35 billion of additional revenue in 1989, he says.

Mr. Mondale has proposed a ''corporate minimum tax,'' amounting to 15 percent of
a company's taxable income. Mr. Mondale says his corporate tax proposals would
raise $21 billion in 1989.

Both candidates would raise individual taxes as well. They would defer the
effective date of a law linking individual income tax brackets to inflation.
This device, known to specialist as indexing, is scheduled to take effect next
year. At present, taxpayers whose wages rise with inflation are pushed into
higher and higher tax brackets. The purpose of indexing is to eliminate the
additional tax burden caused by inflation. Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale now say the
Government cannot do without the revenue that would be lost through indexing in
the next few years.

Mr. Hart and Mr. Mondale would also limit the final installment of the
three-year tax cut approved in 1981 at President Reagan's behest. Mr. Mondale
would limit the value of the tax cut for people with incomes exceeding $60,000 a
year. Mr. Hart would ''cap the benefits'' for anyone with income of more than
$50,000 a year.

All the candidates would ask Congress to impose a heavier tax burden on more
affluent taxpayers. Mr. Mondale has proposed a 10 percent surtax on incomes
above $100,000 a year. Mr. Hart would impose a 5 percent surtax on incomes
exceeding $100,000 for couples and $70,000 for individuals. Mr. Jackson would
impose a temporary graduated surtax on incomes over $25,000. The rate would
range from 1 percent to 10 percent, with people in higher income brackets
subject to the higher rates.

Mr. Hart was a co-sponsor of the comprehensive tax simplification bill offered
last year by Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey and Representative Richard A.
Gephardt of Missouri, both Democrats. The bill would reduce the top rate for the
individual income tax, now 50 percent, to 30 percent, while repealing most
itemized deductions. Mr. Mondale says the Bradley-Gephardt bill ''rests on sound
principles.''


Civil Rights

All the candidates say they have been champions of civil rights, and all
denounce the policies of the Reagan Administration.

Mr. Jackson has spent all his adult life in civil rights work, starting in the
early 1960's, when he led sit-ins and protest marches to desegregate theaters
and restaurants in Greensboro, N.C. He has continued that work in the last
decade as president of Operation PUSH, a civil rights organization based in
Chicago. One of his major campaign promises is tougher enforcement of the Voting
Rights Act.

As a Senator, Mr. Mondale was more prominent in civil rights battles than Mr.
Hart has been. Mr. Mondale was a leader of the bipartisan liberal bloc that won
passage of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, which prohibited certain forms of
discrimination in the sale or rental of about two-thirds of the nation's
housing.

In 1975, Mr. Mondale led efforts to change Senate rules so it would be easier to
end filibusters, which had often been used to block action on civil rights
bills.

Senator Hart has supported extension of the Voting Rights Act, sponsored a
resolution to deny tax exemptions to private schools that discriminate on the
basis of race and opposed President Reagan's efforts to abolish the Legal
Services Corporation.

Right to Abortion Backed


All three candidates support the proposed amendment to the Constitution to
guarantee equal rights for women. All support the right of women to choose
abortion and oppose efforts to restrict access to abortion.

Mr. Jackson said, ''As a private matter, I would not, except in medically
extenuating circumstances, advise a woman to have an abortion.'' He emphasizes
that a woman who chooses to have an abortion must ''be responsible and live with
the consequences'' of such a choice.

All the candidates support legislation to guarantee that women receive the same
pay as men if they perform work of comparable value. This principle of pay
equity goes beyond the requirements of a 1963 Federal law that requires equal
pay for identical work. Mr. Hart has proposed legislation to forbid economic
discrimination against women.

All three candidates support Federal legislation to forbid discrimination
against homosexuals. All say they would issue an executive order banning
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in Federal employment.

Mr. Mondale says he has not decided whether the ban should apply to the armed
forces. Mr. Jackson says there is ''no reasonable basis'' for excluding
homosexuals from the military. Mr. Hart says ''military employment should not be
restricted because of sexual orientation per se.''


Busing for Desegregation

In 1970, Mr. Mondale introduced a resolution to create a Select Committee on
Equal Educational Opportunity, a basically liberal panel that served as a
counterweight to the more conservative Judiciary Committee. Mr. Mondale became
chairman of the select committee, held hearings and led Senate opposition to
President Nixon's proposals to limit the use of busing for school desegregation.

''Busing is the means - and at times the only means - by which segregation in
public schools can be reduced,'' Mr. Mondale said in a Senate speech in 1972.

Mr. Jackson and Mr. Hart have also opposed efforts to prevent the use of busing
as a means of school desegregation.


Affirmative Action

As Vice President, Mr. Mondale urged the Justice Department to make a strong
defense of affirmative action in the case of Allan P. Bakke, a white who
challenged a special admissions program at the medical school of the University
of California at Davis.

In response to a questionnaire from Mayor Koch of New York City, Mr. Mondale
said: ''I strongly support affirmative action to correct past discrimination. I
reject the use of quotas.''

Mr. Hart said: ''I support quotas, as an alternative to so-called 'weaker' forms
of affirmative action, if the use of such a remedy is necessary to remedy the
effects of past discrimination.'' Mr. Hart listed criteria he would use in
evaluating the need for quotas.

Mr. Jackson says that numerical goals and quotas may sometimes be necessary to
eradicate the effects of 200 years of discrimination.


Gun Control

Mr. Mondale advocates a ban on small handguns known as Saturday night specials.
Mr. Hart said Wednesday in New York that he has ''opposed Federal gun control
laws.'' However, he had previously expressed support for a ''cooling off
period'' between the time a person buys such a gun and the time it can be taken
home. This requirement, he says, would permit the authorities to check whether
the purchaser had a criminal record. In a letter to a constituent, Mr. Hart said
he supported ''the right of law-abiding citizens to enjoy the legitimate uses of
firearms,'' and he said he would ''oppose any infringement of that right.''

Mr. Jackson advocates stiffer, more comprehensive gun controls than the other
candidates. He favors licensing of handgun owners, a freeze on the manufacture
and importation of handguns, and a ban on the sale and possession of such
weapons.


Other Issues

All the candidates are against proposed constitutional amendments that would
permit organized prayer in public schools.

All oppose a comprehensive immigration bill proposed by Senator Alan K. Simpson,
Republican of Wyoming, and Representative Romano L. Mazzoli, Democrat of
Kentucky. The bill would require job applicants to show they were citizens or
legal aliens and would prohibit the hiring of those in this country illegally.
The candidates say this could increase discrimination against Hispanic people.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Jackson, Mondale and Hart

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE DEMOCRATIC DEBATE: MONDALE STRATEGY AIMED AT MIRING HART IN DETAILS

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1139 words


NewsAnalysis


Walter F. Mondale may have turned in one of his more skillful political
performances of the Democratic Presidential campaign at the candidates'
nationally televised debate Wednesday night. He apparently used the event to
advance his master strategy for the New York primary.  According to Mondale
aides, that strategy calls for keeping Gary Hart mired in detail and on the
defensive about his record and personality. The aim of this approach is to
prevent the Colorado Senator from using the debate to advance his broad thematic
message that he represents a new generation of leadership that ought to displace
Mr. Mondale's.

The former Vice President's advisers believe Mr. Mondale is strongest when he is
talking about the details of governing and at his weakest when he tries to play
on Mr. Hart's field by making generalizations about the future of the country.

With his battering attack in the debate on Mr. Hart's Senate record and campaign
tactics, Mr. Mondale seems to have succeeded in reducing the Colorado Senator's
opportunities to push his ''new ideas, new generation'' message.

Assessments of Impact


Afterward, jubilant Mondale supporters hailed their man at a rally as the
''winner by a knockout,'' but that overstates what Mr. Mondale may have gained.
His accomplishment was that he stayed with his strategy and disrupted that of
his main opponent.

So if Mr. Mondale is correct in his guiding tactical idea, that he must advance
his candidacy by undermining Mr. Hart's, he may have solidified his position as
the New York Democrats prepare to vote next Tuesday.

In trying to assess the impact of the debate, however, some strategists such as
Dotty Lynch, Mr. Hart's poll taker, cautioned that the contest might be entering
its period of maximum volatility.

The pattern of this campaign year has been that narrow leads, such as that shown
by Mr. Mondale in many polls, melt away in the final weekend before the voting.
In earlier primary states, particularly New Hampshire and Illinois, voter
opinion shifted with startling velocity between Friday night and the opening of
the polls on Tuesday.

Mindful of this pattern, Mr. Hart opened an intensive weekend television drive
last night with a half-hour speech on network television. His target is the
undecided and ''soft Mondale'' voters that he needs to close the lead of 8 to 12
percentage points held by Mr. Mondale in most public opinion polls of New York
State.

By buying 30 minutes on CBS last night, Mr. Hart also hoped to correct the
problem he had at the debate by concentrating on his themes rather than
responding to Mr. Mondale's attacks. ''There is almost no format, unless it's
one you control yourself, to really get that positive message out,'' Miss Lynch
said.

Role of the Debates Underscored


By its very combativeness, the debate at Columbia University underscored the
important role played by the six major candidate debates held so far this year.
''I think they've been probably the most important single phenomenon of the
campaign year,'' said Robert Squier, a television consultant for Democratic
candidates.

This reasoning rests on the obvious part that the debates have played in
regulating the fortunes of the candidates. For example, both Mr. Hart and the
Rev. Jesse Jackson got their initial boosts toward national prominence in the
initial debate at Dartmouth College at Hanover, N.H., on Jan. 15.

Conversely, even Mr. Hart's backers acknowledge that his performance in the
Illinois debate on March 20, where he was once again kept on the defensive by
Mr. Mondale, figured in his slide to defeat in that state.

As for Mr. Mondale, he used the debate in Atlanta on March 11 to introduce his
new fighting campaign style to a national audience. Atlanta was also the place
that Mr. Mondale first made ''Where's the beef?'' the battle cry of his effort
to discredit Mr. Hart.

If the six debates are judged as a unit, several Democratic political
professionals agreed, it is now possible to pronounce one candidate a
''winner.'' That is Mr. Jackson.

Gains Made by Jackson


By playing a statesmanlike role in the Mondale-Hart clashes on Wednesday night,
Mr. Jackson seemed to make progress in his effort to reclaim the vitality
drained from his candidacy by his entanglement in the criticism about his use of
the word ''Hymie'' to refer to Jews.

Mr. Jackson also seems ready to claim the peacemaker role filled by George
McGovern, the former Senator from South Dakota, before he dropped out of the
race. But Mr. Jackson is using a tougher, more evenhanded approach to the job,
chiding Mr. Hart for pushing ''new ideas'' on people who need financial aid and
reprimanding Mr. Mondale for being late in opposing the war in Vietnam.

In sum, Mr. Jackson has used the debates to enhance his campaign's stature, if
not its chances of victory. He has also moved toward his goals of being a broker
at the Democratic National Convention and gaining acceptance by whites as well
as blacks as a national leader

Now that the Hart and Mondale campaigns seem locked into their battle plans for
the next few days, their partisans have split along predictable lines in
analyzing the impact of the debate performances of their candidates.

Mr. Mondale's supporters believe that by forcing Mr. Hart to talk about subjects
of his choosing, Mr. Mondale came off looking Presidential, experienced and
authoritative.

''It was almost as if one had reversed the script of Mondale and Hart from the
New Hampshire debate to New York,'' said Peter D. Hart, the Mondale poll taker.
''It was Mondale with the tight, confined message and it was Gary Hart who was
out touching every erogenous zone in the Democratic Party.''

Hopes in the Hart Camp


Mr. Hart's advisers counter that, to the average voter, Mr. Mondale came off
looking more shrill than Presidential. They believe Mr. Hart's criticism of Mr.
Mondale's reliance on union political action committees to finance parts of his
New York campaign and his advocacy of an American military presence in Central
America will raise further doubts about Mr. Mondale's Presidential stature.
''What we need to do is neutralize the competence and experience issue,'' Miss
Lynch concluded.

While Hart and Mondale advocates press such arguments, other observers suggest
than the television camera may have picked up an altogether more revealing
message this week.

''It's very clear from watching last night's debate,'' Mr. Squier said, ''that
these two men don't like each other. In politics you assume the exchange is done
for the benefit of the audience and afterward there's good-natured gibing behind
the scenes. These men have a genuine dislike for one another and their ideas and
that came across.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 31, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE POKES FUN AT THE PAGEANTRY OF SUMMIT CONFERENCES

BYLINE: By MAURICE CARROLL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 554 words


Walter F. Mondale poked fun at the pageantry of summit conferences yesterday and
then made an emotional plea for annual meetings between the President and the
head of the Soviet Union.

When President Reagan visits China next month, Mr. Mondale said, he would be
saluted by bugles. Then everyone would eat. Then they would nap before the
evening banquet. Then there would be toasts.

By now, there were knowing laughs from the audience at the Foreign Policy
Association.

It would be a lot, the former Vice President said, if the three-day conference
included three hours of the ''personal, tough, privileged conversation that
might make a difference.''

Defends His Intensity


Campaigning for the Democratic Presidential nomination, Mr. Mondale has made a
point of institutionalizing summit meetings. But yesterday, after repeating his
standard foreign-policy points, he returned with vigor to the idea of summit
meetings to avoid confrontations. ''If we keep this trend up, we're going to
blow this place up,'' he said.

Almost as vigorously, he defended the intensity of his dispute with Senator Gary
Hart during the debate last Wednesday with the Colorado Senator and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, his rivals in the primary Tuesday.

''It's noisy, it's controversial, it's hot,'' he said. ''But it also shows
respect for the wisdom of the American people. If we're so fragile we can't
discuss the issues, there's something wrong with us.''

He charged that Mr. Hart had ''learned the wrong lesson'' from the Vietnam War.
The real lesson, he said, is not that the United States should ''abandon its
responsibilities,'' but that ''we should define them sharply.''

The formal appearance was made between two street stops.

Shakes Commuters' Hands


With Lieut. Gov. Alfred B. DelBello and City Council President Carol Bellamy,
Mr. Mondale shook hands with commuters in the morning at Grand Central Terminal.

''Most-civilized line I've ever seen,'' he shouted cheerfully across a wooden
barricade at reporters and broadcast technicians.

Mr. DelBello, who is from Westchester County, said it was ''hard to get a
reading'' on the primary in that suburban area. He said there was a ''flipping
back and forth'' not often seen in primaries.

In the evening, Mr. Mondale visited the subway station at 149th Street and Third
Avenue in the South Bronx, territory politicians consider friendly to Mr.
Jackson.

Reattacks Reagan Policies


Mr. Mondale reiterated for the Foreign Policy group, at the Plaza Hotel, his
charge that Mr. Reagan's policies were based on ''illusion.''

He said that peace in the Middle East required the ''direct personal involvement
of the President,'' that in Central America, the United States must ''cooperate
closely with the Contadora Group'' and that in seeking nuclear- arms control,
the United States must strengthen conventional forces to avoid reliance on a
first use of atomic weapons.

Questions about diplomacy and debates seemed to energize him.

He has been consistent on foreign affairs, he said, ''and my opponent's been all
over the map.'' But his main thrust yesterday was a defense of the foreign-
policy process, not an attack on Mr. Hart.

''If these kinds of debates are off- limits,'' he asked, ''then how can America
choose?''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 365 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 31, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WORK ON $35 BILLION BUDGET COMPLETED BY STATE SENATE

BYLINE: By Josh Barbanel

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Saturday, March 31


The State Senate completed action early today on a new state budget that would
add up to $200 million in additional spending above levels proposed by Governor
Cuomo.

The last bill, authorizing spending by state agencies, was passed at 12:25 A.M.
The Assembly is to return later today to complete its work in time for the start
of the new fiscal year on Sunday.

In contrast with last year, when Governor Cuomo bounded into the Senate chamber
to thank legislators for passing the budget on time, the session ended with
brief remarks by the Senate majority leader, Warren M. Anderson, Republican of
Binghamton. Mr. Cuomo had spent the day in New York City.

The increase in spending, about one percentage point beyond the 10 percent
increase proposed by the Governor, will not require additional taxes or fees.

Budget officials attributed this to improved collections of several taxes,
beyond estimates made by Mr. Cuomo in January. The budget will grow to more than
$35.6 billion, officials said.

Included in the total are $40 million for projects in individual legislators'
districts, the largest amount ever and $10 million more than last year.

The projects - from $3,000 for the Long Beach, L.I. Auxiliary Police to $25,000
for the East Harlem School for the Martial Arts - are included with little
review by the Governor.

As the 18 individual bills that make up the budget began appearing on
legislators' desks, the debate, in this election year, focused on tax cuts
rather than on the increased spending.

Republicans 'Flabbergasted'


Senate Republicans, who said they were ''flabbergasted'' by the size of the
budget, had put forward a $285 million tax cut earlier this month, but then
dropped it from budget negotiations. They did so after Assembly Democrats agreed
to consider the issue later - if the state has enough money.

Nevertheless the tax issue prompted a sharp debate Friday, in which Democrats
accused Republicans of recklessly playing politics, while Republicans said the
Democrats were underestimating tax revenues to create a ''slush fund.''

''The business community is sick of politicians playing politics,'' said Senator
Emanuel R. Gold, Democrat of Queens.

Senator Anderson predicted, however, that the tax cut would eventually become
law. ''You'd better accept it now,'' he said.

One after the other, the Legislature passed bills providing aid to parts of the
state, including $930,000 to help Buffalo residents whose homes were destroyed
in a propane gas explosion last December and $3.2 million to provide free
tuition to Vietnam War veterans at public and private universites.

Budget bills were debated and passed as they arrived from the printers. And as
they appeared, new details on the state budget emerged.

It will provide $29.6 million to add more than 1,600 jobs at four state
agencies, followng a dispute last year between the Governor and the Legislature
on staffing.

The number of jobs will go up by 350 at the City University and by 391 at the
State University. Staffing at the state psychiatric hospitals will go up by 702,
while at least 215 jobs will be added at mental retardation institutions.

For the first time, the Legislature fixed the level of staff at the agencies in
the budget, set a timetable for the administration to meet and required
quarterly reports to the Legislature.

About $3.3 million will be added for local arts programs, $3.6 million for
enforcement of environmental conservation laws, $2.8 million for research into
acquired immune deficiency syndrome and $2.2 million for day care.

Action was blocked by Governor Cuomo on legislation setting up a new program for
$11 million in aid to part- time college students. Though the Senate and
Assembly agreed on a formula to distribute the money, Mr. Cuomo refused to
provide a message needed to waive a required waiting period.

The Legislature dropped all $22 million in increased fees proposed by Governor
Cuomo, including increases in golf course greens fees and license fees for fire
investigators.

The Legislature added far more in new programs than the $200 million, but most
were made up from reductions in estimates of inflation, the prison population
and Medicaid costs.

Peter Lynch, a deputy state budget director, said new revenue would come from
higher income from the State Lottery, higher receipts in the state's personal
income tax and a tax on gains from large real-estate transactions.

The outlines of the budget agreement were reached in negotiations among the
legislative leaders last week. Mr. Cuomo joined the agreement on Wednesday
night, after requesting increases in aid for nutrition and housing for the
homeless.  The only tax cut to pass both houses is a repeal of a state income
tax on Social Security benefits paid to elderly people who have substantial
outside income. The tax took effect automatically when the Federal Government
adopted a similar measure.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senate minority leader Manfred Obrenstein; Photo of Majority
leader Warren Anderson

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
