
                               1 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HALFWAY MARK;
SOVIET: BEHIND ITS PROPAGANDA, SOME REAL FEARS

BYLINE: By John F. Burns

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 322 words


MOSCOW ONE day last week, the Soviet press accused the Reagan Administration of
blocking ''progressive'' resolutions in the United Nations, abetting Israel's
teritorial designs in Lebanon, aiding ''murderers, saboteurs and bandits'' in
Afghanistan, bribing Pakistan with F-16 fighter-bombers, fomenting fresh trouble
in Poland and stalemating the nuclear arms talks in Geneva. By Moscow standards,
it was a restrained day. For most of the Administration's two years, the
official line has been that Washington was in the hands of a lunatic fringe.
Soviet leaders accused President Reagan of launching the ''madness'' of a fresh
arms race, attempting to strong-arm Western Europe into submissiveness, stirring
''counterrevolution'' in Poland and backing repressive regimes in South Africa,
South Korea and Chile. The line is that all this will fail, crushed beneath
''the wheel of history.'' But how strongly it is believed by the shrewd men who
advise the tough-minded new leader, Yuri V. Andropov, is questionable. Soviet
advisers probably anticipated that Washington would emerge from doubt and
selfreproach after Vietnam and Watergate to reassert its power, particularly to
check Soviet advances.

Soviet anxieties seem most real and urgent on the subject of arms.  The Kremlin
believes its own buildup was undertaken to achieve the parity with Washington it
lacked for the first 30 years of the nuclear age. Mr. Andropov seems determined
to match new American weapons, notably MX, if Mr. Reagan goes ahead with them.
An even greater Soviet concern is the Western plan to start placing 572
Pershing-2 and cruise missiles in Europe this year. If the United States wants a
ceiling on medium-range missiles, the Kremlin argues, it cannot expect Moscow to
go below the 162 British and French missiles, which are not on the table at
Geneva. Persuading the Kremlin to go further may be one of the toughest
challenges of the New Year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
Another Winter Of Discontent In Afghanistan

BYLINE: By Henry Giniger and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 342 words


Soviet troops last week entered their fourth year in Afghanistan with little to
show for it except a chorus of boos from around the world.

Peking, sternly repeating its price for Chinese-Soviet reconciliation, reminded
Russia's new leaders that ''by invading Afghanistan and massing its troops along
the Afghan-Chinese border, the Soviet Union is posing a grave threat to China's
security.'' The Chinese insist that Soviet forces along their borders must be
pulled back and Soviet support for Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia must end.

The People's Daily, in its strongest language since Yuri V.  Andropov became
Soviet leader in November, urged all ''peace-loving'' countries to ''increase
the pressure on the aggressor and provide moral and material assistance to the
Afghan people in their struggle.'' China has not denied reports that it is among
those sending weapons to the Afghan guerrillas.

On a conciliatory note, however, a two-paragraph Chinese greeting on the Soviet
Union's 60th anniversary hinted at compromise. ''Both sides,'' it said, ''must
take practical steps to remove obstacles by means of consultations, applying
joint efforts.'' And four musical performers from Moscow's Bolshoi Theater who
were guests of the Soviet Ambassador were invited to visit Peking's leading
music academy, encouraging Soviet diplomats seeking resumption of official
cultural relations.

In Washington, President Reagan renewed his attack on ''Soviet imperialism.''
Even with 105,000 troops and chemical weapons, he said, Moscow had been unable
to control the Afghan countryside or secure many cities and had failed to
rebuild the Communist-controlled Afghan army or create an effective government.
After discussions with President Zia ul-Haq of Pakistan, which succors three
million Afghan refugees, Mr. Reagan said, ''We are both committed to a
negotiated settlement that will return Afghanistan to the ranks of independent
nonaligned nations.'' Tass denounced the Reagan criticism as a vow to wage
''nondeclared warfare'' against Afghanistan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of demonstrators

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE SHULTZ METHOD

BYLINE: BY BERNARD GWERTZMAN; Bernard Gwertzman, of The New York Times's
Washington bureau, has reported on every Secretary of State since 1963.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 13, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6837 words


What is most striking about George P. Shultz is that he is so unhurried.
Returning from the White House, he had hung up his pinstripe jacket and had put
on a bright blue cardigan to receive this reporter in his cozy hide-away on the
seventh floor of the State Department. He talked easily, taking time for an
occasional anecdote. His large frame seemed confined as he leaned forward in his
straightbacked chair in the room he uses for thinking and chatting, free for an
hour or two a day from the pressures that bear down unceasingly on him as
Secretary of State.

Unconventionally, the Secretary had just rebuked the Israeli Government for
expelling some foreign teachers from the occupied West Bank for refusing to sign
an oath pledging not to give assistance to the Palestine Liberation
Organization. It wasn't that he was for assisting the P.L.O. - freedom of speech
was involved. For that principle, he said, he had been ready to resign as dean
of the University of Chicago business school during the Vietnam War, when the
faculty, fearful of student protests, asked him to deny Dow Chemical, which
manufactured napalm, the right to recruit on campus.  ''I said, 'Absolutely
nothing doing,' '' Mr. Shultz recalled. '' 'Communists come here. Nazis come
here. Anybody the students want to invite comes, and they say their piece,
whatever it is. That's what a campus is about - openness, argument. And, in
effect, this company has been invited by these students, and this is where they
are going to be interviewed.' '' And they were.

Gradually, the conversation came around to his major problems. No, he said, he
wasn't expecting any quick diplomatic triumphs, although he was intrigued by the
possibilities opened up by the change of leadership in Moscow. Yes, it was hard
to master the intricacies of missile warheads, payloads and the like that are at
the heart of any attempt to rethink the relationship with the Russians, but
''I've read into it a fair amount. ... I have been taking opportunities to be
briefed on this part, that part and another part, and bring myself up to speed
on it.'' It was difficult, he admitted, not to be distracted by front-page news.
''I think unless you do something about it in the job of Secretary of State, you
will spend 100 percent of your time on the Middle East.''

Philosophic, self-assured, cautious about what was possible, resigned to what he
called ''the long haul'' - there, six months in office, is the essential Shultz,
the image that accounts as much as anything else for the honeymoon he still
enjoys with Congress, the press and his potential rivals in the Administration,
as well as with leaders, both friends and adversaries, abroad.

It is ironic that this impression of flexibility may have been one reason Mr.
Shultz was passed over as Secretary of State when President-elect Ronald Reagan
was picking his Cabinet in November 1980. An educator and economist who had held
top economic posts in both Nixon Administrations, Mr. Shultz had been considered
for the top foreign-policy post, but some of the more militant Reaganites
doubted that he had firm enough political views of the world situation. There
were, they felt, too many soft sides to his character for a Secretary of State
in an Administration with plans for tougher tactics within the Western alliance
and a harder attitude toward the Soviet Union. They preferred someone like the
former NATO supreme commander, Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr.

By itself, that reasoning may not have been enough to make Mr.  Reagan decide
against the man who had been his political supporter and chief economic adviser;
but another factor was involved.

On Thanksgiving Day of November 1980, the President-elect called Mr. Shultz at
his home in Stanford, Calif. Mr. Shultz, who was then president of Bechtel Group
Inc., the global construction and engineering giant, was teaching part time at
the Stanford University business school and living on the university campus. Mr.
Reagan said he had heard that Mr. Shultz was very happy with his Bechtel job.
Well, he added, he just wanted him to know that he hoped that when the new
Administration was in office, he would help out on a parttime basis, if asked.

Mr. Shultz agreed. The phone call, he knew, was a polite way of telling him that
the Secretary of State post would be going to someone else; that having decided
to appoint Caspar W. Weinberger, one of Mr. Shultz's colleagues at Bechtel, as
Secretary of Defense, Mr. Reagan did not feel he could offer the foreign-policy
position to another Bechtel executive.

Nineteen months later, on June 25, 1982, Mr. Shultz was in London for a Bechtel
business conference when he received a call from William P. Clark, the
President's national security adviser. Mr.  Clark said the President himself
would be calling him in a halfhour. The reason? Well, the security adviser
revealed, the President had just accepted Mr. Haig's resignation as Secretary of
State. In making the announcement, he wanted very much to name Mr.  Shultz as
successor, in order to put the emphasis on continuity. Mr.  Shultz consulted his
wife, Helena, who agreed that you Page 14 never say no to a President, even if
it means giving up $500,000 a year in private industry. He placed a hurried call
to Bechtel in San Francisco to tell the company that it would soon hear of a
change in jobs.

Today, the man rejected two years ago presides in Washington and flies about the
world as the 60th Secretary of State - the understudy brought in to rescue the
President's foreign policy from the threat of paralysis, if not failure. Right
or wrong, the Reagan Administration's tendency to treat most international
issues as elements of a heightened confrontation with Soviet Communism had
embroiled the White House in bruising disagreements with European allies and
acrimonious controversy at home. The policy, with its seeming inconsistencies,
had led to embarrassing reversals and illtempered quarrels between the State
Department and the President's staff.

Simply in domestic political terms, foreign policy was not producing for
President Reagan the kind of accomplishment that had sustained some earlier
Presidents, including Jimmy Carter, halfway through their first terms. When
Alexander Haig's high-strung managership collapsed under its weight of
accumulated crises, it was felt that President Reagan was badly in need of a
surer hand to sort out his foreign-policy problems. The President, to put it
bluntly, had to show some results beyond his defense buildup if he was looking
seriously to another race in 1984.

This time, the choice was obvious. On one day's notice, George Shultz became the
President's chief foreign-policy adviser, a mender, a repairman chosen not so
much for his expertise - his experience in foreign affairs had been limited to
economic matters - as for his qualities of mind, of temperament, of style.

These qualities were very much in evidence at his confirmation hearings before
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. There had been predictions that he would
be in for a tough time because of the Bechtel connection. He had spent eight
years in the company's board rooms before leaving (and divesting himself of its
stock) to accept the foreign-policy appointment, and American-Jewish groups
regarded Bechtel as pro-Arab because of its business ties to the Arab world and
its espousal of the 1981 sale of Awacs reconnaissance planes to Saudi Arabia.
Moreover, against his initial inclinations, the President now had two former
Bechtel executives in his Cabinet, and there was concern on Capitol Hill that
Mr. Shultz would team up with Mr. Weinberger, a vocal critic of Israeli
policies, to tilt the Administration against Israel.

And there was another complication. Bechtel is one of the largest builders of
nuclear power plants around the world, and groups aroused by the danger of
nuclear proliferation had accused the firm of promoting the transfer of nuclear
technology abroad without regard to national interests.

Mr. Shultz came vigorously to Bechtel's defense, denying that it had
circumvented United States law in doing business with Arab states hostile to
Israel or that it had sought to undercut United States policy against the sale
of nuclear materials to Brazil. Any discussion of the Brazilian deal, he said,
was the work of an overeager subordinate. Bechtel, he said, ''is a marvelous
company, an honorable company, a law-abiding company, a company that does credit
to our country.'' s for the Middle East, he spoke feelingly about the need for
improving relations with the Arab countries, with their ''brilliant heritage of
science, culture and thought,'' and for resolving the ''legitimate needs and
problems of the Palestinian people.'' At the same time, lest his remarks be
interpreted as reflecting an anti-Jewish bias, he stressed that the resolution
would have to be acceptable to Israel, and he told a story about an Israeli,
Joseph Levy, an honors student at the University of Chicago in the 1960's.

''He was to me not only an extraordinary student but a wonderful person, with
such promise,'' the Secretary recounted. ''The 1967 war came along, and he was
gone like a shot, and it was almost as though only a moment passed when we got
word that he had been killed.''

''I will never forget it,'' he said, his eyes misting. ''I feel emotional about
it right now.'' And he told another story, of a few days in 1977 when he and his
wife were in Jerusalem in the course of a visit to Israel, Saudi Arabia and
Jordan. By coincidence, the Egyptian President, Anwar el-Sadat, had just come
and gone on his historic peace mission, ''and I suppose the thing that I recall
the most vividly in Israel was the numerous occasions when we were invited to
homes or parties, and the sense that you got, particularly from the women, that
there was a sudden shift in the whole psychology.'' ''I believe,'' he
underscored his point, ''that there is in that troubled part of the world a
yearning for peace that is very deep, and a recognition of how much better off
we will all be and they will be if we can attain a peace. I say that, fully
cognizant of how difficult it is, and how many issues there are, and so on. But
the objective is so important and so beneficial that I think it is certainly
worth our best shot.'' No senator was ready to vote against confirmation after
that.

Mr. Shultz has never lacked for admirers. In his recent memoirs, former
Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger wrote that ''if I could choose one
American to whom I would entrust the nation's fate, it would be George Shultz.''
But the challenge that the Secretary of State accepted six months ago was of a
different kind. His task has been to stabilize an erratic foreign policy for a
President whose ideology seems to run counter in some important respects to his
own pragmatic inclinations. In this delicate - and at times ambiguous -
relationship, George Shultz's undoubted gifts have been put to their severest
test.  William Clark, the head of the National Security Council, tells of the
day, last July, when Mr. Shultz attended his first Cabinet meeting. These
sessions had tended to be tense affairs because of Mr. Haig's complaints that
some people in the White House were out to get him. With Mr. Shultz's
comfortable presence, the tension dropped perceptibly. The first thing he did
was to note that the papers prepared for him had his name misspelled as
''Schultz'' on the folder. He said, ''Somebody's out to get me,'' and everyone
broke up in laughter. It was a clue to the deliberately relaxed approach he
would take on the job.  Mr. Shultz likes to get up at 5:30 A.M. and be at the
State Department by 7:15 to read the overnight cables and get his morning
top-secret briefing from a Central Intelligence Agency officer before the
pressure builds up. He seldom leaves for home -the Shultzes bought a house in
Bethesda, Md., after his State Department appointment - before 8 P.M., and he
usually works Saturday mornings.

His first scheduled meeting is normally with the Deputy Secretary of State,
Kenneth W. Dam, and other department ''principals.'' He got Walter J. Stoessel
Jr., a Foreign Service veteran, to retire six months ahead of time so that he
could appoint Mr. Dam, provost of the University of Chicago and an old
confidant, to the State Department's No. 2 post; it was part of his attempt to
strike a balance between having career diplomats and trusted former colleagues
around him.

On Thursdays, he has breakfast with ''Cap'' Weinberger, to iron out any pending
State Department-Pentagon problems. On Tuesdays, he has breakfast with Secretary
of the Treasury Donald T. Regan; the chairman of the President's Council of
Economic Advisers, Martin S.  Feldstein, and the director of the Office of
Management and Budget, David A. Stockman. It is unusual, of course, for a
Secretary of State to join the Government's economic troika, but rarely has a
Secretary of State had Mr. Shultz's economic experience. He held both Mr.
Regan's job and Mr. Stockman's during the Nixon years; he also served Mr. Nixon
as Secretary of Labor and White House economic coordinator. Mr.  Regan, who got
his first stock-market training from Mr. Shultz's father, Birl, founder of the
New York Stock Exchange Institute, invited him to contribute his expertise to
their councils.

The Secretary says the benefit is mutual. ''It's artificial,'' he explains, ''to
talk about the United States economy as though it exists in some sort of
isolation. It is part of the world economy, and we have to think of it that
way.'' Moreover, continued involvement in economics helps him to transpose to
his new field the kind of discipline and way of ordering things that he learned
during his economic activities.

To hear him talk, these lessons from the past involve many things.  For
instance, his stints as a labor-management mediator during his academic career -
he holds a doctorate in industrial relations from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, taught at M.I.T. from 1948 to 1957, and was on the faculty of the
University of Chicago business school from l957 to l968 - convinced him that
every issue can be seen from various vantage points. Almost every view of a
problem proves to have some merit, he says, if you study it carefully enough,
and what you must do is listen and try to figure out ways to ''move the
situation along.''

This philosophy is making for certain changes at Foggy Bottom. He has insisted
on being educated in depth before making any recommendations to the President -
a demand for information and still more information that has sometimes nettled
State Department professionals who wish he would be quicker about making up his
mind, and also about letting them know what he thinks. (Some of them have
described him as ''Buddhalike.'') His emphasis on economics has made top
officials dust off their old textbooks. One senior aide said he was taken aback
during his first conversation with Mr. Shultz when the new Secretary asked him
about steel subsidies in Britain, a subject his predecessors had been giving a
wide berth.

He has made listening an art form to be copied by others in Washington who are
sensitive to every change of fashion. His speaking voice is so soft that one
must often strain to hear him clearly. He has called a halt to ''guerrilla
warfare'' between the State Department and the President's White House advisers
- many of whom he knew during his work in Mr. Reagan's campaign - by involving
as many of them as possible in decision making and by stressing consensus
instead of confrontation. Though he sees the President at least several times a
week, he does not make the same issue Mr. Haig did about seeing him alone,
preferring to draw others into the discussion.

In a capital not known for meekness in high places, he cultivates the common
touch. There was an example of that during his trip with the President last
month to Brazil, Colombia, Honduras and Costa Rica. Mr. Shultz was in the
presidential palace in Brasilia when Mr.  Reagan's motorcade left for the next
appointment without him. He ran out into the courtyard; the only vehicle left
was a 10- or 15-yearold Ford, its driver dozing in his seat. ''Me - Secretary of
State,'' Mr. Shultz reasoned with the Brazilian, finally getting him to agree to
catch up with the others. When Mr. Shultz got to his destination, he went up to
the State Department security men. The officers expected to be chewed out for
letting the motorcade leave without him. Instead, he apologized for having been
late.

He is a master at lightening the mood with a self-deprecating story. One of his
favorite recollections is of his first venture in business. He was a young boy
then, growing up in Englewood, N.J., where his family had moved from New York
City when he was an infant.

''I started up a little newspaper,'' he recounts, ''using some kind of crude
process. It was a great shock to me when I went around the neighborhood to
peddle this thing, and one of the neighbors took a look at it. I was charging a
nickel. He went and got a copy of The Saturday Evening Post, which was also a
nickel, and he said, 'Now you want to charge a nickel for this?'

''It was an early lesson in competition. It convinced me I didn't belong in the
newspaper business.'' Another story has to do with his World War II service. Mr.
Shultz was in his senior year at Princeton when the Japanese bombed Pearl
Harbor, and, like all his friends, he was eager to enlist. He joined the Marines
and, after graduating from Princeton, was trained in artillery and sent to join
the Seventh Antiaircraft Artillery Battalion in British Samoa. While based at an
island called Fanafuti, Shultz got word that a group of men under his command
were to take the island of Nonomea, down below Tarawa, from the Japanese.

''So we were packed on board this destroyer,'' Mr. Shultz remembers. ''I didn't
have that much information, except people said the island was very lightly held.
The idea was that we would take the island, the Seabees would come in and make
an air-field, and they would build a medical center there.

''We got to the island as dawn was breaking. I had learned a little Samoan by
that time. I could say, 'Good morning, sir,' which sounds like 'Taloka sol-li.'
So we were coming in, and we saw that the beach was lined with natives there,
all lined up. In the center was a man in a white robe.

''I walked up to him and, not knowing what else to say, I said: 'Taloka sol-li.'
''He looked at me and said, in a clipped accent: 'Good morning, Lieutenant.
We've been expecting you. The Japanese left two days ago, and everything is
arranged for your arrival.' ''

(It was, incidentally, while on leave in Kauai, Hawaii, that Mr.  Shultz met
Helena O'Brien, an Army nurse from Nashua, N.H. ''Obie'' and Mr. Shultz were
married in 1946.)

The Secretary's congenial manner has led many meeting him for the first time to
take the same view of him as those on Mr. Reagan's transition team who had
opposed him for Secretary of State because they thought he was too soft. This,
according to former colleagues in the academic, business and political worlds,
is a misreading of Mr.  Shultz. Behind the easygoing manner, they say, the man
is tough. One illustration they cite is his response to a problem that
confronted him when he was Secretary of the Treasury. eleaguered by the
developing Watergate scandals, President Nixon's counsel, John Dean, had
produced an ''enemies list'' and had told the Internal Revenue Service to harass
everyone on it. The I.R.S. asked Mr. Shultz what to do. He remembers the episode
well. ''I felt,'' he says, ''that this was something we had no business doing.
So I just told the I.R.S., 'Do nothing.' ''

Soon afterward, an I.R.S. computer kicked out Mr. Nixon's tax return for audit.
Again, the I.R.S. asked Mr. Shultz what to do.  ''It was an easy question to
answer,'' he recalls. ''I said, 'Go audit the President's tax return.' ''

Mr. Nixon was furious. He called Mr. Shultz and ordered him to find out by the
next morning how many other Presidents had had their taxes audited. ''The answer
was that every recent President had his tax return audited,'' Mr. Shultz says.
''Some have been assessed for back taxes. That is because they were wealthy men
and had complicated returns, including President Nixon.'' The high marks being
given to the Secretary of State by virtually everyone who has watched him in his
testing period are impressive, but they represent the atmospherics of policy
making. He has taken over smoothly and with aplomb. How well, however, has he
done on matters of substance?

As he made ready for his confirmation hearings, Mr. Shultz knew he would have to
deal with one of the bitterest disputes to divide the Western alliance in recent
decades.

To the White House, the East-West project for piping Siberian natural gas to
West Germany, France and other Western European nations was tantamount to
rewarding Moscow's expansionism - and, in particular, its proxy crackdown in
Poland -with hard-currency earnings and potential political leverage over
Western nations likely to become dependent on Soviet gas supplies. For the
allied governments in question, Washington's reasons for opposing the pipeline
were mere rationalizations of an effort to apply sweeping economic sanctions
against the Soviet Union, a policy they regarded as both misguided and
impractical. The Europeans were infuriated by the President's action blocking
European companies from using American technology to manufacture components for
the pipeline.  Tempers rose even higher when the President levied specific
sanctions against companies that went ahead with delivery of the parts.

Mr. Shultz was in a difficult situation. As president of Bechtel and a believer
in free trade, he had been outspoken in opposing the use of trade sanctions to
achieve political ends. But now he was to be the executor of the President's
policy, and to appear to be at odds with the President would damage his
effectiveness from the word go. e was ready with his response when the question
came up on Capitol Hill. ''As a general proposition,'' he said, ''I think the
use of trade sanctions as an instrument of diplomacy is a bad idea.  It
basically has not worked, and has led us into a situation where our own trade is
damaged.''

''However,'' he added, ''I can readily conceive of situations where overriding
considerations would lead you to do so, and I can fully support and understand
the President's decision to apply sanctions, as he has, in the light of the
terrible things that have been done in Poland, and to express ourselves in that
regard.''

The old labor-management mediator was operating on the level of high policy. As
soon as he was confirmed, he began discussing the matter with other top Cabinet
officers. He took a low-key approach, according to an aide, calling on them
infor-mally and saying, ''I sort of think this - what do you think?'' Slowly, he
began to feel his way toward the possibility of lifting the sanctions if the
allies could work out a comprehensive agreement on better coordination of their
policies on East-West trade.

''He knew what he was doing wasn't worth a damn if the President was not
aboard,'' the aide said. ''He talked to Clark about it. He talked to the
President about it. If the President wasn't happy with something - well, fine,
Shultz didn't have a 'Shultz view' that had to be pressed, that had to win out.
What he did was identify the problem and suggest some ways of getting out of it.
Gradually, there emerged a recognition that the sensible thing to do was to have
a broader, farther-reaching policy, because in the absence of that, things were
drifting in the wrong direction.''

In late September, he went to New York for the annual session of the General
Assembly and held private talks with various European foreign ministers. He told
them, in effect, ''We're in a mess. If you all want to stay in this mess, the
President is prepared to stay with it. But the President is also prepared to get
out of it, and this is what we think. What do you think?''

The discussion continued on the weekend of Oct. 2 and 3 at an informal gathering
of NATO foreign ministers outside of Montreal.  Pointing out that the allies had
a military strategy toward the Russians but not an economic one, Mr. Shultz
outlined a proposal to fill the gap, and won general support. Negotiations on
the working level in Washington produced a formal agreement - with one caveat.
The French insisted that the agreement should not be presented as a trade-off
for the lifting of American sanctions against the Soviet pipeline. The
Government of Francois Mitterrand had won broad support on the left for its
defiance of the White House policy, and it did not want to be seen as making a
concession to the American view.

The French condition was acceptable to Washington, and the White House decided
that President Reagan should announce the accord during his regular five-minute
Saturday radio broadcast Nov. 13. The allies were asked the night before if they
minded if the full text were made public. They all replied by the morning of the
13th that they didn't mind - all except France, which was silent. When the Under
Secretary for Economic Affairs, W. Allen Wallis, telephoned Mr. Mitterrand's
office in Paris, the Americans learned for the first time that France was having
second thoughts about the wording of the agreement.

Mr. Shultz recommended that the President hold off his announcement to give him
time to bring the French around. But Mr. Clark, angry at the French, advised the
President to go ahead. The President did, adding that he was lifting the
pipeline sanctions as no longer necessary. Within hours, the French Government
denied heatedly that it was party to the accord. The exercise ended on a sour
note, far short of the show of unity the Secretary of State had hoped for.

In so doing, it revealed a flaw in his method. Mr. Shultz had succeeded in
persuading Mr. Reagan and other senior advisers to drop the sanctions in return
for an amorphous document in which the Europeans promised to harmonize future
economic relations with Moscow. His problem was to sell the deal to the
President as representing a ''hardening'' of alliance policy while going along,
at French insistence, with the fiction that there was no trade-off. In effect,
he fell into the kind of trap that had awaited Mr. Kissinger at the end of some
of his more spectacular efforts: The very ambiguity that had enabled Mr. Shultz
to put a document together gave rise to the confusion that robbed his diplomacy
of its full intended effect.

Yet Mr. Shultz didn't leave it at that. Meeting with President Mitterrand and
Foreign Minister Claude Cheysson in Paris in the course of his European swing
last month, he got the French to commit themselves publicly to the substance of
the economic coordination agreement. When asked at a press conference if, in his
understanding, the French, now or in the past, had agreed to the allied
document, he said the question was now ''irrelevant.'' The mediator had done his
work. The crisis that had been poisoning the alliance had been finessed,
although he smiled and crossed his fingers when asked by reporters if he was
sure the deal would hold.

This, of course, leads to the fundamental question of whether the Secretary of
State sees eye to eye with the President on policy toward Moscow. Does he regard
the Soviet pipeline as a price to be paid for allied harmony or as a legitimate
instrument of East-West trade? Does he favor the Reagan policy of virtual
economic ostracism of the Russians as a companion to an American defense buildup
- a two-track approach designed to force the Kremlin into more acceptable
behavior? Or does he see more merit in drawing the Russians into a web of mutual
commercial and other interests in the hope of influencing their internal
evolution and global policies that way - the carrot-and-stick concept advanced
by the last President he worked for?  The Secretary did not come as an innocent
to the problem of Russia. As Mr. Nixon's Secretary of the Treasury, he traveled
to Moscow for several wide-ranging conversations with Leonid I. Brezhnev, the
late Soviet party chairman, and Aleksei N. Kosygin, the late Soviet Prime
Minister, on the economic aspects of what was then the high point of detente.
Nonetheless, after moving into the State Department, he had his staff organize a
daylong seminar for him on the Soviet Union (one of several on various
geographical areas).

With Brezhnev dead and Yuri V. Andropov apparently secure as his successor, Mr.
Shultz is being urged by some of the country's Soviet experts not to miss a
possible chance for a diplomatic breakthrough.  Thus, William G. Hyland, one of
the Nixon Administration's ranking Moscow specialists, has been telling him that
President Reagan, as a Republican conservative, can explore an accommodation
with the Kremlin without worrying about a domestic backlash.

What, in his heart of hearts, Mr. Shultz feels about this is one of the biggest
questions in Washington. He has taken tough pro-military stances in public, such
as his statement at his confirmation hearings that the Administration's
''greatest success'' has been ''bipartisan agreement that we need to look to our
defenses, so that we are perceived abroad as a country once again looking to our
own strength.'' But does he believe as fervently in President Reagan's defense
program as he makes out? Is there, in his method, a readiness to try to change
the President's mind on some specific policy while defending it staunchly in
public? One of his talents is for keeping everyone guessing what he tells Mr.
Reagan when he does see him in private.

Yet some generalizations can be attempted. Basically, Mr. Shultz appears to be a
hard-liner in his view of America's role in the world, and this makes for an
essential compatability between him and the President. For instance, when asked
what, in retrospect, he thought of the Vietnam War, he replied: ''One of the big
lessons is, if you are going to be in a war, you better be in it to win, and not
tie your hands the way we did.'' What of covert operations by the Central
Intelligence Agency? No qualms about them, he replied, when they are necessary.
Violations of human rights by the rightist regimes of Central America? He is
concerned about it, but also believes the United States should not let El
Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala be overrun by Communist-backed guerrillas.

All the same, there seems to be a lack in his makeup of the kind of integrated,
all-embracing, doctrinal world view that animates some of his present colleagues
and contributed to the outlook of such former Secretaries of State as Mr.
Kissinger and Mr. Haig. He puts more emphasis than any of his predecessors on
economic issues, as though to suggest that problems like debts, refinancing,
trade deficits and commodity prices can cause more woe than Communist subversion
and other more traditional State Department concerns. At the end of his European
trip, he was saying that the West had to combine ''realism'' about Russia with a
willingness to explore the possibility of mutually profitable agreements.

Any such accommodation, as he sees it, would be quite a different proposition
from the Nixon-Kissinger concept of detente, which has become a highly charged
word standing for false American expectations, Soviet adventurism in Angola,
Ethiopia, Indochina and Afghanistan, and Soviet repressiveness in Poland. The
Reagan Administration regards detente as having created a complacency at home
that enabled the Russians to overtake the United States in certain categories of
weapons. Agreements of the kind Mr. Shultz seems to be envisaging would be
fewer, more clearly in the American interest and less imbued with political
hopes.

Even within this narrower framework, the question is how hard the United States
should try to improve relations with the new Soviet leadership. Some of Mr.
Shultz's aides say he will soon have to take a clearer position within the
Administration on that score. If he chooses to work more actively for an
improvement, he will be able to do so only if he persuades President Reagan and
his political advisers that an accommodation involving arms control and an
easing of pressures on the American economy will do more to strengthen the
United States than the present policy - and that it will help with re-election.
Because, by the middle of 1983, the President's advisers will be judging
foreign-policy decisions in terms of whether they will help or hinder in
1984.Russia is his first priority; not far behind is the Middle East. On the day
he was sworn in as Secretary, Mr. Shultz had a chat with the President in the
Oval Office just before the ceremony. The President said, ''You have to put the
Palestinian issue at the top of your agenda.'' The very next day, Mr. Shultz
held the first of his seminars. The Government's top experts on the Middle East
were invited to attend, along with three guests - Mr. Kissinger, Irving S.
Shapiro, who had accompanied him on his 1977 Middle East trip, and Laurence H.
Silberman, a California banker who had served in the Nixon and Ford
Administrations.

''His purpose,'' says a top aide, ''was to gather together people who knew what
they were talking about, and let the issue cook intellectually. Take your time
was his motto.'' Arriving at his own view of the situation was only the first
step. ''He knew that having his own opinion didn't amount to a hell of a lot. He
had to have the President not only agreeing but fully understanding and fully on
board, as well as a host of other people.''

''So,'' the aide reports, ''he began what amounted to consultations in a very
deliberate fashion and in a very disarming way. It went something like this:
'Gee, we have this problem, Marty, what do you think?' He did it with his
Cabinet colleagues, he did it on the Hill. He saw the President on several
occasions, and went to Camp David and they talked the thing through.''

Mr. Shultz set up a large team of experts and asked them to develop ideas
through competing papers. There was a clear difference of opinion between the
State Department's Near East bureau, headed by Nicholas A. Veliotes, and its
Policy Planning bureau, headed by Paul D. Wolfowitz. The first, sensitive to the
views of Egypt and other Arab states, wanted any new policy enunciation to
include language accepting ''self-determination'' for the Palestinians. But in
the political shorthand of the Middle East, that would be advocating a
Palestinian state, since it is generally assumed that, once offered
self-determination, the Palestinians would vote to establish their own state in
the West Bank. Mr. Wolfowitz said at one meeting in August that if the intention
was to announce a new policy with a chance of winning Israeli as well as Arab
support, it made no sense to propose a Palestinian state, an idea rejected by
virtually all Israelis.

Mr. Shultz interjected, ''Well, I don't think anyone here is talking about an
independent Palestinian state on the West Bank.'' It was the first time he made
known his decision on that key issue. The group eventually proposed an
''association'' between the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and Jordan as a long-term
goal, without defining the term.

The President accepted the proposal and made it public in a major speech on
Sept. 1. Mr. Shultz called a meeting to discuss what to do next. The
overwhelming recommendation was that he go to the Middle East and sell the plan
to the Israelis and Arabs. Mr. Shultz rejected the advice. He said it was more
important to gain support from the American people and, in particular, from the
American-Jewish community. He went to New York to state the case for the Reagan
plan, as it had become known, in a dinner address to the United Jewish Appeal.

The plan, while widely praised at home, in Europe and even in some Arab
countries as an imaginative prod to the stalled Israeli-Egyptian negotiations on
Palestinian West Bank autonomy, was rejected both by radical elements in the
P.L.O., as falling short of Palestinian independence, and by the Begin
Government, as a move toward denying Israel the right of eventual annexation of
its biblical heritage of ''Judea and Samaria.'' Relations with Israel, already
exacerbated by the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, were placed under an additional
strain. The Begin Government charged that by coming forth with proposals of its
own, the United States was abandoning its mediator's role.

This accusation still rankles with Mr. Shultz. ''There is an image in some
people's minds,'' he says, ''that what a mediator does is pass messages back and
forth between people and be somebody who convenes meetings. A good mediator is
very active with all the parties to the dispute, and at times makes suggestions,
at times privately, at times publicly, depending upon what the mediator thinks
is going to advance the process.''

In this instance, there has been little if any advance so far, and the Secretary
has been criticized for it, particularly in regard to his decision not to go the
to the area. Some aides say that the new policy initiative needed a more
energetic push; that Mr. Shultz relied too much on American Ambassadors in the
field and foreign ministers on visits to New York and Washington; that he did
not seem to recognize the crucial importance of high-level personal diplomacy in
dealing with Israeli and Arab leaders.  The critical questions for 1983 are
whether King Hussein of Jordan, who visited Washington just before Christmas,
will overcome his reluctance to join the peace process, and whether Israel will
make the kind of gestures that would make that possible.

Mr. Shultz admits to a measure of disappointment over the plan's slowness to
catch on. ''I was ready both ways,'' he says. ''And in discussing it with the
President, we posited it both ways. You shouldn't start unless you're prepared
for a long haul. You've got to be steady, firm, patient and prepared to stay
with it. We talked about that extensively with the President, and we are
prepared to stay with it.'' Mr. Shultz, who has just turned 62 years old, is
having less and less time for the relaxing days with friends and family that
were so much a part of his life until six months ago. He and his wife consider
themselves Californians now, and they like to get away whenever they can for
weekends in their Stanford home. They couldn't do it last Thanksgiving, and
their five children and two grandchildren spent the holidays with them in their
new Bethesda residence.

Sitting in his private study, considering a reporter's question as to what he
expects to be the toughest issues of 1983, he muses in the same slow, tentative
way he had when he took on his new job. ''Well, issues emerge. You can't always
predict what they are going to be.  However, I think it's important to try to
set your own strategy as much as you can, and identify, and have work going on,
and so on. How that is conducted, I think, is of great importance.''

How well he is doing his share of the conducting may be too early to say. His
presence at Mr. Reagan's side during the President's Latin American trip was
symbolic of a shifting emphasis -away from concern about the Soviet and Cuban
threats to the region and toward the need for economic and social solutions. His
swing of European capitals was undertaken not only to tie up the loose ends of
the Soviet pipeline compromise but to compose disputes between the United States
and the Common Market over agricultural subsidies. Later this winter he plans to
visit China, Japan and South Korea. Sometime soon there will undoubtedly be a
critical meeting with the Russians, whether with Foreign Minister Andrei A.
Gromyko or with Andropov himself.

''The long haul'' ... ''ready both ways'' ... ''advance the process'' ... his
watchwords have not changed. He still seems to see himself as the university
dean on leave from academia to help out his friend in the White House. The
hardball players in the Washington establishment have come around to believing
he means it when he says, ''The President is boss,'' even though the President
has not always taken his advice and tends to shoot from the hip in his public
comments. There are those in Washington who say that by putting a halt to
debilitating internal squabbles, conveying an air of stability and creating an
impression of a more thoughtful approach to the country's interlocking foreign
problems, Mr. Shultz has already made himself the Administration's most valued
member.

Yet, again, these are the intangibles of foreign policy, and in the end it is on
the substance of his diplomacy that the Secretary of State will be judged. He is
too much the professor not to know that the grades are not yet in.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Shultz with R. Reagan, W. Clark, and J.
Baker (page 12) photo of Shultz with senators (page 14) photo of Shultz with
Gemayel of Lebanon (page 15) photo of Mr. and Mrs. Shultz (page 17) photo of
Shultz and Ariel Sharon (page 32)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S FAITHFUL ALLIES

BYLINE: By Bob Dole

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1105 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In this city, which makes history but prefers headlines, today's hottest story
is President Reagan's problem with his allies on Capitol Hill. But those who
believe that they see a divisive split between the President and Congressional
Republicans ignore Ronald Reagan's many achievements, misunderstand the role of
Congress, and exaggerate the tension between the Presidency and Congress that
has naturally existed since the Founding Fathers found room for both in the
Constitution.

It is important to understand that Presidents of both parties have always had
differences with their friends on Capitol Hill.  Thomas Jefferson had to endure
a Speaker of the House who was not only a fellow Democrat but his own son-in-law
and who had the irritating habit of publicly charging members of the Jefferson
Administration with corrupt land speculation.

Abraham Lincoln found his military decisions criticized by his own party's
select committee on the conduct of the war, and his nascent plans for
Reconstruction roadblocked by the so-called radical Republicans.

Theodore Roosevelt's pioneering efforts to regulate commerce and preserve the
natural splendors of the West ran counter to the property-loving instincts of
Republican legislators.

Franklin Delano Roosevelt saw the wave of his personal popularity crest in 1937,
when disgruntled Democrats shot down his plan to pack the United States Supreme
Court.

Lyndon B. Johnson failed to unite Democrats behind the Vietnam war and, in the
end, abdicated.  So did Richard M. Nixon when many of his strongest supporters
made clear their distaste for his handling of Watergate. Earlier still, Mr.
Nixon watched as two Supreme Court nominees were torpedoed by Republican
Senators.

Jimmy Carter's term was rendered all but irrelevant by Democrats of the Kennedy
stripe.  Now, after two years of remarkable leadership, the equal of anything
seen in this city since the heyday of Lyndon Johnson's Great Society, it has
become fashionable to claim that Ronald Reagan's mastery over Congress has
become frayed and that his options for future guidance have narrowed to little
more than graceful acquiesence.

Much of this is the product of journalistic boredom or, perhaps, Democratic
wishful thinking. Those interested in the sounds of genuine partisan division
ought to pitch their hearing to the tunes of Mondale and Glenn and Hart and
Hollings and Askew and Cranston.

What's more, those now debating responsibility for next year's agenda all too
easily overlook Ronald Reagan's achievement in setting the decade's agenda. They
forget that the President has already engineered a major shift in relations
between the individual and his Government. And, in their own preoccupation with
current headlines, they obscure a personal history of political resourcefulness
and a gift for compromise familiar to anyone who has examined Ronald Reagan's
Governorship in California.

So, before Republicans start believing the fashionable theory of a White
House-Capitol Hill split, we ought to remind ourselves that we are led by a
persuasive chief executive, that we enjoy strong, experienced leadership in both
houses of Congress and that the issues confronting us present as much
opportunity as peril.

Social Security is a case in point. With 116 million workers supporting it and
36 million beneficiaries relying on it, Social Security overwhelms every other
domestic priority. Through a combination of relatively modest steps, including
some acceleration of already scheduled taxes and some reduction in the rate of
future benefit increases, the system can be saved. When it is, much of the
credit, rightfully, will belong to this President and his party.

Similarly, the mashed-potato circuit echoes to the plaintive cries of born-again
protectionists who address the symptoms and not the illness plaguing our
economy. Whether through local-content legislation or export subsidies, they
would scuttle free trade and risk a global war, with tariffs and other trade
barriers as lethal weapons. Wrong as they may be in their prescription, these
new economic isolationists have struck a responsive chord in a nation deeply
worried about present and future employment. Again, the trade issues provide
Republicans at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue with the potential to reach out
to working people, to demonstrate not only verbal concern but practical
solutions.

The nation's headline writers like to call President Reagan The Great
Communicator. Historians, I'm convinced, will label him the Great Reformer. It
is his willingness to question this city's conventional (and costly) wisdom that
Republicans must emulate as we tackle priorities too pressing to put off. No one
is more eager to extend the Reagan revolution and to avoid political trench
warfare in the coming session than Congressional Republicans.

The atmosphere within which the new Congress convenes will be shaped by
perceptions that, in politics, are sometimes the equivalent of reality. And it
is as a supporter of the President's objectives that I express concern about
perceptions of his program. Clearly, they will not be improved so long as the
Congress, public and news media discern an imbalance between human needs and
military hardware. When the Constitution mandated the Federal Government to
provide for the general welfare, it said nothing about the generals' welfare.

The problem of perception might also be improved by a closer partnership between
the White House and its natural allies on Capitol Hill. A modest but useful
first step would be more frequent and constructive give-and-take sessions with
G.O.P. leaders. For we, no less than his own department Secretaries and other
personnel, belong to the President's official family. And we, no less than they,
wish the next two years to be as successful as the last two.

Certainly, tackling Social Security and trade issues will engender controversy.
But the alternative is momentum surrendered and an anxious public disillusioned.
This President has always insisted that purely political considerations will not
affect his judgment. That is one more reason why he is free to propose and
achieve reforms on a historic scale. By doing so, he insures that he will not
have to wait for history to express gratitude.

Those who say that the bloom is off the rose for Ronald Reagan forget that the
rose is a perennial. With a little imaginative gardening now, it will blossom
handsomely in 1984.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Bob Dole, Republican Vice Presidential candidate in 1976, is senior Senator from
Kansas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

FOR 'ANNIE' ON BROADWAY, NO MORE TOMORROWS

BYLINE: By ELEANOR BLAU

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1165 words


Leapin' Lizards! Not just one Annie but half a dozen or more on the stage of the
Uris Theater. Also three or four Daddy Warbuckses and as many mean Miss
Hannigans. All had performed, on Broadway or on tour, in a show that became an
institution - the musical ''Annie.'' And they all took curtain calls after
yesterday's matinee, which was the 2,377th and final performance of the
production on Broadway.

''This is a sad and terrible time for all of us,'' said Martin Charnin, the
director and lyricist. ''It's impossible to imagine Broadway without 'Annie.' ''

The five girls who in turn played the feisty orphan on Broadway since the
musical opened in 1977 were there, Alyson Kirk, the final Annie, who will be 12
years old this month, and her predecessors who outgrew the role: Allison Smith,
Sarah Jessica Parker, Shelley Bruce and Andrea McArdle, the original Annie, now
19. Some touring Annies were there, too.

Men who played Warbucks -Annie's billionaire benefactor - were on stage,
including the first and last, Reid Shelton and Harve Presnell. So were women who
played the orphanage director Miss Hannigan - Dorothy Loudon and June Havoc
among them. Also something like 150 fellow-orphans of Annie from various
productions, as well as producers of the show. The stage was crowded with
alumni, and everybody ended up, of course, singing the show's optimistic
signature song, ''Tomorrow.'' It was an emotional frewell.

''Are you all right?'' Mr. Charnin asked Alyson Kirk as he introduced her. She
nodded tearfully.  Mr. Charnin thought up the idea of making a musical out of
zeroeyed comic-strip orphan, back in 1971, and convinced Charles STSrouse
Strouse to write the music for it and Thomas Meehan to write its book.

Winner of 7 Tony Awards

There were reasons, though, not to feel terrible. ''Annie,'' which won seven
Tony awards, made a profit expected to exceed $20 million.  It grossed $225
million, which Mr. Charnin, who thought up the idea of making a musical out of
the zero-eyed comic-strip orphan in 1971, said was a record. On the other hand,
it wasn't the longest-running show; it came in seventh.

''We passed 'Abie's Irish Rose,' 'Man of La Mancha' and 'Oklahoma!' in October
and November,'' he said. ''We'll wind up behind 'Grease,' 'Fiddler on the Roof,'
'A Chorus Line,' 'Hello, Dolly!,' 'My Fair Lady' and 'Oh! Calcutta!' ''

''Annie'' had to close, Mr. Charnin said, because the show was losing $30,000 to
$50,000 a week last fall. One reason for that was the four touring companies.
''We ate up our audiences by having too many companies on the road,'' the
director said. ''Out-of-town visitors weren't going to see 'Annie' anymore
because they'd already seen it, in Memphis or Peoria.''

Movie Detoured Audiences

Other people weren't going because they had seen the movie version - although
the film, in Mr. Charnin's view, violated the whole spirit of the show.

Hollywood, which bought the rights to ''Annie'' for $9.5 million - also a
record, he said - complicated simple elements that it deemed too naive. For
example, he continued, Daddy Warbucks in the film decides to adopt Annie because
it would please his secretary. In contrast, on the stage: ''He simply accepts
the fact that he is smitten with a feeling for an 11-year-old child. And he
tells her he realizes what he has been missing in not feeling for human beings
what he has felt for things, like stocks and bonds.'' The film episode is a
''gigantic betrayal,'' Mr. Charnin said, ''and the movie is riddled with choices
like that.'' The appeal of the stage show, he added, is its simple good will.

''Nothing is necessarily the way it is, but everything is the way we all want it
to be,'' he said. ''We all want the president of the United States to get the
F.B.I. to hunt for your long-lost parents.  This is a protest musical against
all the ugliness and the neurosis of the early 70's, when Watergate and Vietnam
were in the news and the front pages were filled with rage and mistrust.''

Although it is leaving Broadway, ''Annie'' won't disappear. ''It's returned in
triumph to London's West End and is being done in Venezuela and Wellington,
N.Z.,'' Mr. Charnin observed. One of the four American touring companies of
''Annie'' will still be playing throughout the United States. And rights will
soon be released for stock and amateur productions. So, Mr. Charnin said, ''it
will be turning up in high schools, colleges and summer camps, where little
children will be walking around in dog suits.''

For it won't be easy to cast live canines like the mutt Sandy, who was rescued
from an animal shelter the day before he was to be put to sleep and who has been
Annie's companion since the show opened at the Goodspeed Opera House in East
Haddam, Conn., the summer before its Broadway debut.

Sandy Is Type-Cast

Sandy, in fact, was one of the few cast members to appear without a doppelganger
or two at last night's curtain call. He has his problems, though, Mr. Charnin
noted. ''He's type-cast. He couldn't play Benji. He'll have to be Sandy all the
time.'' And so Mr. Charnin is hoping he will consent to play the part in the
show's sequel or ''continuation.''

It will be called, simply ''Part II,'' but Annie will hang over the logo as she
does in the advertisements for ''Annie'' just in case anybody can't guess what
Part I was. The same creative team that brought forth ''Annie'' is at work on
''Part II,'' in hope of finishing by the end of summer, so rehearsals can start
next fall.

''The first scene is the same as the last scene in 'Annie,' only from a
different persepective, a 'Rosencrantz and Guildenstern' approach,'' Mr. Charnin
said. ''It tells the story of Mrs. Hannigan's revenge on Annie and kind of ties
up the personal affairs between the secretary and Oliver Warbucks. It will be
much more of an adventure story, with a lot more scenes. And more orphans.''

A most enthusiastic audience attended the finale. They applauded the main
characters. They applauded Sandy. They even applauded a Christmas tree that was
brought in during the final scene. And they stood and cheered for the curtain
call.

There was too much energy left over after yesterday's farewell just to disperse.
So everyone on stage went to a party at Magique on First Avenue at 61st Street.
With their friends and kin, they packed the place. While slides from ''Annie''
were projected on a giant screen, people danced, embraced former cast members or
balanced and food and drinks as they maneuvered elbow to elbow under the
blinking colored lihgts. lights. Annies and orphans engaged in another
''Tomorrow,'' prompting a deluge of red-and-white feathers from the ceiling.

''This is sad, but it's happy,'' Tara Carnes shouted above the din near a
Christmas tree festooned with stage money. Tara, 12, who was one of the touring
Annies, was sad because ''a great play is coming to an end.'' But she was happy
to meet old friends. ''it's a big family getting together,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 4, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article yesterday on the closing of ''Annie'' after 2,377 performances gave
the musical's ranking incorrectly in a list of longest-running shows and omitted
two Broadway plays that had longer runs. ''Annie'' is No. 9. ''Life With
Father'' and ''Tobacco Road'' also outranked it.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Martin Charnin and Alyson Kirk

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

POP MUSIC: BILLY JOEL IN A RESTRAINED MOOD

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 435 words


UNTIL the release of his newest album, ''The Nylon Curtain,'' Billy Joel seemed
happy to be rock music's most versatile piano entertainer and the class cutup of
his generation. But Mr. Joel is now 33 years old and no longer the precocious
boy next door. For a decade, the multitalented singer, songwriter and pianist
from Hicksville, L.I., has juggled the roles of frisky pop entertainer and
acerbic suburban observer as easily as he has tried on different musical styles
and mimicked other performers. It was clearly time for a change.

That change came with ''The Nylon Curtain,'' with its moving postscript to the
Vietnam War, ''Goodnight Saigon''; the ominous, psychedelically textured
''Scandinavian Skies,'' and the outspoken blue-collar protest song
''Allentown.'' ''The Nylon Curtain'' transcends Mr. Joel's earlier albums in the
richness of its music and the depths of its perceptions. These songs, while far
from the evening's biggest crowd pleasers, lent Mr. Joel's Madison Square Garden
concert Friday an unaccustomed sobriety. ''Goodnight Saigon,'' with its
helicopter sound effects, stark piano chords propelling a bluntly powerful
melody and the singer's road crew playing a chorus of soldiers, was particularly
impressive. Mr. Joel, who often clowns around as a singer, delivered so serious
and so emotional a reading of the song that, for a moment, he assumed the heroic
stature associated with Bruce Springsteen, Neil Young and one or two other
veteran rock performers.

On earlier tours, Mr. Joel used to scurry about the stage, manipulating
audiences into a frenzy of love with his vaudevillian charm. But in keeping with
his heavier new material, his show Friday was considerably more sedate. Of his
older material, the ballad performances overshadowed the rock songs. ''Just the
Way You Are'' and the critically underrated ''Piano Man'' received sensitive,
open-hearted readings. And ''It's Still Rock-and-Roll to Me,'' the singer's
rejoinder to the critical hyperbole that greeted new wave rock, stood out as an
amusing, still-trenchant pop-rock ditty.

The concert also had its awkward moments, most notably a silly group tableau
illustrating ''Scenes From an Italian Restaurant.'' And Mark Rivera, the horn
man who has replaced Richie Cannata in Mr.  Joel's band, played with an
aggressive showiness that didn't always jibe with the jazzy pop-rock style of
the songs. But these were only minor irritants in an otherwise satisfying
concert, which closed Mr.  Joel's latest tour.

One came away with the sense that Billy Joel had also ended the
''boy-next-door'' phase of his career.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 5, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AGNEW GIVES $268,482 CHECK TO MARYLAND IN GRAFT LAWSUIT

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 452 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, Jan. 4


A bribery suit against former Vice President Spiro T. Agnew that began six years
ago as a student law project ended today with payment of nearly $270,000 to the
Maryland treasury.

The state Attorney General, Stephen Sachs, presented a check for $268,482 from
Mr. Agnew to Maryland's Treasurer, William James, at a news conference.

''It is especially gratifying to have this money returned to the state because
it confirms three important, but sometimes ignored points,'' Mr. Sachs said.

''It reminds us of the good, old-fashioned principle that a public office is a
public trust; it helps erase at least part of the stain that Maryland's
reputation suffered because of Mr. Agnew's greed, and, finally, it proves what
determined citizens can accomplish.''

A Maryland circuit court judge ruled in 1981 that Mr. Agnew violated his public
trust while governor of the state by accepting $147,500 in kickbacks from
highway contractors from 1967 to 69.

Lost Money Plus Interest

The judge ordered Mr. Agnew to repay the state the money, as well as more than
$100,000 in interest.  Mr. Agnew appealed the decision twice but decided Monday
not to seek a review of his case before the Supreme Court. He had deposited
$250,000 in a California bank in 1981 and agreed to turn the money over once his
appeals were exhausted.

A group of George Washington law students prepared a lawsuit in 1976 to force
Mr. Agnew to reimburse taxpayers for the kickbacks he received in exchange for
lucrative state contracts.

With the students' aid, three Maryland taxpayers filed the suit against the
former governor in Anne Arundel County. In 1980, the state joined the case and
on April 27, 1981, Judge Bruce C. Williams of the Anne Arundel County Circuit
Court ruled that Mr. Agnew violated the public trust by accepting the bribes.

Mr. Agnew, 64 years old, originally denied the charges, calling them ''a damn
lie.'' Despite repeated statements he would not give up the office, Mr.  Agnew
resigned as Vice President Oct. 10, 1973. By resigning, Mr.  Agnew was allowed
to plead no contest to one count of Federal income tax evasion. The Justice
Department agreed not to act on indictments charging conspiracy, extortion and
bribery.

While Vice President, Mr. Agnew described himself as ''a champion of law and
order.'' In a speech in New Orleans, he referred to protesters against the
Vietnam War as ''an effete corps of impudent snobs who characterize themselves
as intellectuals.''

On another occasion he used the phrase ''nattering nabobs of negativism'' to
describe critics of his assertions.  He was elected governor in 1966 and was
selected by Richard M.  Nixon for the Vice Presidential slot on the 1968 ticket.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Attorney General Stephen Sachs

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 5, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Quit the Bay of Piglets

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 424 words


When Congress asked why the C.I.A. is waging a secret war to overthrow the
leftist regime in Nicaragua, the Administration said it isn't; America is only
trying to harass the Sandinist junta, not overthrow it. This spongy distinction
failed to impress the legislators. At the bipartisan urging of its intelligence
committees, Congress has now informed President Reagan that he may not use
American arms or manpower against Nicaragua.

This constitutes a second warning to an Administration that seems to be
sleepwalking into Credibility Gap. The Congressional resolution - adopted 411-0
by the House, and approved in conference by the Senate - followed many press
accounts of United States help for clandestine forces raiding Nicaragua. The
publicity proves that there is no way to hide such large-scale involvement with
emigre adventurers.

Perhaps such covert action is justifiable after conventional diplomacy fails.
But the Reagan Administration hasn't made that case even to sympathetic members
of Congress.

New York's Senator Moynihan, vice chairman of the Senate intelligence committee,
has said it is a serious question ''whether or not the Administration is in
violation of the law for the first time since the Gulf of Tonkin resolution.''
His doubts are shared by the Republicans' John Chafee of Rhode Island.

Any secret commitment of American forces to attacks in or against Nicaragua
would violate both the Neutrality Act and the War Powers Act. The laws make no
exception for mere harassment. There can now be no doubt about Congress's intent
in this affair: its resolution forbids the use of ''military equipment, military
training or advice, or other support for military activities ... for the purpose
of overthrowing the Government of Nicaragua or provoking a military exchange
between Nicaragua and Honduras.''

News reports have put the number of C.I.A. operatives among Nicaraguan rebels in
Honduras as high as 150. But Congress is said to have been assured by C.I.A.
Director Casey that fewer than 50 agents are involved. It seems to have been
conceded that Nicaragua's borders may have been violated by the U.S.-assisted
insurgents, whose raids are meant by Washington to punish the Managua regime for
supplying arms to guerrillas in El Salvador.

The operation isn't large enough to achieve any military objective but it's too
large to conceal or explain away. It's a Bay of Piglets. Let President Reagan
heed the views of Congress and end this meddling before it turns into something
worse than an embarrassment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 5, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BENJAMIN ROSENTHAL, CONGRESSMAN FROM QUEENS FOR 2 DECADES, DIES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 21, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 921 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 4


Representative Benjamin S. Rosenthal of Queens, a leading liberal Democrat who
was elected to his 11th term in November, died today of cancer at Georgetown
University Hospital.

Mr. Rosenthal, who was 59 years old and had been ill for two years, had been
sworn in Monday at his hospital bedside.

----

Advocate for the Consumer

By MAURICE CARROLL

Mr. Rosenthal was first elected to Congress in 1962 as the choice of ''regular''
Democrats in a complicated special election.  He went on to become an outspoken
leader of consumer causes and, as his seniority grew, an increasingly effective
advocate for the city.  When still new in the House, he began, much earlier than
most, to speak out against the Vietnam War. ''It was a very lonely road,'' he
said when, after opposition to the war became more general, a number of members
of Congress arranged for an all-night vigil in the House to coincide with
antiwar demonstrations by students.

'10 Percent Agreed With Me'

As he helped organize the vigil, he recalled the earlier, lonelier days. When he
first took his antiwar stand in 1965, he said, ''maybe 10 percent of my district
agreed with me.''

For the most part, though, Mr. Rosenthal was in tune with his constituents and
he did not forget the political truism that politics is a local trade. ''He
never 'went Washington.' '' said one Capitol Hill friend. ''He was totally
oriented to New York.''

But he lived close to his job. Although he kept a voting address in Elmhurst,
Queens, Mr. Rosenthal, his wife, the former Lila Moskowitz, and their two
children made their permanent home in Bethesda, Md.

On Capitol Hill, Mr. Rosenthal was regarded as a perceptive analyst of
motivation and of what could be accomplished. He wanted to win, not just make
points.

He berated one fellow New Yorker who had, in his view, sabotaged an effort to
win a House leadership post for the city delegation with a maneuver aimed at a
mayoral election. That, Mr. Rosenthal said scornfully, was ''playing a local
game.''

Nevertheless, his own involvement in New York City's increasingly intertwined
relationships with Washington was considerable.  He started with the
watchfulness over district projects that are a Congressional standard. He came
to play an important role in the drive to win Federal support to help the city
out of its fiscal problems in the mid-1970's.

As a member of the Government Operations Committee, he issued a report in 1976
that criticized the administration of President Gerald R. Ford for
''preoccupation with fiscal brinkmanship'' during the city's fiscal troubles.

Shaped Policy and Practice

In Congress, he wielded power through investigations and an ability to call
attention to issues more than through writing legislation.  He conducted
inquiries into charges of food-price discrimination against the poor. And his
operations subcommittee focused attention on practices of the Internal Revenue
Service, on condominium conversions and on investments in the United States by
the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.

Representative Rosenthal's effect on city affairs grew stronger when Edward I.
Koch became the Mayor. They had been friends in Congress and, on Mr. Koch's
first night in Gracie Mansion, Mr.  Rosenthal and his wife were the Mayor's
guests.

Benjamin Stanley Rosenthal, who was born on June 8, 1923, in the Bronx, was
brought up in Queens and attended City College. He served during World War II as
as a military policeman in Iceland, and in 1949 he graduated from Brooklyn Law
School. And like many other young lawyers, he began to dabble in politics.

Complex Maneuvering

In 1962, the incumbent in the Eighth Congressional District became a judge, and
after complex maneuvering involving numerous candidates Mr. Rosenthal emerged as
the choice of Mayor Robert F. Wagner. He went on to win in a special election.

He won re-election in the newly drawn Seventh District, which shifted south from
his old district in north-central Queens to include Forest Hills, Kew Gardens,
Richmond Hill, Rego Park and Bellerose on the Nassau County border.

In Congress, he focused on consumer affairs as the main sponsor of the bill to
establish a consumer protection agency. ''We ran out of time,'' he said in
explaining his inability to put it over. ''We were swimming upstream when
everyone else was swimming downstream.''

But the fight had not been lost, he said. From it grew a variety of consumer
protection measures.  Mayor Koch last night ordered the city's flags to be
lowered to half-staff through the day of Mr. Rosenthal's funeral and issued a
statement saying:

''Ben Rosenthal was a great Congressman, a wonderful husband and father and a
close friend. His compassion and effectiveness have earned him an honored place
among New York's great legislators.''

Governor Cuomo said Mr. Rosenthal's ''20 years of service will long be reflected
in the many lives he fought so ardently to improve.''

To Call Special Election

The seat will remain vacant until the Governor calls a special election, which
he is expected to do soon. A general election for the seat will be held on
Election Day next November, with the winner of that election to take office in
January 1984 for a one-year term.

Besides his wife, Mr. Rosenthal is survived by a son, Edward, of Bethesda; a
daughter, Debra Mandel of Philadelphia; his mother, Ceil, of Queens, and a
sister, Lola Ostreicher of New Hyde Park, L.I.

Funeral arrangements were incomplete last night.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Benjamin Rosenthal (page A1) photo of Benjamin
Rosenthal

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 6, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

3 ARE INDICTED IN ATTEMPT TO SHIP TRUCK-MAKING MACHINES TO SOVIET

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 839 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 5


A Canadian and two United States businessmen, one of them a former employee of
the Central Intelligence Agency, were indicted late Tuesday by a Federal grand
jury on charges that they had tried to circumvent American export restrictions
by shipping machines to the Soviet Union that could be used to make military
trucks.

The three businessmen, who Customs Service officials said unwittingly dealt with
Federal undercover agents and a fake company while planning their ruse, were
arrested earlier this week in a nearby Virginia suburb before the $5 million
shipment could take place. Over the past year or so, Government authorities have
mounted a major campaign to halt the flow of critical technology and materials
to Soviet-bloc countries.

The indicted men were identified by Customs officials as Gerald F.  McCall of
Toronto, Stephen G. Carter of Chicago and Paul Sakwa of Washington. According to
the indictment, they intended to use false documents to trick United States
export officials into thinking the truck assembly machines were headed for a
company in France instead of the Soviet Union.

The three were freed after posting bonds ranging from $10,000 to $15,000. If
convicted on all charges, the two 55 years in prison and the Canadian could be
sentenced to up to 45 years in prison. None of the three could be reached for
comment. Mr. Sakwa worked as a covert operative for the C.I.A. in the 1950's and
early 1960's, with one assignment in Vietnam. But Federal authorities said there
was no indication of any tie between his work then and the current export case.

Tuesday's indictment, handed up by a Federal grand jury sitting in Alexandria,
Va., asserts that the three men, doing business as Performance Sales and
Marketing Inc., made contact with the Soviet Union as they attempted to set up
their export scheme. However, William C. Von Raab, the Commissioner of United
States Customs, said this morning in disclosing the indictment that ''the
Soviets do not leave fingerprints and so it's not surprising at this point not
to have any hard evidence that the Soviets were involved.'' A spokesman at the
Soviet Embassy here said there would be no comment on the case.

The arrest of the businessmen was part of Operation Exodus, a Customs Service
enforcement progam in effect since 1981 to protect national security by
intercepting forbidden exports of hightechnology devices and militarily useful
equipment to Eastern-bloc countries. Such exports have become increasingly
sensitive as the atmosphere of detente that once encouraged East-West trade has
waned.

''Certainly before Operation Exodus, this sort of equipment was going out of the
country at a regular rate,'' Mr. Von Raab said today of the truck plant
machines, which were to be used to make diesel engines. ''There is a tremendous
amount of this sort of activity. This just happens to be one particular example
of the sort of needs that the Soviets have.''

50 Indictments in 1982

During 1982, according to Customs Service records, there were about 50 incidents
in which shipments of restricted materials were headed off or seized under the
program, including a number that involved aircraft and space satellite parts,
electronic test devices and computers. The value of the shipments was put at $55
million.

Customs officials said that the truck production machines were manufactured
several years ago in Detroit by the Ingersoll-Rand Company for use in assembling
engines at the Kama River truck complex in the western part of the Soviet Union.
A number of American companies have produced equipment for that complex.

But Ingersoll-Rand was forbidden to ship its machines, according to Customs
officials, after United States export authorities determined that military
vehicles could be built at the Soviet factory as well as civilian trucks.
Eventually, the officials said, the machines became the property of an insurance
company from which Ingersoll-Rand had purchased business protection.

Option to Buy Obtained

According to Customs officials, the Canadian businessman and his two American
associates recently got in contact with the insurance company and obtained an
option to buy the engine equipment, falsely telling company officials that it
would be shipped to Western Europe. The Customs officials added that the three
planned to obtain phony documents that would indicate the machines were going to
France when, in fact, they would only pass through France en route to the Soviet
Union.

But in obtaining the false documents, the officials continued, the three
unwittingly dealt with undercover Federal agents. The agents had been tipped to
the ruse, the officials said, and had positioned themselves to become involved
by setting up a spurious concern, called Arinfi, which seemed eager to become
part of the ruse and provide false documents. Arinfi's fee was to be $500,000.

''They were hoping our undercover agents would help them get it out,'' Mr. Von
Raab said today. ''But they were dealing with the wrong people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON IS TURNING 40

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 302 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


The Pentagon, conceived and born during World War II, a child when this country
fought in Korea and becoming an adult as the Vietnam War began to escalate, is
reaching middle age.

As the building marks its 40th birthday a week from Saturday, critics and
admirers can agree on at least one thing: It hardly looks a day older than when
it was dedicated. Rumors persist, however, that the structure is suffering from
a kind of sagging waistline; Defense Department legend has it that the Pentagon
is sinking.

Officials acknowledge that there are some cracks and folds. But they say that
the world's largest office building, built on swamps and landfill on the west
bank of the Potomac River in northern Virginia, will stand proud for many years
to come.

Architectural critics say the building, consisting of five concentric concrete
rings that total more than 3 million square feet of office space, is a testimony
to dullness; fans maintain it is a bastion of utility. Both are right. In any
case, the building is remarkably efficient. Although there are nearly 20 miles
of corridors, it takes only seven minutes to walk between any two extremes.

The Pentagon houses nearly 23,000 workers who tell time by 4,200 clocks, drink
water from 685 fountains, consume 30,000 cups of coffee daily, daydream by 8,000
windows, use 280 rest rooms and place 200,000 phone calls a day on 87,000 phones
connected by 100,000 miles of cable.

It was the brainchild of Gen. Brehon Burke Somervell, the Army's chief of
construction in World War II, whose idea it was to place the nation's military
establishment under one roof. At the time, the War Department, now the Army, was
spread across Washington in 17 buildings, and completely separate from the Navy.
The consolidated Defense Department was not established until 1947.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY;
Coming: A musical on the good years before Vietnam

BYLINE: By Carol Lawson

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words


TOM EYEN, who wrote the book and lyrics for ''Dreamgirls,'' and Alan Menken, the
composer of ''Little Shop of Horrors,'' are collaborating on a new musical.
Their show is about to take its first tentative step toward Broadway with a
12-week workshop production, which Mr. Eyen will direct.

''We don't have a name yet,'' says Mr. Eyen, who won a Tony Award for his
''Dreamgirls'' libretto. ''That is the last thing I do. We didn't have
'Dreamgirls' until the end. We had many other titles - 'One Night Only,' 'One
Night Stand,' 'Big Dreams,' 'Dream City.' ''

The story of this new, unnamed musical concerns ''postwar America in New York
City,'' Mr. Eyen says. It takes place from 1945 to 1962.  ''Those were the good
years, before Vietnam.''

The subject of showgirls also figures prominently in the musical.  ''The 1940's
and 1950's had the last beautiful showgirls.'' Mr. Eyen observes. ''Our musical
is about a showgirl - an Arlene Dahl character - and her daughter. It is about
the difference between curlers and straight hair.''

The workshop will take place at Mr. Eyen's new performing space, a former dance
studio, which he has renamed the Theater of Big Dreams, at 43 West 13th Street.
On weekends, the theater will be lighted with a revival of Mr. Eyen's ''Why
Hanna's Skirt Won't Stay Down,'' which opens tonight.

As the workshop proceeds, Mr. Eyen expects to shuttle between New York and
Florida. ''The sun and the water make me write,'' he explains. ''When we had a
problem with 'Dreamgirls' in Boston and I told Michael Bennett I had to go to
Florida, he rolled his eyes. I wrote all my 'Mary Hartman' scripts on the beach.
L.A. was perfect for me.''

Is it possible for a play that received little critical acceptance and closed on
Broadway in four days to reopen and become a hit? That is what a determined
group is trying to do with ''Monday After the Miracle,'' William Gibson's sequel
to his successful drama ''The Miracle Worker.''

''We are looking to raise $500,000, and I have a commitment from all the members
of the cast that they will come back,'' says David Richenthal, a lawyer, who is
the producer of this venture. ''I am also assured that Arthur Penn, the
director, will be available.'' The play starred Jane Alexander as Annie Sullivan
and Karen Allen as Helen Keller.

''I expect everyone to waive royalties for the first four weeks,'' Mr.
Richenthal adds. ''Bill Gibson has already agreed to that.'' Why is ''Monday
After the Miracle'' expected to succeed the second time around? ''We believe it
could have a sustained life if it were sufficiently promoted,'' says Mr.
Richenthal, who plans to spend half of the $500,000 budget on advertising and
publicity. '' 'Agnes of God' is a good example. It received good reviews for the
performances, but not for the play. The producers promoted the performances, and
now it is a hit. Jane Alexander gave one of her greatest performances in 'Monday
After the Miracle.' And Karen Allen was wonderful.''

The thrill lasted about a second when James Russo learned that he had landed the
role of Raul in ''Extremities,'' the new hit at the Westside Arts Center. ''I
said to myself, 'This is almost impossible,' '' Mr. Russo recalls with a pained
chuckle.

Raul is a rapist. As ''Extremities,'' which was written by William Mastrosimone,
opens, Raul enters a New Jersey farmhouse through an unlocked door and tries to
rape one of the occupants, who is played by Susan Sarandon.

''It's not easy playing a rapist,'' says the 26-year-old Mr.  Russo, who
disguised his youthful appearance by growing a menacing stubble of a beard for
the role. ''When I got the part, I went down to Avenue D and hung around for a
few nights. There are a lot of Rauls in the city. Raul is the ultimate street
character. The ultimate survivor. Someone who lies his way out of anything. When
you see the play, you know you've seen this guy before.''

Raul does not succeed in his rape attempt. Instead, he is bound and gagged by
his would-be victim and stashed in the living room fireplace. ''This woman gets
the better of him,'' Mr. Russo notes.  ''This has never happened to Raul. He is
trapped. The energy builds and builds. This play gets me so revved up that it's
hard to get to sleep before 4 o'clock in the morning.''

As the energy of the drama builds, Mr. Russo and Miss Sarandon tussle in a
series of harrowing encounters staged by B.H. Barry, the master of the fight
scene. Despite Mr. Barry's expert guidance, Mr.  Russo and Miss Sarandon are not
without battle scars. ''One night I broke two ribs,'' Mr. Russo says. ''Another
night I gave Susan a bloody nose, accidentally. She also broke a finger and is
wearing a neck brace.''

Mr. Russo, who has received excellent reviews for his performance, is a
high-school dropout from Queens who has had almost no formal acting training and
little experience on the stage. He formerly worked as an illustrator and sees
acting as an extension of his work as an artist.

''When I was an illustrator, I was obsessed by people - their faces and hands,''
he says. ''I @couldn't draw objects, just people. One day I said, 'I'll use
myself as a canvas.' The whole thing in acting is transforming yourself. I
wanted to play a rapist because I never raped anyone. It is more interesting to
be in the shoes of someone else.''

What to do with empty Broadway theaters? James M. Nederlander, the theater owner
and producer, is bringing in a couple of one-man shows. The singer-songwriter
Barry Manilow has been booked into the Uris Theater for a two-week run,
beginning Feb. 21. The French composer and singer Gilbert Becaud will open March
15 for a three-week engagement at another Nederlander house, to be announced.

''You must be wondering why I am going to New York after all these years,''
Milton Berle said over the phone from his home in Beverly Hills. ''Oy, vey. It
is cold in New York.''

Nevertheless, Mr. Berle has signed to star in Walter Landau's new play,
''Goodnight, Grandpa,'' which will open at the Entermedia on Feb. 23. Mr. Berle
will play the title character, a patriarch who is one week shy of his 100th
birthday.

''Goodnight, Grandpa'' will mark Mr. Berle's Off Broadway debut.  ''As long as
I'm in a theater and have live people in front of me, I don't care where I am,''
he said. ''Give me a theater with four people in it, and I'm on.''

Diahann Carroll, who was Elizabeth Ashley's recent vacation replacement in
''Agnes of God,'' will return to the production in May, when Miss Ashley leaves
to take a company of ''Agnes of God'' on the road. ... A.R. Gurney, whose Off
Broadway hit, ''The Dining Room,'' is playing at the Astor Place Theater, has a
new play opening at the Circle Repertory Company. The title is ''What I Did Last
Summer,'' and the director of the play, which is about a young man's coming of
age, is Joan Micklin Silver, who wrote and directed the film ''Hester Street.''
Performances begin on Jan. 27. ... John Rubinstein, Michael Moriarty and William
Atherton will open Wednesday in a revival of Herman Wouk's ''The Caine Mutiny
Court-Martial'' at the Hartman Theater in Stamford, Conn. If all goes well
there, the play will come to Broadway this winter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 'CLOSEUP' ON LEBANON MASSACRE

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 975 words


''OH, tell the world what happened to the Palestinian people!'' That refrain,
wailed by a survivor of the September massacre in Lebanon, echoes through the
''ABC News Closeup'' being shown on Channel 7 tonight at 10. The hourlong report
attributes the blame for the slaughter of some 800 people at the refugee camps
of Sabra and Shatila ''to the wanton brutality of the Christian militiamen; to
negligence by senior Israeli military officers; to the weakness of the Lebanese
army and Government; to the indifference of Arab nations, and, finally, to the
failure of an anxious American Government, which broke its word.''

The program traces the events that culminated in the massacre - from the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon in June to the withdrawal in August of the Palestine
Liberation Organization's ''fighters'' or ''terrorists,'' depending on whose
terminology one prefers, and then, to the Israeli military leadership's making
an arrangement with the Phalange, as this report describes it, ''to purge the
Palestinian camps.'' In addition to previously reported material, including
testimony from the official Israeli inquiry, ABC News offers several fresh
interviews with Phalangists and Israelis, as well as a number of plausible, if
vaguely attributed allegations and interpretations.

Unnamed ''senior U.S. diplomats'' are reported to have told ABC News that United
States troops were withdrawn prematurely from the multinational force in Lebanon
because of the Administration's concern over being involved ''in situations
reminding the American public of Vietnam.'' Unnamed ''highly placed military
sources'' are cited as laying direct responsibility for the massacre on three
Phalangist military commanders, who are named and who deny everything. Unnamed
''military and intelligence sources'' are said to have confirmed the presence in
the refugee camps of Phalangists from Damur, a town that had suffered a severe
assault by the P.L.O. in 1976. There is testimony that several members of the
forces of Saad Haddad, leader of the Christian militia in southern Lebanon and a
client of Israel, was seen in the camps. ABC News concludes from its interviews
that at least 45 Israeli officers and civilians knew that civilians were being
killed many hours before the Phalangists were ordered out of the camps. In one
scene, several Palestinian women who are said to have escaped while the massacre
was in process are shown appealing to an Israeli soldier for help. ''Come to the
camp now, and we'll show you the dead bodies,'' one woman says.

Some of the documentarians' techniques of making points by visual counterpoint
become obtrusive, particularly the juxtaposing of rote denials of responsibility
by Phalangist leaders with scenes of grieving women.

Despite a somewhat facile resort in the narration, delivered by Bill Redeker, an
ABC News correspondent, to phrases like ''collective responsibility'' and ''the
inevitability of Sabra and Shatila,'' which obscure more than they illuminate,
the evidence marshaled here is forceful. The testimony of witnesses, as well as
Israeli films of Christian militia deployments, leave little doubt that the
Phalangists did the killing. As for Israel's responsibility, that is laid
primarily to the decision of the Israeli Defense Minister, Ariel Sharon, to
spare his own troops the dirty work of ''purging'' the camps of remaining P.L.O.
militiamen by resorting to the Phalangists, despite common knowledge of their
past ruthlessness and their craving for vengeance in the days after the
assassination of the Christian leader, Bashir Gemayel. A former Israeli officer
comments, ''Things can happen which you cannot think about.''

Did the reluctance of high-ranking Israelis to think about what was happening in
the camps contribute to the delay in putting a stop to it? The Phalangists
entered Sabra and Shatila on a Thursday evening. Evidence presented here
confirms that by Friday morning, atrocities were already being reported to
Israeli officers. One of them, ''Major X,'' says, ''It is certain, beyond any
doubt, that by Friday afternoon everyone knew.'' But it was Saturday morning
before the Phalange was ordered out.

The viewer is left with the reflection of an Israeli journalist: ''We solved the
military problem, and we created a moral problem,'' and with the anguish of a
woman who is reported to have lost her husband and three sons: ''We are still
afraid. And we will be afraid. Where will we go? Who will take care of us?''

'Roses in December,' Tragedy in Salvador

While the tragedy in Beirut is unfolding on Channel 7, on WNET, Channel 13, we
are reminded of a tragedy in El Salvador - the murder in December 1980 of four
American women. ''Roses in December,'' first shown last season in public
television's ''Crisis to Crisis'' series, is a sensitive portrait of Jean
Donovan, one of the Roman Catholic missionaries killed by Salvadoran security
forces. The hour, produced and directed by Anna Carrigan and Bernard Stone with
a combination of passion and restraint, gains power as it reveals, through the
reminiscences of friends and Miss Donovan's letters, this very alive young
woman's growing commitment to El Salvador's children, ''the poor bruised victims
of this insanity.''

No report on these murders can ignore the dispute in this country between the
Reagan Administration, which has detected an improvement in the Salvador
Government's human-rights practices, and its critics, like the brother of one of
the murdered women who charges, ''We were supporting a Government; that
Government had killed my sister, and my Government didn't care.'' The producers'
sympathies are undisguisedly and understandably with the critics. The strength
of ''Roses in December,'' however, has less to do with the politics of Latin
America than with the humanity of Jean Donovan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE OTHER ISRAELI CASUALTIES: THE MENTALLY SCARRED

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1120 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV, Jan. 5


A 35-year-old Israeli soldier collapsed on seeing other soldiers blown apart
while under heavy artillery bombardment. Evacuated to a treatment center, he sat
and stared at one spot on the floor, responding only when someone touched him
and called his name. He refused to touch a rifle.

Another soldier spent 24 hours crying, yelling, rolling on the floor and
crawling around, trying to piece together what he imagined were the parts of a
friend's dismembered body.

These were some of the casualties of the war in Lebanon who did not make the
army's daily statistics. Their wounds were psychological.  Known in World War I
as shell shock and in World War II as battle fatigue, the phenomenon is now
called combat reaction by the teams of Israeli Army psychiatrists, psychologists
and social workers who treated psychiatric casualties during the invasion of
Lebanon.

600 Psychiatric Casualties

There were 600 of these, officials say, with 23 psychiatric casualties for every
100 physical casualties. The Israeli Army has not made public overall figures on
the results of treatment, but on the basis of fragmented statistics it appears
that about two-thirds of the 600 were able to return to combat units.

Some of the cases and methods of treatment were described by army officers this
week in an international symposium on psychological stress, sponsored by Tel
Aviv University, with participants from the United States, Canada, Sweden,
Britain, Australia and West Germany as well as from Israel.

Were ''combat reactions'' fostered in Lebanon by a lack of broad support in
Israel for the war or by outright opposition to the conflict by soldiers
themselves? Asked that question, Yohanan Wozner, who heads the university's
School of Social Work and who served in an Israeli treatment unit, said, ''We
have no scientific information, but my impression is no.''

Battle fatigue was observed as early as the 16th century. It was studied and
treated in the Russian-Japanese war, in the two World Wars and in Korea and
Vietnam. In Israel it was first seen as a problem in the 1973 war, which was
marked by fierce combat and heavy initial losses.

2 Broad Categories Included in '82

Army psychologists estimate that the actual ratio of psychiatric to physical
casualties in 1973 may have approached 40 or 50 to 100. But official figures
were kept considerably lower at the time by the exclusion of two broad
categories -those whose symptoms did not appear immediately and psychiatric
casualties who were also physically wounded. These groups were counted and
treated in the Lebanese war last summer.

In addition, ''the symptoms were less severe'' in 1982, according to Maj. Reuven
Bar-On, a psychologist in the Mental Health Department of the Israeli military.
He said such severe symptoms as dissociative states, or episodic loss of contact
with reality, occurred less frequently in Lebanon than in the 1973 war.

Fifty-six percent of the 600 psychiatric casualties in 1982 were found to
display anxiety reactions, 38 percent depression, 34 percent sleep disturbances,
34 percent fear, 24 percent social estrangement and detachment and 22 percent
reactions in which emotional trauma was converted into such bodily dysfunctions
as limping, blindness and deafness.

The army found that the soldiers most severely affected had a background of
personality disorders, according to Dr. Reuven Segal, a psychiatrist who was
deputy commander of a treatment unit in the rear. He said his patients had
displayed difficulties in school, in social adjustment and in intimate
relationships.

Education as a Factor

Maj. Zahava Solomon, a psychologist in the Mental Health Department, found that
the higher the educational level, the less the chance of a soldier's becoming a
psychiatric casualty. Only 6 percent of the casualties had gone beyond 12th
grade.

She said 80 percent of the casualties were reservists, 19 percent draftees and 1
percent career military men. She suggested that reservists were most vulnerable
because their age made them less able to cope with strenuous activity and
because they had been exposed to combat in previous wars that had weakened their
resilience. She added that their transition from their more established civilian
lives into war was more traumatic than it was for young draftees, and that their
interaction with their peers in the army was more fragmented.

Some army psychologists, including the Americans present, said they believed
that individual personality factors had less to do with pyschiatric casualties
than did the characteristics of the battle and the unit.

Dr. Franklin D. Jones of the neurop@sychiatry division of the Walter Reed Army
Institute of Research in Washington said that, while a study of the United
States 82d Airborne Division had ''found extremely pathological personalities''
among the paratroopers, the elite unit turned out to have low rates of
psychiatric casualties.

Dr. Shabtai Noy, a psychologist with the Israeli Army's Mental Health
Department, said psychiatric casualties seemed higher in units that distrust
their commanders, have low cohesion, are being defeated or suffer heavy
casualties.

Three-Echelon Treatment System

After finding itself unprepared in 1973, the army this time organized a
three-echelon treatment system in an effort to return as many victims as
possible to their combat units quickly.

In the 1973 war most casualties were evacuated to the rear and treated in
civilian units. This ''caused a prolongation of psychological distress and even
permanent psychological damage,'' Lieut. Col. Dan Enoch, an army psychiatrist,
said.

In Lebanon, frontline psychiatric units were established to take casualties
overnight, or for 24 to 72 hours at the most. Commanders and fellow soldiers
were encouraged to visit, and 59 percent of those treated were reportedly
returned to their combat units.

Second-line centers were set up on army bases just inside the Israeli border for
those whose frontline treatment failed. The longest period of treatment was 14
days. If that failed, the soldier was sent to a third-line center, called the
Combat Fitness Retraining Unit, on a base in central Israel.

The emphasis was on keeping the soldiers in uniform, on obstacle courses, in
physical fitness programs and, ultimately, in weapons training as well as group
and individual therapy. They were never referred to as ''patients'' and treated
with the expectation that they would remain active soldiers.

At first, when therapists told them they would be firing on the rifle range, the
soldiers were said to have jeered and cursed, since almost all had developed a
gun phobia. But step by step, they were re-exposed to weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Israeli soldiers

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV: ETHNICITY CROPS UP IN TWO CRIME SHOWS

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 47, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 504 words


Prime time on NBC tonight is taken up largely by two ''pilots,'' which, in these
cases, is a euphemism for two aborted series. At 9 P.M. on WNBC-Channel 4, it's
''O'Malley,'' starring Mickey Rooney as a comical private detective, Irish
obviously. At 10 P.M., it's ''Inspector Perez,'' starring Jose Perez as a
humorous New York City policeman, Puerto Rican obviously, on loan to San
Francisco. Despite their differing heritage, these two characters bear a family
relationship to the many other ethnic policemen who have proved popular on
television; O'Malley and Perez were evidently conceived in response to the
season's taste for ethnicity. ''O'Malley'' was not available for review, but I
did screen ''Inspector Perez,'' and I am moved to say a few words over the
departed.

To borrow one of the show's running gags about the inspector, ''He don't look
like no cop.'' No, Perez the actor is little and softlooking, with a thick
mustache that doesn't interfere with his boyish grin. And Perez the inspector
doesn't act much like a cop, at any rate not a made-for-television cop. He lives
with his mother, who sends him off to work with hefty sandwiches and who writes
him mysterious notes. His driving would be catastrophic in a car chase.

Although he practices judo now and then, his strength as a policeman lies in a
concern for others that he says he picked up along with much else in New York's
Spanish Harlem and that translates into people trusting him. He is the sort of
detective who pauses in the middle of an interrogation to inquire about a
witness's pet dog.  One thing he does have in common with some other television
cops is an apartment that is clearly not affordable on a policeman's salary.
Since Perez is honesty itself, I deduce that his mother has money in the bank.

In sum, Perez the actor makes the inspector a likable little fellow in a low-key
way, easy to be around. Despite the mod leather coat he dashes about in, he's
thoroughly wholesome.

One assumes that at some stage in the production of this show, NBC's market
researchers discovered that a little Puerto Rican cop, no matter how likable,
just wouldn't fly. Part of the problem may be the likability; the producers try
to squeeze a bit too much sweetness out of their star, instead of trusting him
to let it flow naturally. But neither the amiable presence of Jose Perez nor the
teasing banter with his captain, energetically played by Dana Elcar, could have
done much for his cause in the executive suite once this pilot was shown. The
plot is an exercise in psychobabble about a young man who kills beautiful
Chinese girls because a beautiful Chinese girl betrayed him in Vietnam. As the
police psychiatrist observes sensibly, ''It's a little kinky, isn't it?''

So, here we have a central character who one might have lived comfortably with
for a season or two, killed off before his primetime. He deserved better.
Inspector Perez, it was good meeting you; rest in peace. As for you, Perez the
actor, hope to see you around.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN REPORTED SEEKING A BIG RISE IN NUCLEAR FUNDS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1254 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 8


President Reagan, who has brought spending for nuclear arms to a level nearly
double that of four years ago, plans to ask for another big increase when he
submits the new military budget to Congress later this month, according to
senior Administration officials.

The officials said that while the President had not made a decision on the exact
figure, the Defense Department had proposed an appropriation of about $30
billion for strategic nuclear forces in the fiscal year 1984, which begins Oct.
1.

This year about $22 billion was allocated to strategic forces; strategic
spending in 1979, under the Carter Administration, was the equivalent of $12.1
billion in today's dollars.

$180 Billion Program

Strategic forces include long-range bombers, intercontinental missiles, missiles
launched from submarines, continental air defenses, and warning systems and
communications.

Senior officials assert that the funds are necessary to continue the President's
program of modernizing the nation's strategic deterrent, a $180 billion plan
announced in October 1981. That program was scheduled to be moving at full speed
by next year.

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger has said that the Administration
places ''the highest priority on the long overdue modernization of our strategic
forces'' to deter the Soviet Union or, if deterrence fails, to prevail over the
Soviet Union.

Vigorous Debate Expected

Other officials said the Administration's objective within the current five-year
plan was to build a nuclear deterrent that could survive in a protracted nuclear
conflict and, in the long run, be capable of forcing the Soviet Union to end
such a war on terms favorable to the United States.

The Administration's 1984 proposal seems certain to be vigorously debated in
Congress this winter in light of the continuing controversy over the MX missile.
The President has appointed a special commission, led by Gen. Brent Scowcroft, a
retired Air force officer, to examine all aspects of that issue.

Mr. Reagan, in a letter last week to Representative Jack F. Kemp, Republican of
upstate New York, suggested that he might suspend negotiations with the Soviet
Union in Geneva on arms reduction unless Congress approved production of the MX
missile.

That drew a heated retort from Senator Gary Hart, Democrat of Colorado, who
contended that breaking off negotiations would be ''dangerous and foolish.''
Senator Hart asserted, ''This amounts to nothing less than blackmail.''

Critics of the Administration's military policy, moreover, have asserted that
too much money has been allotted to nuclear weapons, which they say are the
least likely to be used, at the expense of conventional forces that are more
likely to be needed.

The Defense Department's $30 billion proposal for 1984 would be about 12 percent
of the total military budget request as against 10 percent this year. Last year
strategic spending was about 8 percent of the military allocation.

Within the armed forces, Army generals and Navy admirals have grumbled that
strategic nuclear forces have consumed more of the military budget than
necessary at the expense of conventional weapons. The largest share of nuclear
force spending goes to the Air Force.

Planned Increases Outlined

Despite such opposition, senior officials said they planned to protect the
nuclear modernization program from spending cuts as best they could. While they
gave no precise figures pending the President's submission of the budget, they
indicated where large spending increases had been planned.

Production funds for the B-1 long-range bomber, scheduled to go into operation
in 1986, would be increased by 50 percent to more than $6 billion. Funds to
modify B-52 bombers to carry cruise missiles and to improve the planes'
electronics would nearly double to $1 billion.

While officials would not discuss development of the radar-evading Stealth
bomber, spending on that aircraft, due to be operational in 1991, would
presumably increase.

The Administration has been eager to develop a new missile to be launched from
Trident submarines. Funds for that missile were scheduled to quadruple to $1.5
billion.

The Administration requested funds this year to buy 42 F-15 fighters, whose
primary mission is air defense, but Congress cut that to 39 planes. The
Administration plans to ask for 60 in 1984 and 96 in 1985, each costing over $40
million.

Other large programs include expenditures for research in defenses against
missiles, communications networks that could survive in nuclear war and new
engines for aerial tankers that support longrange bombers.

What the Administration will request for the troubled MX program remains to be
seen. Earlier plans called for tripling production funds to more than $3
billion. Debate over a secure basing plan for the missile led to a defeat for MX
production funds in the post-election session of Congress last month and the
President's subsequent appointment of the Commission on Strategic Forces headed
by General Scowcroft.

Ratio Larger in 1950's

Even with the swift increases planned by the Reagan Administration, the ratio of
the military budget allotted to strategic nuclear weapons would be only about
half of that when the policy of massive retaliation was enunciated by President
Eisenhower and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles in the 1950's.

After the demobilization that followed World War II, the United States spent
about 10 percent of a relatively small military budget on nuclear arms. But as
the cold war and then the Korean War began, President Truman began to build
strategic forces. That took 18.5 percent of the 1952 military budget.

Nuclear arms became the mainstay of United States armed force under President
Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles, as they pledged an allout assault in
retaliation for Soviet aggression. Strategic forces consumed nearly 27 percent
of the military budget in 1959, as against 33 percent for general-purpose
conventional forces.

The rest of the military budget went into intelligence and communications,
airlift and sealift, reserve forces, research and development, supply and
maintenance, training, medical support, and administration.

Changed Under Kennedy

Reliance on nuclear arms began gradually to diminish under President Kennedy,
who adopted a policy of flexible response. As the United States became involved
in the war in Vietnam, spending for nuclear weapons declined from 19 percent of
the military budget in 1963 to about 9 percent under President Johnson in 1967.
That ratio continued through the Nixon and Ford Administrations.

Under the Carter Administration, which argued that the nuclear forces of the two
superpowers were essentially equivalent, appropriations for strategic arms fell
to a historic low of 6.8 percent of the military budget in 1979, while
general-purpose forces were allocated 37.5 percent.

After the Russian invasion of Afghanistan and evidence of a Soviet buildup in
nuclear weapons, the Carter Administration applied more resources to nuclear
arms, allotting more than 7 percent in its 1981 military budget.

Mr. Reagan and Secretary Weinberger, who have repeatedly asserted that American
forces are inferior to the Soviet Union's because of what they contend are long
years of neglect, have hastened the upward trend in spending for nuclear arms to
last year's 8 percent of the military budget, 10 percent this year and the 12
percent that would result from the Defense Department's request for 1984.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MANILA TO UPGRADE ITS FORCES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 462 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Jan. 8


The Government announced this week that the Philippines was acquiring new patrol
boats, planes and guns to help it meet its increased responsibilities over
surrounding waters as a signer of the new Law of the Sea Treaty.

The Government also said that Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile would go to
Washington early next month to hold the first of a series of consultations with
the Reagan Administration on the modernization of the Philippine armed forces
under the military pact with the United States.

A Defense Department spokesman said the projected modernization was aimed
primarily at ''making the armed forces internally capable and, to a certain
extent, at enabling it to meet its commitments toward regional security.''

He said the consultations between Mr. Enrile and Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger were not part of new negotiations for an agreement on American bases
here. Those talks are to begin here in April.

$100 Million a Year in Arms Aid

In an interview on the modernization plan, the Chief of Staff of the Philippine
armed forces, Gen. Fabian C. Ver, said that aside from new weapons now provided
by the United States under a $100-million-a-year military aid package, the
Philippines was making its own M-16 rifles under license from the Colt
Corporation of the United States. More planes are expected this year under the
same aid package, he added.

General Ver said the United States had already turned over 25 F-8H Crusader
planes and 15 Huey helicopters. He said the Philippine Navy's shipbuilding
program, based at the old United States Navy slip at Sangley Point near Manila,
would be stepped up to produce more small patrol boats for duty in coastal
waters. The general reported that the Philippine Coast Guard had been upgraded
to help the navy patrol Philippine waters.

The Law of the Sea Treaty, which the Philippines signed on Dec. 10 in Jamaica
along with 116 other nations, provides that each coastal nation's sovereign
territory extends 12 miles beyond its coast and that it has exclusive rights to
the fish and other marine life in waters extending 200 miles beyond its shores.
The treaty is to take effect and become binding when 60 nations have ratified
it.

The economic zones it envisions would extend the Philippine area of
responsibility over a large expanse of the South China Sea. Such a zone would
overlap with those of China and Vietnam at the Spratly Islands, but the
Philippine Government has said it will resolve all such issues through
negotiations.

Such claims, however, are not recognized by the United States, which did not
sign the Law of the Sea Treaty, and the area involved has specifically been
excluded from the joint security responsibilities of the Philippines and the
United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE DEMOCRATS GET EVEN

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 447 words


WASHINGTON WHEN the 98th Congress opened its doors last week, Representative
Doug Barnard Jr., a four-term Democrat from Georgia, bid for a seat on the
prestigious House Appropriations Committee. Mr. Barnard had a good case, since
the slot had been held by a fellow Georgian. It went instead to Representative
Bill Boner, a moderate from Tennessee.

That small decision told a lot about the new tenor on Capitol Hill. Mr. Barnard
is a pure-bred ''boll weevil,'' one of the two-dozen conservative Democrats who
often provided President Reagan with his margins of victory. With 26 more
Democrats in the House, that leverage is gone. The Democratic leadership lost no
time in demonstrating it.

Once the lawmakers were sworn in, a series of rules changes were swiftly
propounded to speed up the legislative process and reduce the ability of the
minority to hinder the majority. The rules gave the Speaker greater authority to
waive certain procedural votes, and made it much more difficult for members to
offer amendments to appropriations bills, once only used to set spending levels.
In recent years conservatives have attached amendments pursuing causes from bans
on federally financed abortions to prohibitions against school busing.

Supporters of the new rules argued that they promoted efficiency while thwarting
the guerrilla tactics of the right wing. But many Republicans, and a few
Democrats, denounced them as a hypocritical attempt to ''run roughshod over the
rights of individual members.'' After all, the critics maintained, antiwar
legislators had once used riders on appropriations bills to bar funding for the
Vietnam war.  (The tactics of die-hard conservatives also provoked a reaction in
the Senate, where leaders announced formation of a bipartisan panel to recommend
changes in the filibuster rules to prevent a small band of dissenters from tying
up the chamber.)

The House leadership's influence was further enhanced by organizational efforts.
Representative Phil Gramm of Texas, the most ornery of the boll weevils, was
ousted from the Budget Committee; he promptly announced that he was resigning
his House seat and running again as a Republican. Other boll weevils suffered
lesser chastisements. John B. Breaux of Louisiana failed to win a spot on the
Budget Committee and Roy Dyson of Maryland, on the Appropriations Committee.
G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery of Mississippi was re-elected chairman of the Veterans'
Affairs Committee, but lost 53 votes in the party caucus. The vote, he said, was
a way for his colleagues to ''let their frustrations.'' But conservatives, he
conceded, would likely be more cooperative with their party leaders in this
Congress.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gramm

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE SLIPPERY SLOPES OF SUMMITRY

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Ronald Reagan and Yuri V. Andropov are caught up in a diplomatic minuet that
seems inevitably to be leading to a Soviet-American summit sometime in the next
two years. Every American President since Franklin D. Roosevelt has had one or
more meetings with a Soviet leader and there is no reason to suppose that Mr.
Reagan will be any different.

Indeed, if Leonid I. Brezhnev, who died in November, had been in better health,
there probably would have been by now a Reagan-Brezhnev meeting in New York or
Europe. Despite assertions by both sides from time to time that the importance
of such meetings is exaggerated and that they have to be ''well-prepared,'' the
simple fact is that Soviet-American summits are the Super Bowls of international
diplomacy, and both sides love to play in them.

As part of the preparatory rites, American and Soviet leaders sometimes profess
disdain for the meetings. President Dwight D.  Eisenhower said in 1953 that ''I
would not go to a summit merely because of friendly words and plausible promises
by the men in the Kremlin.'' Nevertheless, he was there in 1955 in Geneva. He
invited Nikita S. Khrushchev to Washington in 1959, and would have gone to
Moscow in 1960 except for the U-2 incident. Leonid I. Brezhnev resisted Richard
M. Nixon's initial overtures because of the Vietnam war, and then (worried about
Mr. Nixon's infatuation with Peking) embraced the idea so firmly that he and
Nixon held consecutive meetings in 1972, 1973 and 1974. Yet, Mr. Brezhnev turned
around in 1977 and rejected President Jimmy Carter's proposal for an early
summit on the grounds that a new SALT agreement should be negotiated first. They
eventually met in 1979 in Vienna.

Just now, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Andropov are playing a bit hard to get.The Soviet
leader, in response to a question from the Hearst newspapers, said recently that
while the Kremlin had no problem with summitry in principle, ''good preparatory
work is needed for the success of such a meeting.'' Mr. Reagan, who last year
invited Mr.  Brezhnev to New York for an ''informal'' discussion of world
issues, told his news conference last week that he now wanted a ''planned''
summit. ''I don't think you just say let's get together, sit around a table and
then say 'well, what'll we talk about,''' he said. And his spokesman the next
day said Soviet behavior in such places as Afghanistan and Poland would have to
improve first.

Other Presidents and Soviet leaders have been less coy. John F.  Kennedy rushed
to Vienna to meet with Mr. Khrushchev within months of taking office. Lyndon B.
Johnson virtually twisted Aleksei N.  Kosygin's arm in 1967 to get him to meet
him in Glassboro, N.J. One of Mr. Johnson's major regrets on leaving office was
that the Sovietled invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968 forced him to
cancel a trip to Russia that October.

For an incumbent American President, nothing guarantees more television exposure
and diversions from difficult political problems at home than the drama of a
face-to-face meeting with the leader of the Soviet Union. But it does not always
help. Mr. Nixon insisted on a final journey to Moscow even though Watergate was
to cause his resignation a month later. Mr. Carter's meeting with Mr. Brezhnev
did not prevent a precipitous drop in the President's popularity that led to the
firing of several of his top aides a few weeks later.

For the Soviet leader, whether he be Stalin, Khrushchev, Brezhnev, or Andropov,
the summit provides him easy access to the world's news media, and an aura of
respectibiity in Western circles that temporarily eases the inferiority complex
that permeates the Kremlin.
Is Summitry Worthwhile?

There have been voices of caution, to be sure, about summits.  Gerard C. Smith,
an arms control negotiator for Mr. Nixon, once wrote out 10 ''don'ts'' for any
future President. The first was, ''Don't lust for a summit.'' It only leads to
giving away negotiating points in the rush to have some agreements to announce
at the meeting, he said.

Despite the Olympian qualities of summits, it is questionable whether they
really produce the results expected of them or indeed whether they are the best
way to get results. Gerald R. Ford came away from Vladivostok in 1974 with
guidelines for a new SALT agreement, but Henry A. Kissinger might have done just
as well. Mr.  Nixon and Mr. Brezhnev knew each other as well as any two leaders
can hope to. Yet, in June 1973, when Mr. Brezhnev warned him in San Clemente
that an explosion was likely in the Middle East later that year unless pressure
was brought on Israel, Mr. Nixon paid no attention.

The drawbacks notwithstanding, the preponderence of opinion right now seems to
be in favor of the spectacle of another summit. Mr.  Nixon has publicly called
for an early Reagan-Andropov ''gettogether.'' Zbigniew Brzezinski, who was Mr.
Carter's national security adviser, said last month that the two sides should
agree on annual summits ahead of time, to give them a more routine quality that
would lower expectations.

If Mr. Andropov and Mr. Reagan were to meet anytime soon, it is improbable that
any major agreements would emerge, although it would give each leader a better
understanding of the other's personality.  But there would likely be no
spontaneity to the session; Mr. Reagan has struck some as shaky on international
issues and Mr. Andropov, whose powers seem far from absolute in the Kremlin,
might not be free to depart from a collective Soviet wisdom.

Given those limitations, what seems more likely is a series of preliminary
contacts, managed for the most part by Mr. Shultz and Foreign Minister Andrei A.
Gromyko that could produce a summit late this year or early next, in time for
any Reagan re-election campaign. By then, the probability of any arms control
agreements would be easier to forecast. If there were to be any accords
announced at the summit, they would most probably concern arms.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of two chairs on an empty, lit stage

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A National New Yorker

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 175 words


It is hard to grasp the force of the late Ben Rosenthal from his laconic account
of himself in the Congressional Directory. He listed his New York education, law
practice and family and his 10 reelections to the House. The true importance of
this wry, sometimes abrasive but always dedicated and effective legislator was
made far clearer by the presence at his funeral of 75 obviously moved colleagues
from every part of the nation.

The delegation that attended Ben Rosenthal at the end testified to his crucial
influence in melding New York's Congressional delegation into an effective unit,
serving priorities that he articulated so well. It paid tribute to his
pioneering opinions on the importance of consumer protection and the unwisdom of
the Vietnam war.

Representative Rosenthal did not rely on facile slogans to make his mark. He won
respect by the seriousness of his views and by bringing something special even
to less glamorous committees - by his determination to be a national and not
only a New York representative. And so he was.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HARD SELL IN THE SHOWROOM

BYLINE: By Andrew H. Malcolm

SECTION: Section 6; Page 17, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5849 words


It is barely light these chilly Middle Western mornings, when the first
customers line up in their troubled cars, trailing warm, white vapors outside
the giant doors of the service department at Jennings Chevrolet in suburban
Chicago. But soon the lights are on, the mechanics are filling the cavernous
garage with the raucous rat-atats of their air wrenches, while in an adjacent
room the hissing paint-spray guns of their body-shop colleagues erase the sudden
scars of automotive indiscretions.

Outdoors, the bare bulbs of the new-car lot beam coldly down on shiny
windshields carrying computer-printed price stickers that make grown men gasp.
The strains of Frank Sinatra trying to sing ''My Kind of Town'' seep across the
lot and through the spacious indoor showroom, interrupted every 10 seconds by
paged pleas: ''Dave Szutz, switchboard, please, Dave Szutz.''

In a tiny cubicle in the showroom, James R. Jennings, the son of 58-year-old
James P. Jennings, president of the firm he bought in 1957, sits down at his
metal desk with the fake wood-grain top. The dealership's general manager and
sales manager, he is nervously fidgeting with his collar. ''Well,'' said the
younger Mr. Jennings, indicating the nearby new models, ''here we go.'' He might
have added, ''I hope.'' Because selling new and used American cars has become a
risky business.

Once, the American automobile, built on an assembly line invented and perfected
by Americans, was the quintessential symbol of this country's know-how, a vital
part of its industrial foundation. It provided the jobs and the wheels to carry
generations of automotive workers and other Americans to an improved
middle-class life, surely better than that of their parents but not as good as
that of their children. Many Middle Western cities were built around the auto
industry - steel, rubber, parts, machine tools and other related businesses,
whose readily available jobs and certain overtime were the lure for workers
leaving the countryside. Buying a new car every two or three years was as common
as 4 percent mortgages and 24-cents-a-gallon gasoline.

As late as 1978, some 11.3 million automobiles, American and foreign, were sold
in the United States. But then the Shah of Iran fell, uncertainty enfolded the
oil resources of the Middle East and the gas lines doubled. Auto sales slipped
and by 1982 came to slightly under 8 million, with no signs of growth. For
Chevrolet alone, production last year totaled 1,234,988 cars and 758,387 trucks,
down 15 percent from 1981. Worse yet, Chevrolet's share of the total market fell
from 20 percent to 16.

The corporate and consumer confidence of yesteryear had been shattered by forces
far from the carpeted confines of the new-car showroom. The business is a victim
of an inflation largely spawned by the Vietnam War, high interest rates, even
higher prices, energy shortages real and anticipated, often shoddy workmanship,
aggressive foreign competitors more closely attuned to domestic consumer fears
and desires, as well as lingering economic uncertainties that have corroded the
assumption of perpetual progress. Value-conscious customers - not tied to any
one brand anymore - ask more intelligent questions now: They care less about
chrome, more about mileage, durability and dependability. olume sales, once the
be-all and endall of any dealership, still matter; but of increasing import is
the carefully monitored profit per car. Given today's high operating costs - not
to mention high risks - selling a lot of cars does not guarantee financial
success if the computer says the profit is inadequate. It is a lesson learned
the hard way by 4,400 of the nation's 30,100 franchised new-car dealers who
since 1973 have gone the way of huge tail fins. Nearly 600 dealerships have died
in the past 15 months alone.

On the surface, Jennings Chevrolet, a small, profitable, familyowned concern in
Glenview, Ill., looks much the same as any other car dealership. But these
establishments have become, in effect, paved business battlegrounds where the
decisions of thousands of average customers coming and going through the big
glass doors will determine the future or demise of the American automobile
industry. These days, that industry is mildly hopeful, fueled by the popularity
of ''bargain'' 10.9 percent interest rates. Some segments of it - and Wall
Street - are also buoyed by a determined new theme in automotive advertising,
which has Detroit beginning to play down economy of operation in favor of the
glamorization of technology.

But Mr. Jennings, the dealership's president, is worried, even as he scrambles
to fill his half-empty lot with the new cars that a cost-conscious Chevrolet
management is constructing so cautiously these days. Whether the simmering sales
will continue remains to be seen. ''We've just got to get through this long,
cold winter,'' said Mr. Jennings. New, bargain interest rates may be necessary
this month to prop up sales.

In the innocent days of our Automotive Eden - before gas shortages, 18 percent
loans and autos so tiny they looked like spares - future success was
unquestioned. Some Smilin' Ed could wave his cane and promise shinier chrome,
larger fins, bigger engines, unlimited sex appeal and grand power to go from
here to 60 in a few seconds flat.  More than that, the American automobile had
for a half-century represented nothing less than the American dream.

As for the buyer, who was not yet called a consumer, anyone could go anywhere he
pleased; anyone could become anyone he wanted, at least inside that fancy car,
with its stylish, unblem-ished lines that changed at the whim of an engineer's
pencil, and the powerful engine, with its deep-throated rumble.

Those were the days when Americans knew of autumn's arrival because the leaves
fell, schools reopened and in every city huge sheets of paper went up on the
windows of car-dealers' showrooms to hide the contents from a curious public.
Long, spindly trucks from that magic manufacturing land called Detroit
surreptitiously drew up to the dealers' backdoors then, their cargo carefully
covered with large, tied tarpaulins concealing the exciting secrets of shaped
metal.

There was paint on the showroom windows then, too, announcing that special date
when we could first glimpse the new-model cars.  Everyone, naturally, dreamed of
owning one and children passionately hoped that their fathers would buy one so
that the youngster could be the envy of all on his school-bus route. n a way,
new-car buying time was better than Christmas then: The buildup lasted longer.
One night at dinner, the father announced that he was thinking of getting a new
car. It was expected, of course, because 24 months had already passed since the
last automotive purchase. The brand was equally predictable. Mine was a loyal
Chrysler family - Plymouths, Dodges, a DeSoto and, once, a red Chrysler Newport
convertible.

One evening after work, the big moment arrived. We all drove in to the Chrysler
dealer in the same Cleveland neighborhood where we used to live. Dad felt
comfortable dealing there; customers and salesmen were on a first-name basis
-they chatted on the phone regularly - and the salesmen remembered what model
you had two cars ago and what happened to your last trade-in. (Like the family
pet, the car became part of the family, closely associated with an era of fond
memories; to hear that the last trade-in was destroyed in a crash was to get an
early inkling of mortality.) But on that exciting new-car evening, it was
perhaps more important, from the viewpoint of 3 feet 4 inches, that the dealer
served candy to short people and let them pretenddrive the entire showroom
anywhere they wanted to go.

Aside from the car, the only thing large about our family was my dog, Buddy, a
St. Bernard who liked the idea of cars - getting in and out, sitting up on the
seats - but would rather be somewhere else when the car started moving. Outside
the big showroom windows, after the men emerged from a back room with a bunch of
papers, my mother, father and I and Buddy, if he had been good that day, would
all pile into the shiny vehicle; it smelled funny, fresh or something. And it
was the only day the dashboard clock was ever on time.

I had to keep both my feet off the seat, but Buddy, who had four, didn't.
Sitting in the middle of the back seat, I would lean forward and test with my
chin the shape and softness of the top of the front seat. It was an important
consideration, because from that midseat vantage point on our long summer trips
to Michigan or Canada or Atlantic City, I could simultaneously keep track of the
dashboard dials that glowed at night, as well as the supply of LIFE SAVERS in my
mother's purse in the right-hand front seat, where women always sat. Of course,
there wasn't much to see on the dials that first evening; because of something
that sounded like a breaking period, you couldn't go more than 35 miles an hour
for the first 500 miles or something, which was mortifying because everyone
passed us, even cars from West Virginia.

I wasn't terribly aware of automotive-maintenance affairs. I do remember once we
had to have the tarlike roof refinished on our 1948 Mercury station wagon
(Chrysler wouldn't complain about our owning a Mercury because, after all, Dad
bought it used), and one time a carpenter had to repair and varnish the wood
strips on its side. The windshield wipers were amazing. They always knew to slow
down at red stoplights, and they always seemed to fail most often in fog. The
only car I don't remember ever being repaired was my grandfather's 1932 Ford
coupe, perhaps because it was black. Its cab had two seats, one for him and one
for me. The trunk lid came off. The doors closed with a metal bolt, and a lever
on the steering column blew the horn.  He kept it in a dirt-floored garage whose
worn wooden walls were decorated with every license plate the car ever wore. He
had promised I would drive it someday, but he died before I was 16.

My grandfather never had another car. He didn't need another. And so far as I
know, he paid no attention whatsoever to all the new-car autumn hoopla. He'd
have called it falderol. Which, in a wonderful way, would put him right in tune
with the times today, nearly two generations later, as the younger Mr. Jennings,
who is 31, sat at his showroom desk and suddenly realized what day it almost
was.

''Hey,'' he said, ''tomorrow's the day the new Camaros come out.'' The salesmen
in the room laughed. The '83 Camaros had begun arriving, uncovered by
tarpaulins, three weeks before. There were no giant papered windows in sight;
Jennings Chevrolet needs all the car viewers it can get these days. Some Camaros
had been on the showroom floor two weeks.

Dave Szutz, a veteran car salesman waiting for customers on a sunny afternoon,
recalled the new-model unveilings of yesteryear - spotlights piercing the
darkness, champagne parties, buffet tables, small, string orchestras in the
showroom. ''Oh, that goes way back,'' said Mr. Szutz, looking at the ceiling for
such dusty memories, ''that was early 70's.'' Understandable that a decade might
seem a millennium in the history of car dealers, whose annual sales approximate
$147 billion. So much has happened so quickly in recent times that the car has
become a marker of rapid change.

When James R. Jennings was 5 years old, his father left a managerial post with a
prospering Chevrolet outlet on the South Side of Chicago to buy his own small
Chevrolet dealership in the northwest suburbs. Back in 1957, Chevrolet was the
workingman's car. A successful Impala model resembled a bomber with its wings
folded back. In those days, teen-agers wanted the rear ends of their cars
dragging low and the fronts riding high. Smitch Guyer's '51 Ford rode so low we
had to stack phone books on the driver's seat so that he could see over the
steering wheel. The mufflers were supposed to be noisy - and they were. Many
rear-view mirrors came with those big fuzzy dice. Cheerleaders dated the car,
not the boy. One radio speaker was enough per car. And every Sunday night, a
sweet Dinah Shore kissed the nation on television, singing, ''See the U.S.A. in
your Chevrolet.''

Running a Chevrolet shop then was a sure-fire ticket into the country club. And
being born to a Chevrolet dealer was one of those strokes of extreme good
fortune roughly comparable today to winning a state lottery, without buying a
ticket. Just before the junior prom, on their 16th birthdays (possibly before,
if they had learner's permits), many sons of Chevrolet dealers got their own
cars, maybe even a scoop-fendered Corvette like the one on the ''Route 66''
television show. They cost an astronomical sum then -$4,000, just for one.

The senior Mr. Jennings recalled buying his first house then for $17,900. Today,
Mr. Jennings sells Corvettes that cost $6,100 more than that house.

''Those were good times,'' said Mr. Jennings. ''I never lost money. Cars put all
my kids through school. We were growing every year, selling more every month,
buying more land, building new buildings, hiring more people. Things were so
busy around here we didn't even have much time for used cars; we sold them off
right away to wholesalers.''

A few statistics tell the story. Shortly after buying the dealership, Mr.
Jennings had 20 employees (not all salesmen) selling about 20 cars every month
from a 1.5-acre lot. Twenty years later, he had 80 employees moving more than
200 cars a month off a 5.5-acre lot. Today, Jennings Chevrolet is down to the
nine salespeople and 51 other employees scrambling to sell 125 cars, if they're
lucky, on that same 5.5-acre lot. ''We had too many good times,'' said Mr.
Jennings. ''We got to taking things for granted.'' As every car salesman or car
buyer knows, there is more to the car business than numbers, which can mask as
much as they reveal. It is a maxim reinforced by spending a few days in the
Jennings showroom, watching and chatting with the customers and salesmen or,
these days, ''salespersons.'' For, while Jennings Chevrolet may have the same
president and the same name as a quarter-century ago, the unlimited dreams of
another automotive era are rubbing up against some new realities. ''Car selling
has become a serious life-and-death business,'' according to the Power
Newsletter, a respected monitor of auto industry trends, ''and much of the
hoopla has gone out of it.''

''I used to help paper the windows in the fall,'' said the younger Mr. Jennings,
laughing at the thought the other day. During a slow, sales-free morning, the
younger Mr. Jennings, who used to be only general manager but recently assumed
the top sales post to save a salary, paused to peruse the company's records,
some of them now computerized. They tell him at a coded glance how many of which
parts Jennings has on hand, how many of what model new cars he owns and what is
the current status of the other cars on order. They showed a predominance of
models in browns and blues, with some standard options; air-conditioning,
rear-window defogger, radio and tinted glass are no longer considered frills.
However, other extras are in short demand.

''It used to be,'' he said, tapping a pencil on the desk, ''that I'd want to
have a little of everything on hand for each kind of guy who'd walk in here. But
now, I have to be very picky. I get a representative model and color, something
that you know is going to turn quickly. Otherwise, you'll have a car on the lot
for six months waiting for the right customer and you'll have to pay $200
interest just to park it there.'' Just like many consumers, Jennings Chevrolet
must borrow to finance its new-car inventory, a major incentive nowadays to buy
only fast-moving models and to requisition others only on specific customer
orders.

The crucial financing works like this: Dealers pay for their new cars by
borrowing from the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, G.M.'s financial arm.
It gives dealers a minimum of three months (four months for trucks) of virtually
free, 4 percent financing before G.M.'s lending rate rises to 1 percent above
the prime rate.  After this initial period, some dealers prefer to pay for their
new cars in cash (like Mr. Jennings) or borrow from banks.

This financial prop accomplishes three things: It overcomes dealer hesitancy to
make costly - and risky -financial commitments; it keeps the assembly lines
busy, and it encourages the rapid movement of cars off the lot and into
consumers' garages before the 4 percent rate jumps. ''This special deal has kept
many dealers alive,'' said the older Mr. Jennings.

To spur sales activity, the younger Mr. Jennings was chatting, one by one, with
his eight salesmen and one saleswoman (who earn, according to the Jennings
staff, from $18,000 to $40,000). He drives them hard now to produce sales. He
had just hired two new salesmen, which he said he intended as an implied threat
to the jobs of the existing staff. He had also just assigned two veteran
salesmen to sell only used cars, an effort to boost income from an old profit
center, trade-ins. ''We have a big demand for used cars now,'' he said. Of 100
new cars sold each month, 60 involve trade-ins. Jennings now sells only 25 to
wholesalers in Mississippi, Alabama and Chicago, keeping the rest to replace
lost sales on new cars. ''Everybody wants a late-model, low-mileage bargain,''
he said. ''We find few people saying, 'Hey, do you have any old, high-mileage
tacky cars for sale?' ''

Trade-ins, once considered by many dealers to be but a necessary evil to stoke
sales, are now eyed eagerly as a lucrative alternative source of earnings to
help pick up the slack from reduced new-car sales. There is no formal sticker
price on used cars. The cars are worth what the market will bear, and that
market is strong. After all, a $4,000 used car can seem a bargain to some still
recovering from the sight of a new car's $11,000 price tag.

To encourage salesmen to move certain models, such as vans on which profits can
be greater, Jennings can increase the commissions on them. Extra commissions can
be awarded for sales of added (and profitable) options, such as four-speaker
hi-fi sets or rustproofing, which just about everyone orders now, since they
anticipate owning a vehicle longer. There are also contests, with top sales
personnel receiving monthly plaques and, sometimes, free airline tickets. And
there is always a sales board hanging in an inner office, listing salesmen's
accomplishments. When Mr. Jennings thinks about cutting expenses, he said, he
looks at the salesmen with the lowest figures; these days, the threatened loss
of a job can be a more powerful incentive than even a trip to the Caribbean.

But Chevrolet also provides rewards and balms to pacify and encourage its 5,300
dealers and to smooth the tensions that can sprout between these independent
businessmen and the large corporation in far-off Detroit. The corporation
provides some minor assistance for advertising, giving dealers the newspaper ad
material to which is added the dealer's name, for instance, or helping a band of
dealers establish a cooperative area-advertising fund, such as the Chicagoland
Chevrolet Dealers Advertising Association, which Mr.  Jennings helped organize.

There are also annual sales contests for each Chevrolet zone of about 100
dealers. That is the way an ambitious senior Mr. Jennings took his wife on all
those free charter excursions to the Soviet Union, China, Japan, Africa and
Europe. Chevrolet even runs an auto business school for dealers' sons (young Mr.
Jennings attended) to help assure capable offspring to run the next generation
of outlets.

Chevrolet can give no volume discounts to large dealers; every dealer pays the
same price for the same car. But personal relationships do develop between
individual dealers and their closest contact with Chevrolet, the liaison man.
Mr. Jennings, who regularly ranks in the top 15 dealers in sales for Chevrolet's
102-dealer Chicago zone (in November, he was 13th), is highly regarded in
Chevrolet's local and Detroit hierarchy, where even secretaries know his name.

Jennings Chevrolet has the three main attributes that Bob Cook, Chevrolet's
general sales manager, in Detroit, looks for in a successful dealer. ''He is
profitable, No. 1,'' said Mr. Cook. ''He has good market penetration. And he has
very good customer relations. Jim is highly regarded in all three.''

That is why Chevrolet's current liaison man, Ed Schlaffer, Chicago district
sales manager, pays so much attention to Jennings on his visits once or twice a
week. One of Mr. Schlaffer's duties is allocation. Like all car makers,
Chevrolet must plan its production schedules three months in advance, long
before anyone knows how strong the market really will be. Dealers tell him what
they tentatively expect to order. These numbers are consolidated nationally and,
for each of its nine lines of cars and eight lines of trucks, Chevrolet makes
the crucial and costly decisions on how many parts to order to make how many
vehicles where during how many shifts for how many weeks. Sometimes, but not
often, Chevrolet's decisions match the dealers' mood.

Last spring, for instance, 1982 models were selling well, boosted by sales
promotions. Optimistic dealers said they would want more cars in June and July.
So Chevrolet planned to build them. But the promotions ended. So did the strong
sales. And Chevrolet had a surplus of 1982's, which is why it had to institute
the reducedinterest plan this fall.

These days, Chevrolet tends to be more conservative in its planning. This means
it tempers dealers' professed purchasing intentions with a good deal of salt. It
makes fewer cars, which may be fine in a weak market, but it creates vehicle
shortages and real tensions if a strong market develops for a particular model
like the Camaro. Then Mr. Jennings goes to order five Camaros one week, but Mr.
Schlaffer has to allot him only three because the whole zone was shortchanged.

Because Mr. Jennings has a long, trusted track record, Chevrolet tries to
accommodate him, squeezing an extra Camaro or two from another allocation. In
return, when Mr. Schlaffer calls to say it looks like there are too many
Citations around, Mr. Jennings will likely take a few more to help out and he
will tell his sales force to push them a little harder.

Right now - ever the confident salesman, with a different set of concerns from
Chevrolet, which has made up its corporate mind not to be burned by
overproducing two years in a row - Mr. Jennings claims to be hurting for cars.
''My lot is half-empty,'' he complained, ''and I can't get enough.'' He knows
that Chevrolet can't just rev up an assembly factory for a few hours to catch up
to demand. But, like many dealers, he can resent at times the corporate
paternalism.  ''I'm an independent businessman operating under a franchise,'' he
said. ''I'm not a baby. Let me decide how many cars I need. Sell me the cars.
I'll pay for them. And I can sell them. But not if I don't have them.''

''When business is good and dealers are making money,'' Mr. Cook said in an
understanding tone, ''factory-dealer relations are very good. But when it's not
good, it's not good. They blame it on the factory. The last 42 months have been
very difficult for a lot of Chevrolet dealers. They looked at the factory. They
didn't feel good and they blamed us. But we are optimistic. There are more
bright spots ahead than behind.'' Tuesday mornings, business is slower than
Mondays but better than Wednesdays. At 9:30 that morning, Cindy Menick had
phoned Jennings and talked briefly with Ray Morris, one of the new salesmen,
about a new Camaro. The glass window-roof on her 1978 Oldsmobile had been stolen
for the third time and she was tired of it. Like almost every customer, she
promised to stop by sometime; like only one out of three, she really would, much
to the delight of Mr. Morris, a former life-insurance salesman who happened into
the office on his day off in time to take the call. That morning, Janet Schmidt
had made arrangements to take her parents to look at a new Citation she liked.
Bruce Bitcon had persuaded his father to look at another Camaro that evening
during a work break. Warren and Peggy Peters, who have been considering and
researching several makes of new cars at several dealers in recent weeks, had no
idea yet they would be stopping by at Jennings to examine a Cavalier. But the
Tallaksens did; for the eighth time in a year, their new Cavalier was in for
repairs.

In the service department behind the waiting room, where television soap-opera
characters gasped and sobbed for no audience at all, Modassir Sheikh, a nattily
dressed foreman hired to tighten procedures in that profit center, was again
goading his crew to work thoroughly but quickly, quickly. Steve Greenspan, one
of the nine mechanics, did a $15.75 oil change and lube job in 12 minutes. The
company book says it should take 18 minutes, so Mr. Greenspan, and Jennings
Chevrolet, got an extra six minutes paid work. The foreman was pleased. That
day, 72 jobs -59 customers and 13 in-house projects - would flow through the
service area.

At noon, a truck delivered a lone 1983 Camaro. It was a ''demo,'' a new car that
Jennings rents to its salesmen for a token $12.50 a week. The car had been
ordered 12 weeks before, according to Naomi Wilder's computer records. Despite
all the talk of unsold new cars and all the 1982 model leftovers and all of the
automobile layoffs for lack of sales, there is a shortage of some new-car
models. The older Mr. Jennings had been waiting nearly three months for a
standard Caprice he bought his wife. ''They tell me they need three weeks'
production to justify opening up a plant,'' he said.  It is a far cry from the
Dinah Shore days of volume and more volume, a philosophy that sent a number of
the elder Mr. Jennings's high-flying area competitors into bankruptcy court
after their highvolume businesses ran out of control. ''In these times,'' Mr.
Jennings said in his office, nursing an ankle broken on the golf course,
''you've got to be realistic and think of the whole picture.  The old days, you
were just thinking about moving the maximum number of cars out of here. Now,
you've got to concentrate on cutting costs and selling what you can for a decent
profit and building up the overlooked areas of the business.''

Jennings Chevrolet has tightened its service department, eliminating waits for
appointments and completing repairs when promised. The dealer advertised a $9.95
oil-lube special to attract more service customers, who, it is hoped, will
return to that profit center for other work and, while waiting, might stroll
through the new-car showroom, which is kept brightly lighted and immaculate.
Browsers must be greeted by a salesman within a minute of their entry or both
the elder and younger Mr. Jennings become suddenly stern.

''Today's customers,'' said Mr. Szutz, the veteran salesman. ''come in here with
their consumer guides and mileage handbooks. We used to have people who maybe
shopped one other Chevy dealer. Now, you get some looking at a half-dozen
dealers, from Ford to Chevy to Buick.  They'll come in here five or six times.
And they don't buy on emotion anymore.''

From a national perspective, Mr. Cook of Chevrolet said today's consumer is
value-conscious ''more than ever.'' He added: ''This does not necessarily mean
smaller cars always. With gas prices down, we're selling more medium- and
regular-sized cars. I think this is a temporary glitch. We have almost reached
the point where the consumer and the industry expect economical operation to be
a given, like a roof or headlights. But what they do demand more now, because
they are planning to keep a new car longer than the old days, is value for their
money - in the new-car's construction, its operation, its gas mileage,
dependability. So, when buying a new car, they also look at a dealer's service
department, its reputation for quality and reliability. And you'll see many
dealers improving those areas of their business.''

Mr. Szutz, who will see three or four prospective customers for every actual
buyer, quickly greeted the Peters couple. They were seeking a second car
slightly larger than their current Citation, planning on keeping the larger one
as their lone vehicle when Mr.  Peters retires in six or seven years. Mr.
Peters, an elementaryschool principal, was full of detailed questions about a
Cavalier, its gas mileage, reliability, durability and economy of operation. He
cared nothing for body styling. ''Is this an '82 or '83?'' he asked.

''It's hard to tell,'' replied Mr. Szutz. ''Let me check.'' Although the 1983
models had been on sale for more than three months, many 1982's remained unsold
until G.M. began its special financing plan. Other car makers had offered
similar finance plans, with rates as low as 10.5 percent. ''We get lots of
people here,'' said Mr. Szutz, ''And they don't care what the car is. They say,
'What do you have at 10.9 percent financing?' ''

Mr. Szutz showed Mr. and Mrs. Peters all the 1982 Cavaliers on the lot. More
year-old ''new'' cars were coming because they were selling quickly and because
Mr. Jennings had bought 20 from another dealer who was overstocked and needed
some cash quickly. ''What's the difference between the '82's and '83's?'' asked
Mr. Peters.  ''Colors,'' came the reply. ''And the 10.9 percent financing, of
course.'' Mr. Peters did not buy that day; the couple is considering other
medium-sized models, too; Buicks and Oldsmobiles, for instance. Unlike past
days, many of the basic frames and parts are the same because it makes for
cheaper assembly, and only a few hundred dollars in cosmetic differences
separate them. Mr. and Mrs.  Peters left to ponder further. They said they would
be back, and Mr.  Szutz would phone them in two days to keep in touch.

At about the same time, Mrs. Menick was writing a check for Mr.  Morris for the
1982 Camaro to replace her 1978 Olds. Like an increasing number of customers
this year, according to auto researchers, her interest in economy, somewhat
tinged perhaps by dimming memories of a gas shortage, was colored by a desire
for comfort and a greater concern with ''performance.''

''Detroit panicked and rushed into the economy car, thinking it had to be a
plain box,'' said David Power of J.D. Power & Associates, California research
consultants. ''Now with some time and the success of the sportier Japanese
models, American car makers are going back to redefine their economy car not for
more muscle perhaps, but for better handling and zip to sell.'' The stress on
economy remains, but now the ads also talk of ''performance'' and show sleek
models flashing by at speeds rarely achieved between the home and the
supermarket.

Because Mrs. Menick was buying a car that the company wanted to move quickly,
she got a better trade-in deal. Nowadays, the markup (the difference between
list price and cost) is 13 to 16 percent on each new car, down from the 20
percent of bygone years. At Jennings, the average profit per new car is
approximately $700, with the salesman receiving between $50 and $150 per car,
depending on how hard he bargained for the company. But the dealer warns its
employees not to oversell. ''You never gain by overpromising,'' says the elder
Mr. Jennings. ''People are too smart for that now.''

As a result of this approach, the Tallaksens came back to Jennings Chevrolet
despite the persistent carburetor problems with their 1982 Cavalier. They said
that any car maker could produce a lemon and that they were considering trading
in their used '82 Cavalier on a new '82 Citation, which, with the bargain
financing, would actually reduce their monthly payments.

''Wow!'' Fred Krull exclaimed at the five-digit, dealers' suggested retail cost
that few nondealers would suggest to anyone. ''Look at that price!'' Mr. Krull
and his family had been passing by the Jennings showroom and stopped to examine
a van. Swiftly, Mark Carey, a salesman accustomed to such ''sticker shock,''
ignored the remark and moved into his pitch on the vehicle's qualities and
benefits.  ''Customers come in here with three major concerns,'' Mr. Carey said
later. ''Price, price and price. You can't argue that $19,000 is a small price.
But you can point out everything that the customer gets for his money; a lot
more seem interested in comfort these days. And you have to lead people more
now. You ask someone if he wants to take a test drive and, without exception,
he'll say no. So you point out the car's good points, then excuse yourself and a
couple minutes later you drive up in a new car, wave them over, have them sit
down and then you're off on a short ride.'' Jennings Chevrolet employees were
not looking forward to early 1983, after the 10.9 percent financing offer
expired on Dec. 31. That plan, plus salesmen's incentives and old-fashioned
hustle, combined to push Jennings well past the $10 million new-car sales figure
by the end of October. A decent December 1982 - which, by definition, would not
be as ''decent'' as, say, December 1962 - would involve some luck in used-car
sales and enough broken things in cars already on the road to keep the service,
parts and body shops fully busy.  The senior Mr. Jennings, his wife, Patti, and
the company's third owner, the junior Mr. Jennings, projected a satisfying $13
million gross income for 1982. Eighty percent - or $10.4 million -of this gross
income is expected from car sales alone -83 percent from newcar sales, 17
percent from sales of used cars. (The other 20 percent of gross income would
come from parts, service and the body shop.)

That gross sales figure, which is nearly twice the average for dealers in the
National Automobile Dealers Association, is not much different from recent
years. But no growth seems better than the corporate death of bankruptcy that
has struck nearby dealers. If the older Mr. Jennings, who becomes president of
the dealers' association next year, won't be dancing for joy over 1982, he won't
have to give up his Florida condominium, either. ''This business is changing
very rapidly,'' he said. ''My son will be better than I was. He'll have to be to
stay in business. It will all depend on tough professional management. No more
flying by the seat of your pants or you'll lose your shirt.''

And there is, too, one other change in the car business of as yet undetermined
significance. John Ericson was feeling good about making Janet Schmidt, his
latest customer, feel good about her bargaining savvy in the dealing for her new
Citation. He was leaning against a new car after the sale, his legs crossed at
the ankles and his arms folded across the chest in the classic
car-salesman-waiting-for-acustomer pose. He was asked about that strange but
traditional rite of customers kicking the tires of new cars. ''I don't know why
they ever did,'' he said, ''but now they don't.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Ericson, salesman, in showroom (Page 16)
photos of customers examining new cars (Page 18 and 19) photos of service
department and of George Davis, Chevy's No. 1

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NUCLEAR FREEZE FRAME

SECTION: Section 6; Page 78, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 95 words


As Russell Baker began to develop his point that the Government has been telling
the public they don't know enough about the freeze to have an opinion, and
should leave the matter to ''experts,'' I started asking myself, ''Where have I
heard this before?'' I remembered. Lyndon Johnson used the same argument to
quell opposition to the Vietnam War.

Carried to an extreme, the notion that a populace can have only limited
knowledge of important domestic and foreign issues is a dangerous one. It
fosters elitism and government by secrecy.  DAVID NEMIROFF New York City

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A PRIVATE PRIVATE EYE

BYLINE: By David Quammen; David Quammen's second novel, ''The Zolta
Configuration,'' will be published this spring.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 739 words


SUN DOGS By Robert Olen Butler.  218 pp. New York: Horizon Press. $12.95.

HE private investigator Wilson Hand, protagonist of Robert Olen Butler's second
novel, is a man in flight from clutter. Don't ask why; throughout ''Sun Dogs''
the author jealously hoards that secret of character and quite a few others. Mr.
Butler evidently believes it is enough for readers simply to know that Wilson is
possessed by this ineffable loathing and fear of clutter. And so we are reminded
again and again, the word itself recurring persistently, as though what is
lacking in penetration can be made up by iteration. Two examples of many: ''He
wanted to strip away the clutter of things.'' ''The clutter stuffed itself into
Wilson's head.'' For Wilson Hand, definitely no clutter.

We are permitted to know only other things about this very private and neat man.
First, his ex-wife has just killed herself with a 14-floor leap onto a parked
car. Second, Wilson himself once spent seven days as a prisoner of war under
guard in a shack near Hanoi.  What is the full story of Wilson's captive
experience and of its continuing psychological hold on him? What might be its
connection with his loathing of clutter or with the particular enterprise he has
undertaken as the novel begins? Neither Wilson nor Mr. Butler are saying. Eager
for an excuse to escape the septic cacophany of New York, Wilson has accepted a
job as security investigator for an oil company in Alaska (a place he mistakenly
hoped to find free of clutter). His initial assignment involves tracing the
theft of certain important documents - seismic records, maps, reports on the
firm's identified oil reserves - but that little mystery, with its unsurprising
solution, is dealt with perfunctorily by both the novelist and his detective.
Mr. Butler and Wilson are more fascinated by larger matters.

On his arrival in Anchorage Wilson first glimpses the ''sun dogs'' of the title,
a pair of eerie atmospheric lights flanking the sun, smaller than it but nearly
as bright. That illusion is created by ''reflections of ice in the high, thin
air. In this country sun dogs could suddenly appear and run with the sun, mock
it, speak to it of things unseen, things that claimed a special knowledge, that
could take on the sun's very light.'' Of course, these sun dogs represent (as
the dust jacket too helpfully informs us) the continued haunting presence of the
P.O.W. experience and the dead ex-wife. As such they make a nice conceit, the
best of Mr. Butler's weighty symbols. But Wilson soon leaves Anchorage and the
sun; he flies up north to the site of the document thefts, a bleak industrial
outpost called Moonbase on Alaska's notorious North Slope.  There he maunders
away most of the novel, in cold carnal adventures with another displaced soul
named Marta, about whom Wilson learns little more than her insatiable appetite
for men and her hatred for small talk. Yet even in that he and Marta are well
matched, prattle being merely a verbal form of clutter.  Unfortunately, the
relationship with Marta leads nowhere, neither for Wilson nor for us readers.
The Marta subplot is just a long blind alley, sensuous at moments but
repetitive, providing Wilson with a strained excuse to feel betrayed and thereby
contributing to his already highly advanced case of angst. Like the halfhearted
mystery subplot, it gives the impression that Mr. Butler's novelistic method
does not include the luxury of a premeditated plot outline.

In the abstract, the elements of ''Sun Dogs'' (mystery tale set in the exotic
terrain of northern Alaska during the long winter night, the private eye plagued
by his own Vietnam memories) seem to me very promising, but the book itself is a
disappointment. It contains some powerful moments, some engrossing scenes and
deft touches, but there is little momentum, no satisfying pattern, none of the
magic of synergy. The final long chapter is quite potent, in the vein of Jack
London, but has almost nothing to do with what has gone before.

To the very end we have only superficial impressions of Wilson Hand, a
progression of arbitrary acts with barely imaginable motivations, plus a few pat
motifs that pretend to depth - the dead woman, the captivity. As he sits
freezing and desperate in his snow cave, out in the darkened Brooks Range, I
can't help but picture him whispering hoarsely, as portentous as Conrad's Kurtz,
''The clutter!  The clutter!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of dogsled and person

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT THE AMERASIAN ACT IS NOT MEANT TO DO

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 358 words


To the Editor:

I would like to correct a misunderstanding which seems to have arisen about the
new Amerasian Immigration Act.  A news story on Dec. 22 reported that
representatives of several voluntary agencies think the law won't work because
it provides only for the immigration of Amerasian sons and daughters and not
their mothers or other relatives.

he problem is not with the law but with the agencies' attempt to use the law for
people other than those it was designed to help.  The bill was written to assist
three sets of Amerasians: orphans, young people who are approaching or have
reached adulthood and youngsters whose mothers have begged U.S. citizens and
agencies to take their children and give them a new life in America. (Father
Alfred Keane, the Maryknoll priest who asked me to write the bill, told of many
mothers who had asked him during his 20 years in Korea to do just that.)

The law was based on the belief that Amerasians, as sons and daughters of U.S.
fathers, should have the same first priority in obtaining visas into the United
States that is accorded all other offspring of U.S. citizens. It was never
intended as a vehicle to pressure Amerasians living with their mothers and other
family members to leave their families and come to the United States.

Yes, the Vietnamese officials are indicating they have many Amerasians who want
to emigrate with their families. And they are doing just that under the existing
Orderly Departure Program, which was not negated by the Amerasian law.

The other major Amerasian population is in Korea, where our presence dates back
much farther and where most of the interest in coming to the United States is
among older Amerasians. Additionally, when an Amerasian becomes a U.S. citizen
and reaches age 21, he receives special priority in obtaining visas for his
immediate family to also immigrate here.

The extended families of Amerasians may be a problem in the eyes of the
volunteer agencies. But that is not a problem with which the Amerasians
Immigration Act was intended to deal.  STEWART B. MCKINNEY Member of Congress,
4th Dist., Conn.  Washington, Jan. 4, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Trial Set for 3 On Exports

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 143 words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va., Jan. 10


Two men, one of them a former C.I.A. agent, pleaded not guilty today to charges
of violating the Export Administration Act. They and another man, all indicted
last week, are accused of conspiring to ship a $5 million diesel-engine assembly
line to the Soviet Union. The Commerce Department restricts such exports.

The third defendant, a Canadian, also appeared in United States District Court
here. His lawyer, William Moffitt, argued that American courts lack
jurisdiction. His argument was accepted as a plea for his client of not guilty,
and all three defendants were ordered to face trial March 1.

They are Stephen G. Carter of Palatine, Ill.; Paul Sakwa of Washington, and
Gerald F. McCall of Toronto. Mr. Sakwa worked for the Central Intelligence
Agency from 1952 to 1962 and reportedly was its chief of covert activities in
Vietnam for two years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 12, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MISSOURI GOVERNOR PROPOSES STEPS TO FIGHT DIOXIN CRISIS

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: JEFFERSON CITY, Mo., Jan. 11


Gov. Christopher S. Bond today asked the Missouri Legislature for new measures
to cope with the growing problem of dioxin contamination in the state.

Saying that the problem could lead to ''public hysteria'' if not handled
properly, the Governor asked for the creation of a ''Missouri Superfund,''
financed by additional taxes on the transporters and producers of hazardous
wastes, to clean up possible future waste sites. He also said he would soon
appoint a committee of scientific and lay people to work on a ''comprehensive
and permanent solution'' to the dioxin ''crisis.''

The Governor's actions, disclosed in his annual State of the State Address to
the Legislature, were prompted by the discovery in recent months that a waste
hauler, Russell Bliss, contaminated sites all over the state with the chemical.
The number of contaminated sites is still uncertain.

The dioxin was originally produced as an unwanted byproduct by a factory in
Verona, Mo., that made Agent Orange, a herbicide used to defoliate jungles in
the Vietnam War. The effects of dioxin on humans are not fully understood, but
on the basis of animal tests scientists say it is the most toxic chemical known
to man.

Residents Are Urged to Leave

The Missouri dioxin crisis has come to a head in Times Beach, a community near
St. Louis. A decade ago, the unpaved streets of Times Beach were sprayed with
dioxin-tainted oil as a dust-control measure. It is feared that recent floods
there stirred up the dioxin and the Federal Centers for Disease Control recently
urged residents to leave the town.

However, today the Missouri Department of Natural Resources said that initial,
though still inconclusive, results of tests conducted after the flood had showed
no traceable levels of dioxin inside two homes.

Whatever the outcome at Times Beach, Government officials here are concerned
about potential environmental crises in other parts of the state. Mr. Bond today
proposed the hiring of seven new environmental health officers, an additional
hazardous waste criminal investigator and three environmental landfill
specialists. He also called on the lawmakers to appropriate $1 million
immediately to match Federal funds available from the special fund used to clean
up hazardous waste sites.

Termed a Nationwide Problem

''Unfortunately, the Missouri dioxin problem does not stop with Times Beach or
Jefferson County or Verona,'' the Governor said.  ''Because hazardous waste
generators and haulers were unregulated for so many years in Missouri and in the
rest of the country, the problem of dioxin and other hazardous chemicals is
likely to reappear throughout Missouri, as it will throughout the nation, for
years to come.''

Fred A. Lafser, director of the Department of Natural Resources, said in an
interview today that Missouri official had alerted environmental officials in
neighboring Illinois about possible sites where Mr. Bliss might have deposited
toxic wastes in that state. Mr.  Bliss, the target of legal suits by the State
of Missouri, has said that he was unaware that the waste oil he sold was
contaminated.

In an interview after his speech, Governor Bond said that he hoped Missouri
would emerge from the crisis as a leader in developing and applying waste
cleanup technology that could be followed should similar problems arise in other
parts of the country.

----

Tests Hint Debris Is Safe

ST. LOUIS, Jan. 11 (UPI) - The Environmental Protection Agency today released
preliminary results of tests on 10 composite samples indicating that flood
debris in Times Beach is not contaminated with dioxin.

A spokesman for the Federal Emergency Management Agency said the environmental
agency's tests, conducted with silt on the debris that had been piled in the
streets of Times Beach, showed concentrations of less than one part per billion.

The spokesman said the test results ''serve as a preliminary indication that
dioxin probably does not exist in the silt associated with the debris in
concentrations greater than one part per billion.''

The authorities had suspected that record flooding that swept through the
community in early December had contaminated the debris.



Court Approves Disposal Plan

ST. LOUIS, Jan. 11 (AP) - An appellate court panel cleared the way tonight for
the state to move the possibly contaminated flood debris from Times Beach to a
landfill 45 miles away.

James Long, a spokesman for the Missouri Department of Natural Resources, said
the state hoped to begin moving the rubble from last month's flooding on the
Meramec River to the landfill in a neighboring county Wednesday morning.

On Monday night Judge Edward D. Hodge of Circuit Court had ordered Warren
County, where the landfill is situated, to come up with $75,000 by 9 P.M.
Tuesday as a surety bond on a restraining order against transfer of the rubble
into the county. Timothy M. Joyce, a prosecuting attorney for the county, had
filed a petition to dissolve the bond, saying it was against state law to
require a bond on a temporary restraining order.

Tonight, however, the Missouri Court of Appeals for the eastern district denied
the petition to dissolve the bond, and the county failed to raise the money.
That cleared the way for the transfer of the silt-covered debris -rotting
clothes and household goods -to a site near Wright City, which is about 45 miles
west of St. Louis.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 12, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

60-MINUTE GOURMET

BYLINE: By Pierre Franey

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 5; Living Desk

LENGTH: 625 words


IN the past few years the cooks of this country have become far more creative
and adventurous than ever before. They seem more willing to go far afield in the
uses of herbs and spices and the matching of textures and flavors.

I recently had a letter from a reader, Dieter G. Wilke, who volunteered a recipe
for mussels Far Eastern-style. He said he was aware of my own predilection for
mussels, which I prefer to oysters and clams for cooking. But he said he was
about to be sent to Germany for a tour of duty with the Army and was sending me
the recipe in appreciation for some he had read in this column.

''This is,'' he said, ''my version of moules a la mariniere.'' He added that he
had created the dish during his stay in Vietnam and that he called it ''Moules
Extreme-Orient,'' or mussels Far Easternstyle.

To prepare the mussels he steamed them in fresh herbs characteristic of the
Vietnamese kitchen: ginger, garlic, scallions and coriander.

The preparation of the dish is simple and the results admirable.  Take
well-scrubbed mussels, combine them in a kettle with herbs and dry white wine
and cook, closely covered, over relatively high heat for about six minutes.
Serve in soup bowls with a crusty loaf of French bread and a fairly robust,
well-seasoned salad.

When I served this dish recently in my home, I accompanied it with the bread and
a salad consisting of watercress, endives, mushrooms and a small amount of
freshly grated Gruyere cheese. The salad dressing consisted of sour cream,
mustard, garlic, oil and vinegar.

Dieter G. Wilke's Moules Extreme-Orient

5 pounds mussels, well scrubbed
2 red ripe tomatoes, about 3/4 pound (see note)
1/4 cup olive oil
1 tablespoon finely minced garlic
1 1/2 tablespoons grated fresh ginger
3/4 cup finely chopped scallions
1 teaspoon or more finely chopped, seeded, deveined hot red or green chili
1/4 cup chopped fresh basil or 1 tablespoon dried
1/4 cup chopped fresh parsley
1 cup dry white wine
2 tablespoons chopped fresh coriander.

1. Clean and drain the mussels and set aside.

2. Cut the tomatoes into 1/4-inch cubes and set aside.

3. Heat the oil in a skillet and add the garlic, ginger and scallions. Cook,
stirring, about 1 minute.

4. Add the tomatoes and mussels and scatter the chili, basil, parsley and
coriander over all. Add the wine, cover and cook over relatively high heat,
stirring occasionally and shaking the kettle so as to redistribute the mussels,
about 5 minutes or until all the mussels open. Serve the mussels and liquid in
soup bowls.

Yield: 4 servings.

NOTE: Good hothouse tomatoes may be used for this recipe, or use cherry
tomatoes, which generally Have more flavor.

Watercress, Endive and Mushroom Salad

1 bunch watercress
2 large, compact heads Belgian endive
1/2 pound fresh, unblemished mushrooms
3/4 cup finely grated Gruyere or Swiss cheese
1/2 teaspoon finely chopped garlic
1 tablespoon imported mustard
1/2 cup sour cream
Salt to taste if desired
Freshly ground pepper to taste
2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar
1/4 cup corn, peanut or vegetable oil.

1. Trim off and discard the tough stem ends of the watercress. Put the tender
leaves and remaining stems in a salad bowl.

2. Cut off the bottoms of each head of endive. Cut each head into 1-inch lengths
and separate the leaves. There should be about 2 cups. Add it to the salad bowl.

3. Rinse the mushrooms and pat dry. Cut them into thin slices.  There should be
about 1 1/2 cups. Add to the salad bowl.

4. Sprinkle the greens with the cheese.

5. Blend in a separate bowl the garlic, mustard and sour cream. Add salt and
pepper. Stir in the vinegar and the oil.

6. Pour the sauce over the salad greens and toss to blend.  Yield: 4 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 13, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN CHOOSES EX-REP HECKLER TO BE THE NEW SECRETARY OF HEALTH

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


President Reagan announced today that he would nominate Margaret M. Heckler, a
former Representative from Massachusetts, to succeed Richard S. Schweiker as
Secretary of Health and Human Services.

If confirmed by the Senate, Mrs. Heckler would head the largest Cabinet
department, which spent more than $275 billion last year. In her bid for
re-election last fall in a reapportioned district, Mrs.  Heckler was defeated by
a Democratic incumbent, Representative Barney Frank, who portrayed the election
as a referendum on President Reagan's economic and military policies.

Mr. Reagan also announced today his intention to nominate John A.  Svahn, the
Commissioner of Social Security, to be Under Secretary of Health and Human
Services. Mr. Svahn, who is 39 years old, served as director of the California
Department of Social Welfare when Mr.  Reagan was Governor in the early 1970's.
If confirmed as Under Secretary, Mr. Svahn would succeed David B. Swoap, who
returned to California this month to join the Cabinet of the state's new
Republican Governor, George Deukmejian.

Second Woman for Cabinet

Mrs. Heckler, 51, is the second woman named to President Reagan's Cabinet in a
week. He chose Elizabeth H. Dole, a White House assistant for liaison to special
interest groups, as Secretary of Transportation, replacing

In Congress, Mrs. Heckler, a moderate Republican, supported the proposed Federal
equal rights amendment, Government programs for Vietnam veterans and Federal day
care subsidies for working parents.  But she disagreed with many women's groups
on the abortion issue, voting against using Federal money to pay for abortions.
For that reason, the National Women's Political Caucus supported Mrs.  Heckler's
Democratic opponents in 1980 and 1982 even though she helped found the
Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues in 1978.  After serving in the House for
16 years, she had more seniority than any other woman in Congress. In an
exchange of letters and in a brief ceremony in the East Room of the White House
today, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Schweiker praised each other, as Presidents and
departing Cabinet officers often do.

In the letter accepting his resignation, Mr. Reagan said, ''More than anyone
else, you have been responsible for honoring my firm commitment that society's
safety net be maintained, so that Americans who require our help in times of
need will receive it.'' The President said Mr. Schweiker, the fourth member of
his Cabinet to resign, had performed with ''unexcelled competence and
compassion.''

Mr. Schweiker, who served in Congress for 20 years, is leaving the Government to
become president of the American Council of Life Insurance, the trade and
lobbying organization for 572 life insurance companies. The council is involved
in a wide range of tax and pension issues pending in Congress, state
legislatures and Federal and state regulatory agencies.

At a news conference, Mr. Schweiker said he was not leaving because of
dissatisfaction or disagreements with the Administration.  Referring to his job
offer from the life insurance industry, he said, ''This was a very rewarding,
unique opportunity that probably will not occur again.'' Mr. Schweiker had
apparently been given a secondary role in deliberations on Social Security and
the budget for his department next year, but he denied that he had been excluded
from the ''inner circles'' at the White House and the Office of Management and
Budget.

In terms of politics and dollars, the biggest issues that will face the new
Secretary are Social Security and Medicare, the health insurance program for the
elderly. , He will have to defend President Reagan's budget proposals in
Congressional hearings.

At the news conference today, Mr. Schweiker was repeatedly asked about the
ethics of leaving his present job to work for the life insurance industry, which
is heavily involved in writing health insurance. As Secretary, Mr. Schweiker was
responsible for Medicare, the nation's largest health insurance program.

Mr. Schweiker portrayed the health and life insurance industries as separate
entities, saying, ''Health policies are none of the life insurance industry's
business.''

Provide Much Health Insurance

In fact, ''a large share of private health insurance for Americans is provided
by life insurance companies,'' according to a reference book published by the
American Council of Life Insurance. In 1981 life insurance companies received
$31.8 billion, or 29.5 percent of their premium receipts, from health insurance,
and most of the big life insurance companies offer health insurance too,
according to a council spokesman.

Organizations concerned with national health policy expressed reservations about
the abrupt shift at top levels of the Reagan Administration. The American
Medical Association said major groups involved in the delivery of health care
should have been consulted.  The association, in a statement, said its officers
were ''surprised and deeply disappointed at the process,'' but eager to know
Mrs.  Heckler's views on health care.

Dr. Anthony Robbins, president of the American Public Health Association, which
includes many state and local health officials, said: ''It's hard to believe the
change could come at a worse time.  It takes a new Secretary a long time to
decide which programs she wants to defend. This will provide an opportunity for
the White House and the Office of Management and Budget to get the upper hand.'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan and Margaret Heckler photo of
Richard Schweiker

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 13, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WHO IS IN AND WHO IS OUT IN ARMS CONTROL AGENCY SHUFFLE;
Eugene V. Rostow

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 397 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


Since the early days of World War II, when he opposed the internment of United
States citizens of Japanese descent, Eugene V. Rostow has been involved, off and
on, in public disputes.

He angered many business leaders with a book in which he called for reorganizing
the oil industry. In Lyndon Johnson's Presidency, he was a vigorous advocate of
armed intervention in the Dominican Republic when a revolution appeared to
threaten. He became a critic of segments of the academic community when they
questioned American policies in Vietnam.

So when Mr. Rostow, 69 years old, was named director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency, it was widely expected that, sooner or later, he would get
into major quarrels.

Later examinations of the policy differences that led to Mr.  Reagan's decision
to ask Mr. Rostow to step down are likely to uncover a number of reasons for his
downfall.

Part of the problem, some acquaintances say, was that he was a restless doer in
a job that many officials and staunch conservatives viewed with ambivalence.
They were not convinced that the time was ripe for major arms talks or that when
the time came for such talks that Mr. Rostow, a conservative Democrat who
supported Mr. Reagan in 1980, was the man for the job.

As one longtime acquaintance, and former supporter, put it, ''He hasn't got a
friend left where it counts.'' A 1933 Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Yale, Mr.
Rostow took a law degree there and, after briefly practicing law in New York,
returned to Yale and joined the law school faculty. He is now to return as
Sterling Professor of Law and Public Affairs, according to Walter Littel,
director of public information, who said that before announcing his resignation,
Mr. Rostow called Harry Wellington, dean of the law school, and offered his
services.

Mr. Rostow had risen to dean before leaving in 1966 to become Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs in the Johnson Administration.

He returned to Yale when President Johnson left office and then was summoned
once more to Washington by Mr. Reagan, who knew him as a supporter and as a
founder of the Committee on the Present Danger, a group dedicated to increasing
United States military might. Mr.  Rostow picked up where he had left off when
it came to controversy, quarreling with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
over control of disarmament policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 13, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
Dioxin Level Down In State Building

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 173 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Jan. 12


New tests taken at the Binghamton state office building show that levels of
dioxin and another toxic chemical are near those ''deemed safe for human
occupation,'' state officials reported today.

Air samples, taken in November by the State Health Department, found that dioxin
was nearly undetectable and that dibenzofuran was below the level judged
dangerous for humans. However, officials said the tests did not mean that the
building was ready to be reoccupied.

A fire in a transformer on Feb. 5, 1981, released cancer-linked polychlorinated
biphenyls, or PCB's, throughout the 18-story building by the ventilation system.
Investigators found that the fire had also produced traces of potentially more
dangerous dioxin and dibenzofuran. The building has been closed since the fire.

Dioxin was a component of Agent Orange, the Vietnam-era defoliant that some
veterans blame for health problems ranging from skin rashes to cancer.
Dibenzofuran is from the same family of chemicals as dioxin, but is considered
somewhat less toxic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 13, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
WHY 'PLENTY' WINS OVER AMERICANS

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1608 words


DAVID HARE'S ''Plenty'' is an anomaly, all right. It's not only the one piece of
brilliant theater to arrive on Broadway this season, but it's also that rare
English play to receive a stronger critical and popular response on this side of
the Atlantic than at home.

According to Mr. Hare in a recent interview, this phenomenon may have to do with
American theatergoers' distance from the post-World War II English history that
his play describes. While the audiences who saw ''Plenty'' at London's National
Theater in 1978 were antagonized by the scabrous references to the Suez debacle
and other benchmarks of the Empire's postwar decline, Americans have no pride
invested in such matters and aren't affronted by their presentation on stage.

But this alone doesn't explain the play's appeal here. If we are not offended by
Mr. Hare's lacerating view of English history, neither are we overly stimulated
by it. We've long ago assimilated John Osborne's dissections of the same period,
and, besides, we have more pressing matters of our own to worry about than
England's misfortunes. It's in a more indirect way that our distance from the
social background of ''Plenty'' changes our perspective on the work.  Because we
don't focus on that background, we are liberated, as English audiences
apparently were not, to study the play's foreground and see clearly what
''Plenty'' is really about. And what we find is that ''Plenty'' isn't
parochially about England - it's about ''plenty'' and the people who squander
it. Surely it's not happenstance that Mr. Hare makes more references to food and
gluttony than to Anthony Eden.

Susan Traherne, the heroine portrayed so extraordinarily by Kate Nelligan, has
plenty of everything - of intelligence, of sex appeal, of money, of people who
love her. She also has many high ideals, which were forged when she served as a
teen-age courier for the French Resistance during the war. But when her postwar
society fails to live up to her utopian dreams, she doesn't honorably keep up
the fight for a better world. Instead, she moves into the materialistic
mainstream - even as she hypocritically attacks others for doing the same -and
becomes a selfish, lying and destructive malcontent. Susan would rather inflict
infinite pain on everyone around her than face up to her own failure to live up
to her high principles. She could be any idealist anywhere who sells out for the
insidious blandishments of ''plenty.''

Seeing the play again on Broadway - where it is no less stunning than it was at
the Public - I was also struck by the author's seemingly irrelevant digression
about F. Scott Fitzgerald. But perhaps Susan also has something of Daisy
Buchanan about her: They are both magnetic, spoiled, privileged women who, as
''The Great Gatsby'' has it, ''smashed up things and creatures and then
retreated back into their money or their vast carelessness'' ''and let other
people clean up the mess they had made.'' Indeed, that Fitzgerald passage is
paraphrased in ''Plenty'' by Susan's discarded workingclass lover, who explodes
at the ''cool and dangerous'' heroine for idly wrecking other people's lives.

Susan's white-flamed neuroticism also recalls Hedda Gabler (gun included), as
well as one of the most memorable movie heroines of the 1960's - the title
character played by Julie Christie in Richard Lester's ''Petulia.'' Like Susan,
the equally breakdown-prone Petulia blames everyone except herself for the way
her world - the hip, moneyed San Francisco of the Vietnam era - has gone wrong.

Actually, ''Petulia'' and ''Plenty'' have a lot in common. Both works use a
fractionalized time scheme that esthetically suggests the social and
psychological collapse that befell the United States and England at home as they
carried out unpopular, calamitous military adventures in the East. Is Mr. Hare,
who came of age in the 1960's, thinking as much of Vietnam America as Suez
England? Maybe not. But I do feel that our strong response to ''Plenty'' has
little to do with our distance from England. It is our close proximity to our
own divided homefront of ''plenty'' that sucks us into Mr.Hare's apocalyptic
landscape.

In contrast to ''Plenty,'' most other British imports this season do suffer from
the usual culture gap. Nell Dunn's ''Steaming'' is a well-meaning feminist
comedy that might have repeated its English success in New York if only it had
been written a dozen years ago.  Miss Dunn's otherwise bright female Londoners
take two acts of debate to decide that they have a right to be ''just as
important as men.'' We keep wondering why it takes them so long to raise their
consciousness to a level that is second-nature for equivalent American women
(and even many men). In the end, we must assume that the women's movement is at
a far more nascent stage in England than here. While Miss Dunn's London
audiences find the ideology in ''Steaming'' revelatory and controversial, we
find it predictable and unassailable.

Caryl Churchill's ''Top Girls,'' though it towers above ''Steaming'' both
theatrically and intellectually, also is somewhat removed from American
experience. The play is a ringing indictment of capitalism, which Miss Churchill
sees as forcing women to adopt all the worst traits of men if they want to
''make it'' in the economic marketplace. But the capitalist system that the
playwright villifies is more British than American: its class distinctions are
rigid and codified.

In ''Top Girls,'' a ''successful'' woman is defined by Marlene - a ruthless,
power-crazed business executive who steps on her sisters to get to the top. The
only other contemporary women we see, led by Marlene's own sister and daughter,
are proletarian losers at the bottom of the social heap. What's missing in
between these dialectical extremes are those women who find success without
transforming themselves into coldblooded men. ''Top Girls'' only makes
ideological sense in an American context if you believe women can only choose
between being either the Faye Dunaway character in ''Network'' or an
assembly-line worker.

The other culture gap affecting ''Top Girls,'' albeit benignly, has to do with
its staging. Even more than her previous ''Cloud 9,'' Miss Churchill's new play
offers remarkably inventive theatrical devices involving the scrambling of time
and the use of historical fantasy.  There are also stage waits and pauses that
can be trance-inducing.  Those who find these devices troublesome tend to blame
the English director, Max Stafford-Clark. What ''Top Girls'' needs, they say, is
the fast-paced, spiffy direction that Tommy Tune gave to the New York version of
''Cloud 9.''

Much as I admire Mr. Tune's staging of ''Cloud 9,'' I disagree with this line of
thought. Must every play be slicked up for American consumption? It's
fascinating, even exotic, to watch Mr.  Stafford-Clark's own considered approach
to ''Top Girls,'' which he developed with the playwright at the Royal Court
Theater. Let's be grateful that Joseph Papp imported the production intact,
thereby forcing us to reckon with a foreign theatrical style that provokes
thought and healthy argument instead of easy applause.

Meanwhile, you may be asking, why are there virtually no new American plays on
Broadway to pull the season out of its slump?  Commercial producers, who are
loathe to blame themselves when things go wrong in the theater, have a new
culprit to hold accountable for the current mess: Hollywood. As an executive of
the Shubert Organization was quoted in a recent article in The New York Times,
''There is no question that people who would otherwise be writing for the
theater are writing for television and film.''

Now who are these people? It is true that some notable playwrights have written
movies lately: Murray Schisgal (who co-authored ''Tootsie''), David Rabe (''I'm
Dancing as Fast as I Can''), John Guare (''Atlantic City''), David Mamet (''The
Verdict''). However, it cannot be claimed that these writers have abandoned the
theater for movie work. Mr. Schisgal, Mr. Rabe and Mr. Mamet all had plays
produced in New York last year - ''Twice Around the Park,'' ''Goose and Tom
Tom'' and ''Edmond,'' respectively. Mr. Guare had two new plays, ''Lydie
Breeze'' and ''Gardenia,'' on view as ''Atlantic City'' came out. And while one
might argue that such other screenwriters as Bo Goldman (''Shoot the Moon'') and
Steve Tesich (''The World According to Garp'') are reformed theatermen who seem
ensconsed in tinsel town, they are part of a tiny group.

The vast majority of serious American playwrights regularly turn out new
theatrical work: Sam Shepard, Lanford Wilson, Christopher Durang, Beth Henley,
Marsha Norman, Jules Feiffer, Thomas Babe, Ronald Ribman, Charles Fuller,
Tennessee Williams, Arthur Miller and Edward Albee - just to provide a partial,
arbitrary list. Some of them write screenplays on the side for pleasure or money
- just like virtually all modern American and English playwrights before them -
but they haven't run off permanently to Hollywood. They remain committed to the
theater, bless them, no matter what.

The real question these days is whether the commercial theater is truly
committed to them - or is capable of wooing those unknown Eugene O'Neills, even
in Hollywood, who might be recruited to write plays. In the Who's Who section of
the Playbill for the Shubert Organization's ''Good,'' one finds a list of 10
Shubert shows of recent seasons. The list contains English imports, musicals and
pickups from regional theaters, some of them distinguished. But there is not one
premiere production of a new play by an American writer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Kate Nelligan photo of Julie Christie

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 15, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WIFE MAY NOT KEEP ALL OF P.O.W.'S PAY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 419 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 14


A three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals here has ruled that a
woman who lived with another man while her husband was a prisoner of war in
North Vietnam was entitled to some of his pay but not the full $122,000 the Air
Force is said to have given her.

The panel said the Air Force should have reduced the payments to Shirley Cherry
a month after it was told she was being unfaithful to her husband, Col. Fred V.
Cherry of Suffolk, Va. The court held that a month was enough time for the Air
Force to investigate the allegations.

The court said the United States Court of Claims had been too lenient in its
ruling that the Air Force did not have to reduce payments until 90 days after
learning of the wife's unfaithfulness.  The full payments continued even after
she bore a child fathered by the other man, according to court papers.

Colonel Cherry, who was a prisoner of war from 1965 to 1973, sued, contending
that he was entitled to the $122,000 because the Air Force had failed to protect
his interests.

Wife Entitled to 40%

Both courts agreed that Mrs. Cherry was entitled to 40 percent of his pay
because she had cared for their four children. But the appeals court instructed
the Court of Claims to consider whether those payments should have been reduced
after two of the children became 18 years old. The appeals court also told the
lower court to calculate how much Colonel Cherry was entitled to get.

Colonel Cherry had asked the appeals court to rule that the payments should have
been cut off a year earlier, after his sister reported to the Air Force that
another man was living with his wife.

But the appeals court, agreeing with the lower court, said that while the Air
Force had the responsibility to protect Colonel Cherry's financial interests,
''It is neither appropriate nor desirable for the Air Force to become involved
as a policeman in marital affairs.''

However, the Air Force should have investigated swiftly when Mrs.  Cherry
withdrew emergency funds from Colonel Cherry's account to pay a private doctor
for performing ''a serious stomach operation'' that turned out to be the
delivery of the child.

She was entitled to medical treatment in a military hospital, and so the Air
Force properly investigated whether she was wasting his money, both courts
ruled. The lower court, however, said the Air Force was entitled to continuing
payments to her for 90 days while the appeals court said its investigation
should have been conducted faster than that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 15, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FORGOTTEN AMERICANS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 94 words


A sign in a Veterans Administration Hospital reads, ''The Price of Freedom Is
Visible Here,'' and the U.S.O. has not forgotten the men and women who have
fought for the nation. The friendly smile of a volunteer and the red, white and
blue U.S.O. banner make the Vietnam veterans in the 12 V.A. hospitals in the
metropolitan area as well as the servicemen from World War I and World War II
feel that their sacrifices are appreciated.

Tax-deductible gifts may be sent to the U.S.O. of Metropolitan New York, 110
East 42d Street, Suite 1812, New York, N.Y. 10017.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CBS WINS APPEAL OVER '60 MINUTES';
Excerpts from ruling, page 31.

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 807 words


A Federal appeals panel yesterday overturned a lower court's order and ruled
that CBS News may broadcast a ''60 Minutes'' segment tonight on police conduct
in New Orleans.

But late last night, the judge who issued the original order called the parties
back into court and issued a new order, limiting the ban to Dallas, where seven
New Orleans police officers are facing trial in a case moved from New Orleans
because of extensive press coverage.

Early this morning, lawyers for CBS were expected to challenge the new ruling
before the appeals panel or a justice of the United States Supreme Court.
Lawyers for both sides said that they would go to the high court if necessary,
and that the dispute could go on until airtime or beyond.

The appeals panel, three judges of the United States Court of Appeals for the
Fifth Circuit in New Orleans, had lifted the order of Judge Adrian Duplantier of
Federal District Court in New Orleans.

Lawyers for the seven New Orleans police officers, who are charged with denying
several individuals their civil rights during the course of a criminal
investigation into the killing of another policeman, had told Judge Duplantier
that the broadcast would make a fair trial impossible.

In several major cases, the high court has held that prior restraint - the
blocking of news stories and broadcasts before their dissemination - violates
the free-press provisions of the Constitution.

Lawyers for CBS had called the injunction ''unprecedented in the history of our
nation'' and ''a blatant violation'' of the First Amendment guarantee of freedom
of the press.

In its four-page decision, the Court of Appeals acknowledged the right of
defendants to a fair trial before an impartial jury.  However, the panel -
citing the 1971 Pentagon Papers case, in which the Supreme Court allowed The New
York Times to publish a classified study of the Vietnam War - called the lower
court's order ''a prior restraint that bears a heavy presumption against its
constitutional validity.''

It further noted that the order was ''not supported by any findings whatsoever''
and was ''unlimited geographically and temporally.''

Moreover, the court found that Judge Duplantier had given no consideration to
less drastic alternatives, such as a continuance of the trial or a further
change in venue.

The seven New Orleans officers the case is centered on have been charged with
beating, kicking and threatening to kill individuals, primarily blacks, whom
they questioned in an investigation into the murder of a policeman, Gregory
Neupert, on Nov. 8, 1980.

Officer Neupert, who was white, was shot to death near a housing project in the
predominantly black Algiers district of New Orleans.  Four blacks were killed in
incidents connected to the investigation of the policeman's killing.

Lawyers for the seven officers moved in Judge Duplantier's court Friday morning
for a ''silence order'' to block the broadcast of the CBS segment.

Judge Duplantier then ordered CBS to give him a copy of the script of the
report. When the network declined to comply, he issued his injunction. Though
the defense had sought to block the broadcast only in the Dallas area, Judge
Duplantier's order did not limit the area covered by the injunction.

Saturday morning, CBS appealed the ruling to the Federal appeals court. ''The
prior restraint contained in this broad injunctive order is unprecedented in the
history of our nation,'' lawyers for CBS News argued, ''and constitutes a
blatant violation of petitioner's freedoms of speech and of the press guaranteed
by the First and 14th Amendments.''

In his revised order, Judge Duplantier barred the showing of the segment in
Dallas until after jury selection. He said that the interests of assuring a fair
trial outweighed the detriment to CBS from postponing the segment.

The First Amendment does not explicitly bar all prior restraints.  The framers
of the provision intended, however, to prevent the sort of restrictions,
requiring the approval of governmental or church authorities, which then existed
on the press in England.

The Supreme Court's view of prior restraints was first articulated in the
landmark 1931 decision in Near v. Minnesota, and was reiterated in the Pentagon
Papers case. In that case, The New York Times had begun publication of the
classified study of the Vietnam War and the Nixon Administration sued to block
it. The Supreme Court upheld The Times and The Washington Post, which had gained
access to the war study after The Times.

In 1979, the Justice Department obtained a restraining order barring The
Progressive magazine from printing an article titled ''The H-Bomb Secret -How We
Got It, Why We're Telling It.'' While the matter was on appeal, another
newspaper published much of the disputed material and the Government dropped the
case.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GEN. DAVID M. SHOUP DEAD AT 78; EX-COMMANDANT OF MARINE CORPS

BYLINE: By SUZANNE DALEY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 767 words


Gen. David M. Shoup, a retired Commandant of the Marine Corps, a World War II
hero and an early, outspoken critic of United States involvement in the Vietnam
War, died Thursday of a heart ailment at the Circle Terrace Hospital in
Alexandria, Va. He was 78 years old and lived in Alexandria.

General Shoup, who won the Medal of Honor for gallantry at Tarawa in the
Pacific, said he believed the extensive buildup of American forces in Vietnam
was unjustified. He called President Johnson's contention that the Vietnam War
was vital to United States interests ''pure, unadulterated poppycock.''

In 1966, three years after his retirement from the Marine Corps, General Shoup
told students of Pierce College in Los Angeles that he did not think ''as
related to the present and future safety and freedom of this country'' that
''the whole of Southeast Asia was worth a single American life.''

''People keep honking about four Presidents having made commitments,'' he said
in an interview in 1968. ''We never made commitments, legal or otherwise, to
furnish combat-type forces to anyone.''

He added: ''Why can't we let people actually determine their own destiny?''

Opposed 'Teaching Hate'

General Shoup, a short, chunky man who had a quiet, matter-of-fact way of
speaking, was named Commandant of the Marine Corps in 1959 after 33 years in the
service.

General Shoup's appointment by President Eisenhower caused bitterness among
ranking corps officers. He was advanced over nine other officers, including
three lieutenant generals, all of whom immediately applied for retirement.

In 1962, testifying before a special preparedness subcommittee of the Senate
formed to investigate anti-Communist indoctrination in the armed services,
General Shoup criticized the panel for sending investigators to question
enlisted Marines.  The Marine Corps should not be teaching hate, he said; it
should be teaching men how to defend themselves and their country.

Among his first actions as head of the Marine Corps was to end the use of
swagger sticks ''except for those who need them.'' They promptly disappeared. He
also ended the traditional practice of escorting Marines convicted by a
court-martial off the post with drummers playing the death march.

Medal of Honor Winner

In command of the Marines in the attack on Japanese-held Beito Island of Tarawa,
Nov. 20-22, 1943, then-Colonel Shoup earned the highest military honor for
valor.

On the first night of the assault, Colonel Shoup was wounded in the leg by
shrapnel, but, according to the citation he received, he ''fearlessly exposed
himself to the terrific and relentless artillery, machine gun and rifle fire.''

Stranded a half mile down the beach from their landing point, Colonel Shoup
rallied his troops and, the citation read, ''gallantly led them across the
fringing reefs to charge the heavily fortified island and reinforce our
hard-pressed, thinly held lines.''

After Tarawa he served through the battles of Saipan and Tinian in the Mariana
Islands.  David Monroe Shoup was born in Battle Ground, Ind., on Dec. 30, 1904.
He graduated from DePauw University in Greencastle, Ind., in 1926.

Joined Marines in 1926

After graduation, he spent a month as a lieutenant in the United States Army
Infantry Reserve and was then transferred to the Marine Corps on June 26, 1926.
He studied at the Basic School for Marine Officers at the Philadelphia Navy
Yard, and served several years on the battleship U.S.S. Maryland off China.

Later, he served as an instructor at the Marine Corps Training and Instructional
Center at Quantico, Va.  Colonel Shoup was commanding a Marine detachment in
Iceland at the time of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. He was then posted
to New Zealand, and wounded in New Georgia in the Solomon Islands.

After the war he served three years at Marine headquarters in Washington. He was
stationed with the Pacific Fleet when he was promoted to Brigadier General and
recalled as fiscal director of the Marine Corps in July 1953.

In 1956, after six Marine recruits drowned in a disciplinary night march at
Parris Island, S.C., General Shoup was appointed inspector general of recruit
training.

He defended the basic tenets of Marine training, but said he would not tolerate
mass punishment in any form.  General Shoup is survived by his wife, Zola D.,
two children, Carolyn LaMar of Chapel Hill, N.C., and Robert of Alexandria, and
four grandchildren.

The Navy has ordered all flags on its ships and shore installations flown at
half-staff until his burial tomorrow at Arlington National Cemetery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of David M. Shoup

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CASEY AND HIS C.I.A. ON THE REBOUND

BYLINE: By Philip Taubman

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6792 words


William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, sat at the end of the
mahogany conference table in his office. Outside, the late afternoon sun played
across the trees that ring the Central Intelligence Agency's headquarters in
northern Virginia, filling the windows with a fresco of autumn colors. A short
stack of documents, some stamped SECRET, rested at Mr. Casey's left elbow, and a
yellow legal pad on which he had penciled several notes was positioned to his
right.

''The reason I am here is because I have a lot of relevant experience and a good
track record,'' Mr. Casey said, alluding to comments that he was unqualified for
the job and had been appointed only because he was Ronald Reagan's campaign
manager. Mr. Casey, an imperious and proud man, had been fuming over the
criticism for months, according to his friends, and now, in his first
comprehensive interview since taking office, he wanted to set the record
straight.

He flipped through the papers and extracted a yellowing clipping from The New
York Times that extolled his record as chairman of the Securities and Exchange
Commission from 1971 to 1973. Next, he provided several pages copied from a book
about Allied intelligence operations during World War II; he had underlined a
glowing assessment of his contribution to the Office of Strategic Services.  The
final clipping was a story that appeared in The Washington Star in the summer of
1980, describing Mr. Casey's role as Reagan campaign director. The headline:
''Casey, the Take-Charge Boss.''

It was an oddly defensive performance for a man who, according to classified
budget figures provided by Government officials, is overseeing the biggest
peacetime buildup in the American intelligence community since the early 1950's.
Because intelligence expenditures are secret, it is not widely known that at a
moment when the Reagan Administration is forcing most Government agencies to
retrench, the C.I.A. and its fellow intelligence organizations are enjoying boom
times. Even the military services, which have been favored with substantial
budget increases, lag well behind in terms of percentage growth, although
military-run intelligence agencies are growing almost as quickly as the C.I.A.
Spending figures for intelligence agencies, including the C.I.A., are hidden
within the Defense Department's budget. With a budget increase for the 1983
fiscal year of 25 percent, not allowing for inflation, compared with 18 percent
for the Defense Department, the C.I.A. is the fastest growing major agency in
the Federal Government, according to Administration budget officials.

On its own terms, the C.I.A. is indisputably on the rebound. The staff has
increased and morale has improved. A quarter of a million Americans, many of
whom saw the C.I.A.'s sophisticated (''We May Have a Career for You'')
recruiting ads in newspapers and magazines, got in touch with the agency about
jobs last year. Ten thousand, most in their late 20's with college degrees and
experience in fields that involve foreign affairs, submitted formal applications
and 1,500 were hired. The C.I.A.'s work force, another figure the agency has
kept secret, now tops 16,000, according to intelligence officials, and is
growing.

An increased number of intelligence estimates and analytical reports are flowing
to policy makers, and they appear to be better timed to coincide with policy
debates. Overseas operations have expanded, including covert actions intended to
influence events in other countries, and President Reagan has given the agency
authority to conduct operations in the United States. As part of a concerted
effort to enlarge its focus of interest beyond the Soviet Union and other
traditional intelligence targets, the agency is devoting new resources to the
study of issues long neglected or ignored, including economic and social
developments in specific regions around the world.

But the C.I.A. is trying to overcome a legacy of troubles and combat a corrosive
undercurrent of doubt about its intentions, integrity and capabilities. Just as
Mr. Casey has found it hard to shake his image as a high-rolling financier and
political operative miscast as the head of a sensitive, nonpolitical agency, the
C.I.A.  has found it difficult to shed the reputation it gained in the
mid-1970's as a rogue agency guilty of swashbuckling abuses of power.

Some developments during the last two years have not helped.  Although the
agency maintains that its covert operations have limited objectives and are
carefully controlled, some American and Honduran national security officials say
that the activities in Central America amount to a secret campaign to overthrow
the leftist Government in Nicaragua, an objective that goes beyond plans
approved by the White House and clashes with the declared policy of the
Government. Secretary of State George P. Shultz and other top officials have
said that the United States hopes to resolve regional problems through
negotiations.

Many career State Department officials believe that Mr. Casey and company, eager
to support some of the Administration's tough rhetoric about the Russians, have
twisted intelligence estimates to accommodate policy positions. The new
authority to conduct domestic covert operations, though presented by the
Administration as no threat to civil liberties, opens the door to intrusive
intelligence activities in the United States.

To dispel some of the distrust, and to display what they view as important
accomplishments, Mr. Casey and his aides have launched something of a
public-relations offensive in recent months.  Journalists, who were turned away
during the first 18 months of the Reagan Administration, have been granted
access to Mr. Casey and some senior officials. He gave his first extended
interview to The Times for this article. Mr. Casey, with one exception, declined
to discuss personnel or budget matters.

While it has been popular to attribute the C.I.A.'s problems to the hostility
produced in the mid-1970's by disclosures of past abuses, and the internal
upheavals that followed, the C.I.A. was headed downhill long before the first
stories were published about assassination plots and domestic spying activities.

Following a period of rapid and sustained growth in the 1950's that was tied to
the tensions of the cold war, the C.I.A. began to feel budget pressures in the
mid-1960's as Johnson Administration officials turned a critical eye on the cost
effectiveness of agency spending. At the same time, the demands of United States
involvement in Southeast Asia acted as a centrifugal force on agency resources,
pulling more and more of the agency's budget and work force into secret military
and intelligence operations in Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia.

Meanwhile, vast sums of money were invested in the technology of intelligence,
including photo-reconnaissance satellites, communications-intercept stations,
computers and other hardware. As a result, the human intelligence-gathering
system was allowed to decay. Finally, there were the revelations about dirty
tricks, assassination plots, drug experimentation with unwitting human subjects,
surveillance of American citizens and the long string of other abuses.

The cutbacks were greater than generally recognized. During the 1970's,
according to Mr. Casey, there was a 40 percent reduction in funding for
intelligence agencies and a 50 percent cut in the work force. In covert
operations, where some of the worst abuses had occurred, the contraction was
startling. Classified figures made available by former intelligence officials
show that the number of agents and staff devoted to these activities, which
primarily involve paramilitary and political-action efforts to influence events
abroad, dropped from more than 2,000 in the mid-1960's to less than 200 by the
end of the Carter Administration.

The numbers alone, though dramatic, do not capture the turmoil and skidding
morale that accompanied the C.I.A.'s declining fortunes. The image of the C.I.A.
as an elite service, cultivated by the agency for decades and embraced by its
employees, eroded. Hundreds of veteran analysts and agents retired early.
Directors were hired and fired like baseball managers, with five different men
heading the agency between 1973 and 1977. In addition, almost an entire
generation of college students, disillusioned by the Vietnam War and the
behavior of the C.I.A., considered employment at the agency a stigma, depriving
it of fresh talent and energy.

Stansfield Turner, the Director of Central Intelligence in the Carter
Administration, aggravated the morale problem when he ordered a massive
housecleaning in 1977 and 1978. Mr. Turner, claiming reports about the changes
were exaggerated, says he reduced the staff by 820 positions, but actually fired
only 17 people. He says the rest were removed through attrition and that morale
improved as a result.  The upheaval may have been a necessary though painful way
of laying the groundwork for a revitalized C.I.A., but the impact of all this on
the agency's operations was tangible. In the all-important area of analysis, the
point at which trends and insights are pulled out of the mountains of raw
intelligence information and translated into reports for policy makers,
productivity slipped sharply. National estimates, the intelligence community's
final word on important international issues, dropped from an annual average of
51 in the late 1960's to 12 a year in the late 1970's. Mr. Turner insists that
the slippage was intentional. ''I don't think that national estimates are a very
efficient way of preparing finished intelligence,'' he said. ''We did other
kinds of estimates.''
oon after moving into the director's elegant but unostentatious seventh-floor
office at the C.I.A. complex in Langley, Mr. Casey made his agenda clear: more
money, more manpower and more aggressiveness.  With the help of Adm. Bobby R.
Inman, Mr. Casey's top deputy until last June and a veteran of the budget wars,
the new Director quickly got White House and Congressional approval for large
spending increases, pushing the agency's budget toward $1.5 billion. The current
total exceeds that sum, according to Congressional sources.  Long-range planning
calls for the C.I.A. to receive large annual increases through the 1980's.

With more money guaranteed, Mr. Casey turned his attention to the agency's
actual operations. ''There's an image of Bill Casey as a tired, doddering, old
man who's primarily interested in spying on American citizens,'' Admiral Inman
told a group of retired agents earlier this year. ''The image could not be
further from the dynamo that I worked with.''

Mr. Casey, who is 69, is described by friends as being a ''voracious reader''
and an amateur historian. He has written several books about the American
Revolution. His office desk is cluttered with stacks of recent volumes, and
aides report that he often startles intelligence analysts by citing information
from obscure books that they have not read. For physical relaxation, Mr.  Casey
plays golf. He blames improper footwear for a golfing accident two summers ago
that left him with a broken leg and a badly bruised ego. Mr. Casey and his wife
of 40 years, Sophia, have a daughter, Bernadette, who is an actress.

Mr. Casey has not run the C.I.A. by trying to forge a consensus about goals. Nor
has he cared much for the trappings of leadership, such as ribbon cuttings, pep
talks to the staff and public pronouncements. He prefers to exercise authority
directly, succinctly and gruffly. According to aides, Mr. Casey addresses
problems by consulting individually with close associates in the C.I.A. and a
handful of outside friends, including Leonard H. Marks, a Washington lawyer and
former head of the United States Information Agency; Charles Z. Wick, the
current head of the U.S.I.A.; Maurice R.  Greenberg, president of the American
International Group Inc., a New York financial-services company, and Senator
Paul Laxalt, the Nevada Republican who is also a close friend of President
Reagan.

Mr. Casey, according to aides, seeks the advice of old friends because he feels
that intelligence specialists often take too narrow a view of the world. ''He
isn't dazzled by the idea that people need all kinds of expertise to understand
the political dynamics of a foreign country,'' an aide explained. ''Casey
believes that too many agents get caught up in the craft of gathering
intelligence and lose sight of the big picture.''

Mr. Casey makes decisions quickly - even his critics concede that he has a
sharp, penetrating mind - and most often relays them to the staff in terse
instructions he dictates early in the morning. On more than one occasion, a
whole day's schedule has been disrupted when Mr. Casey, dissatisfied with an
intelligence estimate, canceled his appointments and produced a shower of
stinging instructions to his aides. His temper and patience are notoriously
short and his gruff, no-nonsense style often lapses into plain rudeness that is
a publicrelations man's nightmare.

While Mr. Casey has undeniably gotten the C.I.A. moving, there is some question
whether all the motion has been positive. From the moment he was appointed,
there have been questions whether he is the right man to rebuild the C.I.A. A
lawyer by training, and a venture capitalist by inclination, Mr. Casey is a
self-made millionaire from New York who served during the Nixon and Ford
Administrations as Chairman of the S.E.C., Under Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs and head of the Export-Import Bank. He received his initiation in spying
during World War II, when he directed Allied espionage operations behind German
lines. Later, while practicing law in Manhattan, he served as a member of
President Ford's advisory board on intelligence.

But Mr. Casey is also the first Presidential campaign director appointed to run
the C.I.A. By picking him, Mr. Reagan, by design or not, seemed to suggest that
the directorship of Central Intelligence was just one more patronage plum. (The
Director has the dual job of overseeing the Government's foreign intelligence
establishment, including the National Security Agency and the Defense
Intelligence Agency, while also acting as head of the C.I.A.) The appointment
immediately generated fears that the C.I.A. would be used to justify and support
the Administration's foreign policies rather than serve as a source of neutral
information.

Mr. Casey, undeniably, is a political animal. In 1966, he ran unsuccessfully for
the Republican nomination for Congress in Nassau County on Long Island. Though
dropping out of front-line campaigning after the loss, he remained very active
as a Republican Party fundraiser and behind-the-scenes broker.

Professional intelligence officials fear nothing more than contamination by
political interests. According to Admiral Inman, who was director of the
National Security Agency from 1977 to 1981, the key is finding a balance between
access to policy makers and accommodation to policy. ''If you're completely
disconnected from the policy process, you're likely to produce intelligence
estimates that are irrelevant,'' he said in an interview. ''But you have to
breed and train your people to be extremely independent so that they don't let
the demands of developing and defending policy influence their judgments.''

Mr. Casey's record on this crucial issue is mixed. The great majority of
intelligence reports produced during the last two years have been neutral and
untainted by ideological prejudices, according to a wide spectrum of national
security officials, many of whom are not Casey boosters. In some areas, however,
where the political heat is particularly high, the agency has adopted a more
partisan tone.  Central America is cited most often as an area where the C.I.A.
has stretched to support White House policy. Mr. Casey strenuously denies that
the agency has twisted intelligence to support policy.  The production of
intelligence reports, at least in theory, is the most important function of the
C.I.A. Of the four main divisions of the agency, known internally as
directorates, intelligence is the most important because it is, in effect, the
link between the agency and the policy-making process. The other three divisions
are science and technology, which handles everything from the processing of data
on Soviet missile tests to the research and design of new surveillance
satellites; support, which deals with logistics, communications and security,
and operations, which directs clandestine intelligence collection abroad and
conducts covert activities.

Mr. Casey has made significant, unpublicized changes in the intelligence
division, which is staffed with thousands of analysts, including hundreds with
Ph.D.'s, who examine data on matters as important as Soviet military
capabilities and as esoteric as steel production in Bulgaria. ''We found that
estimates had been kicking around for close to a year, going through different
drafts,'' Mr.Casey said during the interview. ''We set up a fast-track system.
Rather than a lot of pulling and hauling and papering over of differences
between agencies, we want to highlight differences and give policy makers a
range of views.''

Historically, the performance of the intelligence branch has been varied.
Repeated predictions that the Soviet Union would become a net importer of oil in
the early 1980's proved incorrect. These forecasts contributed significantly to
fears in the Carter Administration that the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
presaged an eventual move into the Persian Gulf. The agency also failed to
anticipate the groundswell of opposition to the Shah of Iran that led to his
overthrow in 1979.

But throughout the Vietnam War, the C.I.A. bucked the optimistic assessments of
the Pentagon and accurately gauged the strength and tenacity of the Vietcong and
North Vietnamese. More recently, analysts reported that trade sanctions against
the Soviet Union would not seriously impede the construction of a gas pipeline
from Siberia to Western Europe. President Reagan recently canceled the pipeline
sanctions he had imposed.

Mr. Casey's first move was to reorganize the operation. The change was long
overdue. Instead of a system where subjects were divided by discipline, with
experts on the Soviet economy, for instance, separated from experts on Soviet
politics, he restructured the operation along geographical lines, putting
together all the specialists on a given country or region.

In addition, he tried to increase communication with policy makers, seeking
critical feedback on intelligence estimates. Every night, the C.I.A. prepares an
intelligence report for distribution to senior Administration officials the next
morning. Called the President's daily briefing, or P.D.B., it covers overnight
developments around the world and reports on important trends.  Instead of
turning the P.D.B. over to White House aides to deliver and discuss with senior
officials, Mr. Casey arranged for top-level C.I.A. analysts to conduct the
briefings and report back to him every morning at 11 o'clock about their
comments and questions. ''It helps us determine and develop the information and
the analysis they need for the next day and for dealing with issues on their
forward agenda,'' Casey said.

To improve longer-range management of intelligence, Mr. Casey established a
weekly ''watch'' meeting of top officials from the C.I.A., National Security
Agency, Defense Intelligence Agency and other segments of the intelligence
community. In previous years, such meetings were held monthly. Mr. Casey also
approved the creation of two new study centers, one to track the flow of
advanced American technology abroad and the other to examine the causes of
instability around the world and to identify countries that appear vulnerable to
insurgent movements.

''The idea is to assess threats against other governments, particularly those of
close or special strategic interest to us,'' Mr. Casey said. ''The Soviet Union
has been extraordinarily successful in extending its influence worldwide by
destabilizing established governments and installing and supporting new ones
which follow its line. In recent years we have seen some 10 countries taken into
the Communist sphere in this way which are now being used in efforts to take
over another 10 or so in much the same way. This is a process we work hard to
spot and measure and help friendly governments avoid.'' Other intelligence
officials said that countries on the agency's danger list include Guatemala, El
Salvador, Honduras, Zaire and the Sudan.

He also encouraged the intelligence division to renew the C.I.A.'s dormant
relationship with the American academic community in hopes of injecting new
ideas into the intelligence system. ''The object is to keep the intellectual
juices flowing,'' Robert M. Gates, the head of intelligence, explained in an
interview. ''Sometimes we don't look enough at unorthodox views. By sending
analysts out to the field, by sponsoring conferences and seminars, and by
consulting more widely with outside experts, we're trying to counter the
bureaucratic tendency toward insularity and being satisfied with the
conventional wisdom.''

Unquestionably, productivity has increased. The number of national estimates,
for instance, has risen from the late 1970's average of 12 a year to 38 in 1981.
According to Mr. Casey, the number will exceed 60 this year. The subjects are
varied, and have included the following: the balance of power in the Middle
East, Soviet strategic offensive and defensive capabilities, the strategic
implications of Soviet economic problems, Soviet dependence on Western
technology and trade for its military buildup, the likely impact and
effectiveness of allied trade sanctions against the Soviet Union, the European
peace movement, the Mexican financial crisis, the war between Iran and Iraq,
international terrorism, Soviet and Cuban involvement in Central America, the
prospects for free elections in El Salvador, the involvement of external powers
in the Salvadoran conflict, prospects for conflict in southern Africa.

But the quality of the reports appears to vary considerably. Soviet specialists
in the Reagan Administration say that evaluations of the Soviet economy have
included impressive analyses about raw-material problems, capital shortages and
other developments.

Donald Gregg, senior national security adviser to Vice President Bush and a
former agency official, believes there has been an overall improvement in
quality and timeliness. ''We're seeing a sharper focus on issues now,'' he said.
''Differences of opinion between agencies are highlighted, not submerged the way
they used to be, and the estimates on specific issues are delivered in time for
consideration of those issues by the National Security Council.'' Despite the
general praise for the agency's performance from many consumers of intelligence
in the Administration, the C.I.A. under William Casey has shown a disturbing
tendency on some issues to rally to the Administration's rhetoric. State
Department and Congressional critics have accused the agency of warping its
analysis to accommodate policy about Central America. Early in the
Administration, for example, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. charged
the Russians and their allies with supplying arms and money to guerrilla
movements in Central America. When Mr. Haig first made the accusation,
intelligence officials privately said, there was little information to support
it. The C.I.A. hurriedly prepared a report on the issue that indicated there was
heavy Soviet and Cuban activity. Some officials contend the evidence was thinner
than the report suggested. Wayne S. Smith, until recently the head of the
American interests section in Havana, has charged that the evidence of Cuban
support was exaggerated.

Later, three Democratic members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
angered at the quality of an intelligence briefing on Latin America, complained
to Mr. Casey in a letter that the briefing ''evidenced a rhetorical tone and
selective use of information which bordered on policy prescription rather than a
straightforward analysis of available intelligence data.''

Last September, the House Intelligence Committee published a report about
American intelligence on Central America which, while praising the overall
quality, found numerous instances of oversimplification and exaggeration. In a
briefing on outside interference in Central America given to the committee in
March, for instance, intelligence officials stated that ''lots of ships have
been traced'' from the Soviet Union to Nicaragua. When asked how many ships, the
C.I.A. later responded that there had been only ''a few.'' The committee report
also noted that the C.I.A., while producing a large volume of information about
leftist guerrillas in El Salvador, had provided almost none about right-wing
terrorism in the country.  The report said that C.I.A. officials reported that
they had ''not considered the subject of Salvadoran rightest violence as a
target for collection.''

On the subject of Salvadoran efforts to reduce atrocities by the military, the
committee found that American intelligence assessments citing improvements were
based largely on the official statements of the Salvadoran military. The report
said, ''Intelligence displayed a willingness to claim greater certainty than
warranted by the evidence, and a complacent acceptance of official Salvadoran
claims whose limitations had already been acknowledged.''

Mr. Casey noted that Admiral Inman resigned as a consultant to the House
Intelligence Committee in protest over what he considered to be the partisan
tone of the report. In general, Mr. Casey insisted that the C.I.A. had not
slanted intelligence reports on Central America.  Noting that the Carter
Administration had disclosed Cuban and Nicaraguan support for insurgents in El
Salvador, Mr. Casey said that during his tenure there had been a consensus among
all the separate components of the intelligence community that such outside
interference in Central American affairs was continuing.

A related issue is the sometimes aggressive way the Reagan Administration has
used intelligence information to justify its policies. Though the practice is
hardly a new one in Washington, one intelligence official said this
Administration has turned more often than most to what he called ''a highly
selective use of information favorable to the Government's position.''

The political edge that has slipped into some of the intelligence reporting is
much more evident - and troubling - in operations, the area where Mr. Casey has
made the agency more assertive. Despite his active involvement in the analytical
side, Mr. Casey's primary interest - some colleagues say his ''passion'' - has
been operations. From the start he took personal command of the clandestine
services, adding staff members and resources, and has worked to rebuild the
covert operations staff, euphemistically known within the C.I.A. as the
international-affairs division.

The changes started with the Presidential executive order that governs
intelligence activities. The National Security Act of 1947, which created the
C.I.A., defined its powers and duties only in broad terms and offered few
specific guidelines for C.I.A.  activities. It did not, for example, include
explicit authority to conduct covert activities. In subsequent years, Presidents
filled the vacuum to some extent with a series of directives that authorized the
C.I.A., among other things, to conduct paramilitary and politicalaction
operations. But neither the Executive Branch nor Congress ever got around to
establishing a comprehensive charter for the agency. In the absence of such a
charter, the executive order is the only source of guidelines for intelligence
operations here and abroad. The first order was adopted by President Ford in the
wake of revelations about intelligence excesses. The Ford order, and a
subsequent one signed by President Carter, set strict limits on C.I.A.
operations, prohibiting assassinations and other extreme measures abroad. The
orders also ruled out agency operations within the United States to prevent any
recurrence of domestic spying abuses. Mr. Casey and Admiral Inman, while
preferring to keep some restraints that the White House wanted removed, accepted
an order that removed several key restrictions. Officials of the American Civil
Liberties Union call it ''a grave threat to civil liberties.''

The most debated - and debatable - change contained in the Reagan order is
approval for C.I.A. operations in the United States, if the focus of such
activity is the collection of significant foreign intelligence information. One
of the few specific prohibitions included in the 1947 National Security Act was
the stipulation that the C.I.A. ''shall have no police, subpoena, law
enforcement powers or internal security functions.'' In addition, the
legislative history of the act made clear that Congress wanted the agency's
activities, apart from headquarters operations, to be confined outside the
United States.

Despite the ban, the C.I.A. conducted extensive domestic spying during the
1960's and early 70's. Admiral Inman and Mr. Casey both said that the Reagan
order does not envisage a revival of such abuses. As an example of what would be
permitted under the Reagan order, Admiral Inman said, intelligence agents could
interview Americans about their foreign travels without identifying themselves
as C.I.A. operatives.

Officials of the American Civil Liberties Union charge that it opens the door to
all kinds of domestic operations, provided they are conducted under the pretext
of gathering foreign intelligence information. For example, there is nothing to
prevent the agency from infiltrating foreign student groups at American
universities, or even American student groups that travel overseas, if there
seems a chance to acquire information about a foreign country.

The new order also lifts a previous ban on physical surveillance of Americans
abroad to collect information that cannot reasonably be obtained by other means,
such as interviews. That means the activities of Americans traveling or living
overseas may now be secretly monitored by the C.I.A. if the Americans are
suspected of having useful intelligence information.

In addition, the new order authorizes covert actions within the United States to
further foreign policy objectives, provided the actions are not intended to
influence domestic public opinion.  Denying that this opens the way for
large-scale domestic operations, intelligence officials say privately the
authorization was needed because previous orders prevented the C.I.A. from
carrying out a secret plan several years ago to underwrite the costs of bringing
a group of Afghan resistance fighters to the United Nations to discuss the
Soviet invasion of their country. The plan was prohibited because it would have
involved activities in New York City.

Finally, the Reagan order permits the Attorney General to authorize the opening
of mail in the United States without a court order if he finds that there is
probable cause to believe that the target is an agent of a foreign power. The
Carter order required a warrant for mail opening.  The aggressive tone of the
new order set the stage for Mr. Casey's buildup in covert operations, perhaps
the most questionable development during his two years at the C.I.A. Drawing on
his World War II experiences, he has made clear that the Reagan Administration
is not afraid to use covert operations, including paramilitary force, to help
further American interests abroad. Mr. Casey calls covert actions ''special
activities.'' Like so much of the vocabulary used at the C.I.A. -
''neutralization'' instead of assassination in Vietnam, for example - the phrase
removes the sting from a controversial concept.

Covert action can cover a lot of ground. Over the years, it has involved
financial assistance to friendly political parties in Europe, clandestine
shipments of military equipment to anti-Soviet insurgents in Afghanistan and the
training of specialized security forces for a select group of foreign leaders,
including the former President of Egypt, Anwar el-Sadat. The assassination of
Mr. Sadat was a particular embarrassment to the C.I.A. because the agency
secretly trained the personal security guards who ran for cover when he was
attacked.

In their heyday, covert operations involved attempts to assassinate Fidel Castro
and other foreign leaders, the successful installation of pro-American
governments in Iran (1953) and Guatemala (1954), and an unsuccessful effort to
block the Marxist Salvador Allende from taking office after he had been elected
President of Chile (1970).

Not surprisingly, few subjects inspire as much debate. For many intelligence
officials, covert operations are anathema because they often risk so much
embarrassment and criticism if exposed for so little gain if they succeed. Civil
libertarians find covert actions unacceptable because they cannot be reviewed
and debated openly and are inconsistent with democratic principles. On the other
side, proponents argue that covert activities are indispensable in situations
where diplomacy fails and the open use of military force is unacceptable.

The Reagan Administration considers covert operations a routine instrument of
foreign policy. ''Through all the investigations and examinations of covert
activities,'' Mr. Casey said, ''very few people came away with the conclusion
that the nation should deprive itself of the ability to move quietly in private
channels to react to or influence the policies of other countries.'' Mr. Casey
sees the equation as follows: ''To be, or to be perceived as, unable or
unwilling to act in support of friendly governments facing destabilization or
insurgency from aggressor nations, or to prevent groups acting or standing for
American interests or values from being snuffed out, would be damaging to our
security and leadership.''

In practice, according to Mr. Casey, that means a series of ''lowkey,
low-level'' efforts, involving a ''small number of people,'' which are ''in
support of other governments, closer to the area of operation and with a bigger
stake in it and ready to take the main responsibility.'' This means, he said
emphatically, avoiding anything like the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961.
What it does cover, according to Mr. Casey, are efforts to provide countries
threatened by externally supported guerrilla forces with equipment and training
to ''help them defend themselves.''

An example often cited by Mr. Casey is the behind-the-scenes role the C.I.A.
played in assuring free elections in El Salvador last year. By providing the
Salvadoran military with equipment and training to help it locate guerrilla
units, reduce the flow of weapons from Cuba and Nicaragua, and anticipate rebel
offensives, Mr. Casey said, the agency helped the Government prevent the
preelection attacks that insurgents promised would disrupt the voting.

In a more ambitious and controversial operation, the C.I.A. has provided funding
and equipment to Nicaraguan exile groups that seek to overthrow the leftist
Sandinist Government in Managua. With dozens of agents based in Honduras, plus
others in neighboring countries, the operation is the largest paramilitary and
political-action effort mounted by the C.I.A. in nearly 10 years, according to
intelligence officials. While these officials maintain that this operation is
limited to harassing the Sandinists and is under tight control, there is solid
evidence that the C.I.A. has become involved in a secret war against the leftist
Sandinists by providing money, training and military equipment to paramilitary
units controlled by the exile groups.

The program is especially troubling because it is inconsistent with the declared
policy of the United States, which favors negotiating with Nicaragua to settle
regional problems, and appears to go beyond plans for the covert action approved
by President Reagan a year ago.

By encouraging the Honduran military to support the paramilitary effort, the
C.I.A. has also drawn Honduras, one of the few relatively stable democracies in
the area, deeper into the regional conflict. In addition, Honduran political
leaders fear that the American assistance, by encouraging a military crackdown
on dissent within Honduras, may eventually undermine civilian rule in the
country. It is not clear whether the expanded operation reflects a change in
policy - Administration officials say it does not - or is the result of working
with paramilitary forces whose aims do not coincide with those of the United
States.

Elsewhere, it is no secret that the agency has expanded an operation begun
during the Carter Administration to supply Afghan rebels with small arms and
other military equipment to combat Soviet forces. Consistent with the Casey
doctrine about covert action, Saudia Arabia has helped finance the operation,
and Egypt and China have provided logistical support, according to intelligence
officials.

In the Middle East, the C.I.A., with assistance from the Turkish Government, has
provided millions of dollars worth of arms and weapons to two Iranian
paramilitary groups in Eastern Turkey that oppose the Khomeini Government in
Teheran. In addition, the agency has financed and tried to unify Iranian exile
groups in France and Egypt and has set up a clandestine radio station to
broadcast anti-Khomeini propaganda into Iran. In Africa, in an operation that
until now has remained secret, the C.I.A. has trained the personal security
forces of Liberia's leader, Master Sgt. Samuel K. Doe, who seized power in a
bloody coup in 1980.

Mr. Casey's enthusiasm for covert operations - he has traveled extensively
around the world, often in private planes to avoid detection, to take a
firsthand look at current efforts - has cost him dearly in several areas. One
was the loss of Admiral Inman, who was widely respected in the intelligence
community and in Congress.  Although Admiral Inman publicly attributed his
resignation to a long-standing desire to work in the private sector, there were
other reasons as well, according to his friends, including alarm over the heavy
use of covert operations. During high-level strategy sessions, according to
national security officials, Admiral Inman repeatedly warned that covert
activities, particularly the use of paramilitary forces, could associate the
C.I.A. with groups that it could not control.

The turn toward covert action also indirectly produced the appointment of Max
Hugel as chief of clandestine operations. Mr.  Casey, who now acknowledges that
the appointment was a mistake, says he thought that Mr. Hugel, a Reagan campaign
worker, was resourceful and innovative and would inject new ideas into the
operations division. Mr. Hugel, of course, never got to implement whatever ideas
he had because he quit in July 1981, less than two months after his appointment,
when two former business associates accused him of violating securities laws.
Mr. Hugel denied the allegations.

Mr. Casey himself was caught in the riptide, as irregularities in his own
finances attracted attention and the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
discovered that he had failed to list all his businesses holdings and legal
clients in a disclosure statement filed before his nomination came up for
confirmation. A long investigation by the committee ended with the tepid
conclusion that Mr. Casey was ''not unfit'' to serve as Director of Central
Intelligence, an assessment that infuriated him.

Although the concept of Congressional oversight does not appeal to everyone in
the intelligence business, both the Senate and House intelligence committees
provide a vital form of public accountability for the C.I.A. and its fellow
agencies. The committees, in a way, are a symbol of public trust in the C.I.A.

On most issues, the committees have supported Mr. Casey's effort to strengthen
the agency. They approved the big funding increases, and went along with the
reorganization of the intelligence branch. They favored an expansion of
intelligence collection overseas, and have encouraged the agency to let some
fresh air sweep through its corridors. But the committees worry about the signs
of political contamination and have great misgivings about the expanded use of
covert operations. Until Mr. Casey gains their trust on these crucial issues, he
will have a hard time gaining the confidence of the public.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Casey

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND OPINION;
THE GARBAGE CRISIS: GOING BEYOND 'GOOD GUYS' AND 'BAD GUYS'

BYLINE: By SHELLY FEUER DOMASH

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 22, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1367 words


IANSWERED a frantic telephone call recently from a desperatesounding man in
California. The call was not unlike many I have received from all over the
country in the last few years.

After confirming that I was the person he was trying to reach, the caller
proceeded to say, ''You have got to help us, there's not much time, and we are
frightened.''

I knew immediately that he was requesting my help in stopping a resource
recovery plant from being built in his community. Whenever I receive these calls
(which have become more and more frequent in recent years), I greet them with
mixed emotions. With each call, I am faced with the same dilemma. To stop the
progress of resource recovery could put us in a crisis situation with our
garbage, and yet to continue to let these plants be built, under the present
conditions, could eventually produce conditions hazardous to every one of us.

More than anything, I try continually to remain objective about the situation we
now face. I cannot help but respect some of the people who are forced to be the
''bad guys'' in this problem. Many of these people in the local, state and
Federal agencies have been cornered by the circumstances, one of which is that
there is no longer any safe place to dispose of our garbage.

Over the last years, I have got to know these people well, and I understand what
they face and the position they are in. As in most situations, there are two
sides to the issue, and both sides in this case are to blame. The public is at
fault for not demanding solutions to the garbage crisis earlier, before that
crisis ever became a reality. The regulatory agencies and the politicians are at
fault for not predicting the crisis and doing something about it years ago.

But all of this does not solve the problem we are now facing.  Landfills are
running out of room, incinerators are very much out of date, and resource
recovery, as it now stands, is just not safe.

The first thing we now need is to educate the public. We must all become aware
of the serious dangers that can be produced by our garbage and the disposition
thereof, and we must all demand immediate answers. Every one of us must become
responsible for our own future, and in doing so must become aware of all
potential dangers, including those inherent in our everyday garbage.

The task of informing the public falls on schools, regulatory agencies,
politicians, the press and every person who knows and understands the problem
and can communicate it to his neighbor. We do not need scare tactics, hysterical
accusations on both sides of the issue or political games. We do need
understanding of the situation and open communications among all the parties
involved.

The facts in this situation are often complicated, and to simplify them often
clouds the issue even more. But since most of us have enough problems in our
lives to worry about, and since garbage is not high on anybody's priorities of
woes, there seems no choice but to try and break the problem down to its
simpliest terms.

Resource recovery, or the burning of our garbage, can produce potentially
serious and deadly results. Unless the temperatures in the furnaces that burn
the garbage are high enough, unless there is enough air turbulence in those
burners, unless there are long enough holding times for the gases in the
furnaces, and unless proper pollution controls are on the stacks for those
gases, the resulting air emissions from these plants can be very dangerous to
all those living in the surrounding communities.

To properly equip these plants takes a great deal of money, as well as
expertise. Another very serious problem is that Americans traditionally like to
do things in a big way. History and research have proved that these plants
should be small ones, not like the huge ones proposed in our country.
Unfortunately, small plants do not make money.

Why the problems? Our Government has turned over resource recovery to private
industry. Simply stated, private industry must make a profit to exist. In order
to do so, it is going to take the simpliest and least expensive way out. To
date, our Government has not interceded with any nationwide regulations
affecting these plants, including their emissions.

Take the case of dioxin as an example. Most of us have heard of dioxin in
connection with Agent Orange and Vietnam. Dioxin is also a byproduct of the
burning of our garbage. It has been linked with birth defects, liver damage,
cancer and other maladies. Dioxin also lowers our resistance to other
cancer-causing chemicals. Test results from resource recovery plants across the
country prove conclusively that other carcinogens are being emitted from these
resource recovery plants along with dioxin. In other words, not only will we be
exposed to cancer-causing agents, but our resistance to all cancer-causing
agents will be lowered at the same time.

In 1980, in a lawsuit against the Dow Chemical Company, the Environmental
Protection Agency stated that there was no known safe level of dioxin. Soon
afterward the agency was in a very awkward situation. Dioxin was found to be
emitted from resource recovery plants.

What did the agency do? It tested five of these plants, found out what they were
emitting, averaged the results and used that figure to determine what would now
become a new safe level. How did the agency get away with it? Not many people
were aware of it, and even fewer took the time to do something about it.

Understandably, we have to find a way out of a very serious garbage crisis.
Stopping resource recovery in our country will certainly not solve the problem.
Yet in all good conscience, under present conditions, how can we continue to let
these plants be built and operated?

Obviously, a solution must be found, and quickly. What we need is the expertise
of all the parties involved, working together, to find a solution. Lines need
not be drawn, for in the long run we will all become the losers.

Meanwhile, interim solutions such as source separation, bottle bills and the
stopping of overpackaging can certainly help.  Explorations of new technologies
such as high-temperature burning at sea must be initiated at once. We must
recognize the seriousness of the situation and put together the manpower that is
needed, now, to solve this problem.

Now that we have a new Governor in New York, it is time for a new and innovative
way to deal with an old problem. Without delay, the Governor should appoint a
commission to find both a short-term and a long-term solution to the solid-waste
problem. Going beyond politics and emotions, the committee should consist of
experts, not selfinterest groups, and should have no other goal than to solve
the problem, not promote its members or benefit just a few.

It should be answerable to the people and explore all the aspects of this very
difficult and complex problem. Finally, as part of the committee's function, an
educational campaign should be begun to benefit the public at large.

With New York State in the forefront of the battle, other states will quickly
follow the lead. With the proper motivation and insight, the committee could
accomplish what has been long overdue in our country.

It is time we forgot the ''good guys'' and the ''bad guys'' in this problem. It
is time communities worked together instead of against each other. It is time we
all joined forces to reach a solution that will help everybody.

It is easy for groups to inspire emotions of fear and anger. It is harder for us
to face the real problem, and depend on understanding and communication. Let's
educate the public, not allow it to be confused by self-interest groups and
political games.

I look with eager anticipation toward the day when the frantic telephone calls
stop and the answer to this difficult problem is found. We must all, each and
every one of us, work together to find a solution to our garbage problem before
we all become buried in it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Shelly Feuer Domash of Westbury is former chairman of the Citizens' Committee
for Civic Action, which she founded and which opposed the Hempstead recyling
plant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS

BYLINE: By Shirley Horner

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 12, Column 6; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 840 words


''IF YOUR plans for a more-exciting 1983 include an extramarital affair,'' said
Herbert S. Strean of Teaneck, a psychoanalyst and Distinguised Professor at the
Graduate School of Social Work at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, ''be
advised that such activity is neither healthy nor mature.''

Dr. Strean's ''The Extramarital Affair'' (Macmillan, New York, $12.95 ), a
candid and absorbing analysis of individual histories, contends that ''happy
people'' are those who, having overcome their ''childish narcissism,'' strive
''to achieve what is realistically possible.''

''Sexual infidelity,'' he adds, ''is usually, if not always, a neurotic form of
behavior.'' On the other hand, Lynn Atwater of South Orange, an associate
professor of sociology at Seton Hall University, says she does not ''condemn or
condone extramarital affairs.''

Seven years of interviewing ''change-oriented women'' in the New Jersey, New
York and Pennsylvania area resulted, Dr. Atwater says, in ''The Extramarital
Connection: Sex, Intimacy and Identity'' (Irvington Publishers, New York,
$15.95), a provocative and sensitive study.

It states that ''changes in the family and sexual life style of the last two
decades are irreversible,'' and concludes that ''extramarital activity is now as
culturally American as apple pie.''

In ''Freud & Women'' (Frederick Ungar, New York, $14.95), which Dr. Strean wrote
with Lucy Freeman, a former reporter for The New York Times, both authors
extensively illustrate Freud's ''fear of women and his hostility towards them,''
in his relationships with his mother, sisters, wife, sister-in-law, daughters
and other women.

''Controversy in Psychotherapy'' (Scarecrow Press, 52 Liberty Street, Metuchen,
N.J., 08840, $18.50) collects, Dr. Strean said, ''notions'' that have sparked
''a great deal of response'' and includes often-lively comments by 24
therapists. For example, Dr.  Strean repudiates the practitioners of encounter
groups as reflective of the ''age of sensations'' and for offering ''short-term
tinkering.''

''Not only is our name unique,'' said William R. Eshelman of Edison, president
of Scarecrow Press, ''but where else do you find publishers as willing as we are
to print - without any subsidy - the books that other publishers often call 'too
specialized'?''

As for the concern's name, Mr. Eshelman said: ''When the late Dr. Ralph Shaw, a
former director of the Rutgers University Library School in New Brunswick,
founded the company 33 years ago, he felt that 'Scarecrow,' denoting our
no-frills policy of keeping office and editorial costs low, fit his brainchild
perfectly.

''Our books return a profit, our authors are paid royalties and our reward is in
being able to bring out -like major publishers - 100 titles a year, making many
brilliant endeavors of every range and scope available to the world in libraries
everywhere.''

Each of the central figures in two new significant books - a Roman Catholic
priest and a Methodist minister - became rallying points for the intense
political movement of the time, and their stories are as persuasive as their
personalities.

''Baptism of Resistance, Blood, and Celebration'' (Twenty-third Publications,
Box 180, Mystic, Conn., 06355, $5.95) was written by the Rev. John P. Egan, with
Paul D. Colford. (Mr. Colford is an editor at Newsday, the Long Island
newspaper).

Father Egan, a native of Jersey City, where he is associated with St. Boniface
Roman Catholic Church, tells how, in 1967, after preaching nonviolent opposition
to the war in Vietnam, he saw clearly that he had chosen a ''costly and
dangerous journey'' to the ''just and peaceful world'' of his ideals.

The book paints a shocking picture of the debilitating effects of prison -Father
Egan was arrested 25 times -but is also a fervent and moving avowal of life's
''human dimension'' that continues to lure him, ''though badly scarred and
awfully scared,'' Father Egan says, toward ''further journeying on behalf of
others.''

The other book is ''Grauel: An Authobiography As Told to Eleanor Elfenbein''
(Ivory House, 121 Randolph Road, Box 676, Freehold, 07728, $14.50). Mrs.
Elfenbein, the author and publisher, lives in Freehold, and the Rev. John S.
Grauel, a resident of New Jersey since 1961, lives in nearby Roosevelt.

In 1944, Mr. Grauel recalls how, stirred by the reports of Nazi mistreatment
''coming out of Europe,'' he took leave of his parish to join those, he writes,
who ''felt Zionism was an idea whose time had come.''

The minister became famous in 1947 when, at the age of 29, he served as the only
non-Jew aboard the Exodus for seven months. During that time, that antiquated
vessel, docked in Marseilles, took on 4,500 Jewish refugees frantically eager to
reach Palestine.

The heroic story of the travails of those passengers, vividly described by Mr.
Grauel, tells how, after enduring impossible conditions on a ship ''built to
carry only 600,'' they were eventually thwarted when they sought to land. So
rarely has a story been told so eloquently.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FREE PRESS, FAIR TRIAL BALANCING ACT;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 963 words


A Federal judge's failure to block a television broadcast about an upcoming
trial reinforces the concept that, except in very rare instances, only
journalists have a right to decide what a news story says and when it should be
run, legal experts said yesterday.

Although the case did not break new legal ground, they said, it raised
interesting questions in a long debate about the mechanics of balancing press
freedoms against defendants' rights to a trial unaffected by prejudicial news
coverage.

They noted, for example, that the attempt to block the broadcast had actually
increased the publicity about the case and thus the difficulty of finding jurors
who had not heard about the matter.

They also suggested that the case underlined a weakness in one remedy usually
endorsed by the press - moving a criminal trial away from the community where
the publicity has been extensive. National television shows transcend city and
state borders; in this case, the ''60 Minutes'' program broadcast last night
took incidents that occurred in New Orleans two years ago and made them vividly
immediate in Dallas, where the trial has been moved and is due to start Feb. 7.


Attempted Prior Restraint

The defendants said the show, which in general repeated published material about
the 1980 killings, would have reached 20 percent of the potential jurors in
Dallas and would have had much greater impact than newspaper articles. A defense
lawyer said he would not have sought to stop the Dallas newspapers from doing
pretrial articles that used the same material as the show.

Robert Chandler, CBS's senior vice president for documentaries and operations,
who supervises ''60 Minutes,'' said the issue was simply one of attempted prior
restraint, and ''any prior restraint is repugnant.''

That view has been upheld in a series of United States Supreme Court decisions
since 1931 that have consistently interpreted the First Amendment's free-speech
guarantee as an effective prohibition on restraints prior to publication. Even
in cases where national security may be involved - as in the Government's 1971
effort to stop The New York Times from publishing the Pentagon Papers, a
classified study about the Vietnam War - the courts backed the right of free
speech over other, competing interests.

Floyd Abrams, a New York lawyer who specializes in First Amendment issues, said
that ''the law has remained very firm.'' He added that the press had not
recognized how much it had been supported in this area by the Supreme Court
under Chief Justice Warren E. Burger.

Mr. Abrams said no appellate court had upheld a prior-restraint order since
1976, when a judge in Nebraska tried to block publication of potentially
prejudicial material that was coming out in pretrial hearings. The Supreme Court
overturned that order in a case widely cited by press lawyers whenever a
defendant seeks a restraint on trial or pretrial coverage.

The press generally says that it hopes defendants get fair trials, but that its
responsibility is to present the news thoroughly and accurately.

The press and its lawyers also say that, with one exception, it has not been
proven that pretrial news accounts have actually prejudiced a jury. The
exception is the 1966 conviction of Dr. Sam Sheppard on charges of murdering his
wife. The Supreme Court overturned the verdict, and Dr. Sheppard was acquitted
in a second trial.

Other Remedies Suggested

The press argues that it is up to the judges to protect defendants' rights.
Judges can postpone trials or move them to other cities, can weed out jurors
prejudiced by publicity and can keep jurors from reading or seeing prejudicial
stories, the press says.

The defendants, however, say those protections are sometimes less meaningful
than they seem to be. Last month, for example, the defendants in the slaying of
two Nyack, N.Y., police officers and a Brink's guard got their case transferred
out of Rockland County because of prejudicial publicity. However, they are
seeking another change of venue, to New York City, on the ground that the new
trial site, in Orange County, may be even less favorable for finding impartial
jurors.

In the New Orleans case, the lawyers for the seven indicted police officers had
successfully argued that the extensive print and television coverage of the case
had made finding unprejudiced jurors in that city highly unlikely. Now they say
CBS has created exactly the same problem for them in Dallas.

They were particularly bitter that CBS had taken the New Orleans segment, which
they said had been largely finished two months ago, and scheduled it at the
beginning of a program that network officials knew would have a very large
Dallas audience. The program was broadcast immediately after the NFL football
playoff game between Dallas and Green Bay.

Mr. Chandler of CBS denied that there had been any commercial motivation in the
scheduling decision.  And he said it was ''appalling'' to suggest that the show
be postponed so that it would not interfere with picking an impartial jury. The
public needs to be informed about the issues in the case, he said, and ''when is
a better time than when a trial is to take place?''

Yale Kamisar, an authority on criminal procedure at the University of Michigan,
said the show could have been held up until after a jury was selected and
sequestered. ''What's the great urgency in doing it now?'' he asked.

But he defended the right of CBS to decide for itself and for its own reasons
when it would broadcast its reports.  In arguing for the restraining order, the
defense lawyers had also contended that other remedies, such as delaying the
trial until after public interest waned, were unfair to the defendants and to a
community torn by racial tension.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MISSOURI NOW FEARS 100 SITES COULD BE TAINTED BY DIOXIN

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 2049 words

DATELINE: KANSAS CITY, Mo., Jan. 17


The number of sites suspected by Missouri officials of being contaminated with
deadly dioxin has reached about 100, up from the 55 earlier suspected.

State and Federal officials trying to cope with the environmental disaster still
do not know its full dimensions.  The Federal Environmental Protection Agency,
using somewhat more narrow criteria than the state investigators, has listed 83
potential sites. Although some will be eliminated after testing, the
environmental investigators say they fear that countless other sites remain to
be detected or may never be found.

Of approximately 55 pounds of dioxin hauled from a defunct chemical plant in
southwest Missouri, about 43 pounds are unaccounted for, and the fear is that
the compound may now be scattered across Missouri and possibly in neighboring
Illinois as well.

Dioxin's effects on humans are not fully understood, but in laboratory animals,
death and disease can result from such unimaginably small quantities that E.P.A.
officials call it ''the most acutely toxic compound made by man.'' A single oral
dose of 25 micrograms could kill a chicken weighing about two pounds. The
miniscule size of such a dose is indicated by a few definitions: There are a
million micrograms in a gram, and it takes 28 grams to make an ounce.

Fears Over Long-Term Exposure

While it remains to be seen what effects small concentrations of dioxin in the
environment will have on humans over the long term, it is feared that this
exposure will cause cancer and other disorders.

The dioxin, a chemical byproduct of some manufacturing processes, was spread to
roads, farms, horse arenas and homesides around Missouri. The dioxin originated
at a plant in Verona, southwest Missouri, that made the germicide
hexachlorophene, and it was dissolved in sludge.

The search for the plant's waste has strained the resources of the laboratories
the investigators are using. Contamination has been confirmed at 15 sites, but
soil tests have been taken at only 21 of the unconfirmed sites. No results from
these are available.

''The feeling is, why go look for more problems when we do not have the staff to
solve what we know about?'' said Fred A. Lafser, the director of the State
Department of Natural Resources, who estimated the number of suspected sites at
100. ''I cannot afford to stop looking, but I cannot solve what I know about.''

Complicating the problem is that the scientific information is so imprecise
about what concentrations of dioxin constitute a human hazard and about its
routes of ingestion. The Centers for Disease Control regard one part per billion
as a health hazard.

''One of the problems is the knowledge pool on dioxin,'' Mr. Lafser said.
''Nobody wants to make a definitive statement on something being safe, but
that's what people want to know. It may not be as bad as we think.''

The national spotlight in recent weeks has been on just one of the contaminated
sites, the St. Louis suburb of Times Beach, because it was also ravaged by
floods. But dioxin levels three times higher than in Times Beach persist in
another St. Louis suburb, Imperial, where families are living near a landfill
containing as much as 300 parts per billion.

Morris Kay, a Republican Party official from Kansas who was appointed regional
administrator of the E.P.A. here last month, was vague about the agency's plans
for this and other sites. He said that a decision on how to decontaminate the
Imperial site would be made ''by early spring'' and that the others would have
to await further testing.

''We must determine the full extent of the problem,'' he said. ''We are doing it
as quickly as we can. We have increased our laboratory capacity.''

Complaints About E.P.A. Pace

Local residents and state officials have complained that the E.P.A has reacted
sluggishly to the situation.  Neither the E.P.A. nor state officials will
disclose the names of the suspected sites, on the ground that some of them would
ultimately be cleared and property values would be reduced unnecessarily.
However, a partial list has emerged, and it includes the St. Louis Police
Department arena, the P.I.E truck lines in St.  Louis and various farms and
arenas. Rowena Michaels, a spokesman for the E.P.A. here, said residents and
owners of the affected properties had been notified.

Dioxin is the common term for a large group of compounds, the most toxic of
which is 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-para-dioxin. It was a contaminant in the
herbicide Agent Orange used in Vietnam and is suspected by many as the cause of
disabilities suffered by some Vietnam veterans.

On the basis of animal tests, dioxin is 150,000 times as toxic as cyanide and as
much as 670 times as lethal as strychnine. It has been linked to mutations,
birth defects, cancer, skin disorders, kidney and liver failure and other
problems in animals. Doses as small as five parts per 1,000 billion have caused
statistically significant increases in cancer in rats. The St. Louis
Post-Dispatch recently put this amount in terms graphic to martini drinkers: It
is equivalent to five jiggers of vermouth in a million tank cars of gin.

Since humans cannot be subjected to controlled tests, human effects are known
only from accidental exposure. Dioxin has been directly linked to chloracne, a
skin condition similar to adolescent acne but much more severe. It has also been
cited as a possible cause of cancer as well as kidney, liver and other diseases.

About 120 pounds of dioxin were generated by the hexachlorophene plant, run by
the North Eastern Pharmaceutical and Chemical Company, in 21 months of operation
from 1970 to 1972. Some of the waste was disposed of properly, but from February
to October 1971 about 55 pounds were removed in 18,500 gallons of sludge by a
waste hauler, Russell D. Bliss of Ellisville, Mo., who mixed it with waste oil
and sprayed much of it over roads and horse arenas for dust control.

Casual Disposal of Waste

The Missouri situation underscores the casual way in which extremely hazardous
wastes were disposed of before waste control laws were enacted. In one instance
a farmer, James Denney, was paid $150 to allow the Verona plant to bury drums of
dioxin on his nearby farm. It has cost nearly $2 million to clean up that site.

Environmentalists say the situation may be just a harbinger of problems to be
faced ultimately by many states as the consequences of past practices are
realized.

The case has also raised questions here about how such a calamity could have
happened. According to court documents in a civil case filed in 1972 against Mr.
Bliss by owners of one of the stables he sprayed where horses died, Mr. Bliss
identified Times Beach as one of the towns whose roads he sprayed with
contaminated oil. Yet it was only late last year, a decade later, that the soil
was tested and high levels of contamination were found.

Further, dioxin was first identified in 1974 by the national Centers for Disease
Control as the cause of deaths of horses and other animals and some human
illness. On March 31, 1975, the centers issued a report urging the excavation
and removal of dioxincontaminated soil at the Minker and Stout residences in
Imperial. No action was taken by either the E.P.A. or the state.

Regional officials of the environmental agency say they can find no record of
having received the report. Missouri health and environmental officials say that
they had little authority or resources to deal with the problem then and that it
was then thought that dioxin had a half-life, or period of disintegration, of
only a year, erroneously suggesting that the problem would solve itself.

Flood Debris Moved to Dump

Last week the pace of daily events quickened. Over the objections of residents
near a dump site chosen in Warren County, dozens of truckloads of flood debris
were removed from Times Beach, after initial tests showed no detectable dioxin
in the debris. The detection limit being used here is 1 part per billion. But
soil test results are still not in.

Also, the Centers for Disease Control, under a $500,000 contract to the E.P.A.,
began medical screening of residents of Times Beach and other affected
communities in an effort to monitor the long-term human consequences of dioxin
exposure. No early results were expected.

Questions also arose last week about possible agricultural problems from the
contamination. Bill Davis, a dairyman near Verona, was recently forced to dump
1,400 gallons of milk after Kraft refused to buy it. Many of his Guernsey cattle
were found to be sufferering from bovine leukemia.

Mr. Davis said his cattle used to drink from the Spring River, one of the sites
known to be contaminated. But it was unclear if there was any relationship
between the chemical and the disease, since dioxin is not soluble in water. The
Food and Drug Administration is testing the milk.

Tracing the fate of the 55 or 60 pounds of dioxin hauled off by the Bliss Waste
Oil Company has been a major headache. Estimates have been made by the E.P.A in
a flow chart that the agency's officers here refused to release officially.
However, a copy of the chart has been obtained through unofficial channels.

The chart estimates that Mr. Bliss deposited three pounds on the floor of the
Bubbling Springs Arena at Fenton, near St. Louis, three pounds at the Timberline
Stables near New Bloomfield, six pounds at the Shenandoah Stables near Troy and
1.5 pounds on the road of his own farm at Rosati. The E.P.A. also speculates
that three more pounds may have been sprayed on Mr. Bliss's horse arena and sold
to a refinery in Illinois. Mr. Lafser said that perhaps one more pound might be
at Times Beach.

40 Pounds Unaccounted For

That leaves 40 pounds or more unaccounted for. Mr. Bliss regularly sold his oil
to refineries for re-use, which is where some might have gone.

After horses, birds and other animals died at the arenas, the soil was dug up,
and, strange as it seems in hindsight, some of it from the Bubbling Springs
arena was deposited as landfill at residential sites at Imperial. Three of those
sites have been designated by the E.P.A for evacuation and cleanup.

Mr. Bliss has maintained from the beginning that he did not realize he was
transporting hazardous wastes.  ''You could have told me it was some kind of a
new jelly and I'd have put it on toast and eaten it,'' he told a Missouri
legislative hearing last week.

Officials of the chemical plant have said in court documents that they warned
him about the nature of the material. The state is attempting to revoke his
transporter's license on the ground that he has repeatedly and knowingly dumped
other kinds of toxic wastes.

Even if all the sites can be traced, it is very unclear what can be done about
them. The options are to leave the contaminated soil in place, cap it with clean
soil or remove it and treat it by photolysis, or exposure to ultraviolet light,
or other means such as incineration to degrade the poison. The last
''comprehensive solution'' is preferred by Gov. Christopher S. (Kit) Bond, but
it would be extremely costly.

No Guarantee of Safe Disposal

''Unfortunately, the state of the art is that we do not have the ultimate
disposal that we can say today is going to work,'' said Mrs. Michaels, the
E.P.A. spokesman. ''We've never faced an entire town before. Until a feasibility
study is done it is premature to say what should be done.''

All of this has produced more than a little tension between the E.P.A. and state
offficials, who are collaborating in the studies.  Mr. Lafser, the director of
natural resources, said: ''The biggest frustration is the failure of the
Washington office of the E.P.A to understand the magnitude of the problem and
eliminate the bottleneck in laboratory capacity. We know we will be taking
thousands of samples over the next few months. They do not have the capacity to
do that. It is a massive problem that will be with us for a long time.''

He added that the E.P.A. had ''practically dismantled'' its pesticide
enforcement programs in some states to get the investigators needed here.

Mrs. Michaels said that the agency was certifying eight new laboratories to do
dioxin tests and that it would soon be able to analyze 650 samples every two
weeks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of technicians preparing sample for testing (page
A23)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DEATH PENALTY PROVISION OF MILITARY CODE CALLED UNCONSTITUTIONAL;
BY RIGHTS GROUPS

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 605 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 17


Civil rights advocates called upon the nation's highest military court today to
strike down the death penalty provisions of the military justice code, which
have not been updated to conform to Supreme Court rulings in recent years.

In a brief to the Court of Military Appeals, the American Civil Liberties Union
and the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund Inc. asserted that it was
''obvious'' that the death penalty provisions were unconstitutional. A committee
of the New York City Bar Association also signed the brief.

The groups had been invited by the court here to act as friends of the court in
a case involving Pfc. Wyatt L. Matthews of the Army, who was convicted of rape
and premeditated murder in the death of an officer's wife. He was sentenced to
die in 1979 in a court-martial at Nuremberg, West Germany.

The death sentence was affirmed, 8 to 4, by a Court of Military Review.

Limited to Certain Crimes

The capital punishment provisions of the Uniform Code of Military Justice,
enacted by Congress in 1950, give courts-martial the option of imposing the
death penalty in convictions for murder or rape.

Those provisions appear to be inconsistent with a series of Supreme Court
rulings beginning in 1972 that have invalidated similar state and Federal
statutes for failing to specify ''aggravating'' and ''mitigating'' factors that
juries must take into account determining whether to sentence a convicted
murderer to death.

The Supreme Court also ruled, in 1977, that the death penalty cannot be imposed
for raping an adult, although it could be imposed in a rape-murder case if
''aggravating'' factors were established.

Army prosecutors have filed a 200-page brief in the case challenging the
jurisdiction of the three-judge Court of Military Appeals to decide the
constitutionality of the code's provisions.  They contend that ''premeditation''
is a sufficient aggravating factor in a murder case. The prosecutors conceded,
however, that the capital punishment option in rape cases was unconstitutional.

Last Execution in 1961

The last military execution was carried out in 1961, and there have been only 12
executions under the code since 1950. Private Matthews is one of six men now
under sentence of death in the military.

In addition to challenging the constitutionality of the death penalty provisions
in the code, the 50-page brief filed today by the rights groups contends that
Private Matthews was denied a fair trial because of several errors by the
military judge.

''The death penalty has been imposed in the military so infrequently and so
arbitrarily,'' the brief says, ''that its imposition here would be cruel and
unusual punishment,'' in violation of the Constitution.

The document notes that blacks have been sentenced to death in the military in
disproportionately high numbers, and that soldiers who were found guilty of
participating in mass murders of civilians in Vietnam and elsewhere have
received comparatively light sentences.  Mr. Matthews is black and his victim
was white.

The brief was filed by Eugene R. Fidell of Washington on behalf of the civil
liberties union; Ronald W. Meister of New York on behalf of the NAACP Legal
Defense Fund, and Steven S. Honigman of New York on behalf of the New York City
Bar Association's Committee on Military Justice and Military Affairs.

There is no direct appeal to the Supreme Court from a decision of the Court of
Military Appeals. But if Private Matthews loses this appeal, he could bring
habeas corpus proceedings in the Federal courts. In any event he could be
executed only with the approval of the President.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE ADDICTIVE PERSONALITY: COMMON TRAITS ARE FOUND

BYLINE: By BRYCE NELSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2070 words


Who is the addict? With addictive tragedies striking every community in the
nation - with many millions of Americans addicted to alcohol and drugs alone -
legions of scientists are asking: What aspects of psychological makeup
contribute to addiction? Are there common threads that weave through all
addictions, from hard drugs to cigarettes, from gambling to overeating?

It is part of a much broader effort that has already seen progress in
understanding the chemistry of addiction, as biochemists isolate the chemicals
and mechanisms by which the brain gives itself pleasure. And the whole panoply
of addiction research has led to insights that buttress a profusion of
therapies. Though some of them hold great promise, all would benefit from an
increased understanding of the addictive personality.

Despite the wide gulf between an addiction to drugs and an addiction to
gambling, some mental health experts find it useful to view addiction as
including all self-destructive, compulsive behaviors. Some even go so far as to
include the relatively benign activity of compulsive television-watching.

In bringing together much of the existing knowledge on the personality's role in
addictions, with an emphasis on drugs and alcohol, a new study prepared for the
National Academy of Sciences concludes that there is no single set of
psychological characteristics that embrace all addictions. But the study does
see common elements from addiction to addiction.

The report finds that there are several ''significant personality factors'' that
can contribute to addiction:

- Impulsive behavior, difficulty in delaying gratification, an antisocial
personality and a disposition toward sensation seeking.

- A high value on nonconformity combined with a weak commitment to the goals for
achievement valued by the society.

- A sense of social alienation and a general tolerance for deviance.

- A sense of heightened stress. This may help explain why adolescence and other
stressful transition periods are often associated with the most severe drug and
alcohol problems.

The author of the study, Alan R. Lang, a psychology professor at Florida State
University, believes that the continuing search for the personality traits that
play a part in the development of addictions is an essential part of the broader
fight against addiction, an opinion shared by others familiar with the field.
''If we can better identify the personality factors,'' he said in an interview,
''they can help us devise better treatment and can open up new strategies to
intervene and break the patterns of addiction.''

Moreover, Dr. Lang believes that the insights provided by this kind of research
could lead to much more effective preventive programs than those available
today, to be used ''before problems reach the critical stage.'' Supplementing
the personality factors listed in the academy's report, other behavioral
scientists who have studied addicts point to additional often-found features of
personality or background - a lack of self-esteem, marked depression or anxiety,
physical or sexual abuse in childhood, and sharply conflicting parental
expectations.

The Inclusive Approach

The broad approach to addiction is taken by Lawrence J. Hatterer, an associate
clinical professor of psychiatry at the Cornell University Medical College who
wrote in his book, ''The Pleasure Addicts'' (Barnes) that ''Addictive behavior
has invaded every aspect of American life today. We all feel the cloud of
concern about becoming addictive - preoccupation with weight, smoking, drinking
too much, or being caught in an excess of spending, acquiring, gambling, sex or
work.''

Among other activities which, done in excess, have been characterized as
addictive behavior are caffeine consumption, eating of chocolates or other
sugar-laden foods, television watching, playing video games and even running.

But not all addictions are equally harmful and not all behavior that could lead
to addiction necessarily does. Although Dr. Hatterer is among those who argue
that addictions of all kinds are similar, he finds it useful to classify the
abuse of alcohol, barbiturates and narcotics as ''hard addictions'' because of
the quickness with which such substances affect many aspects of behavior, and
adversely influence many people around the abuser. Dr. Hatterer terms compulsive
behavior such as excessive smoking, gambling, running, spending or work as
''soft addictions'' because the consequences are not immediately felt by the
abuser.

None of these activities are considered to be addictions by Dr.  Hatterer unless
they involve excessive, repetitive use of pleasurable activities to cope with
unmanageable internal conflict, pressure and stress. While such activity may
begin pleasurably in a person's life, the process in the addict involves
increasing activity to achieve the same effect and eventually results in injury
to the person's health or to his work, family and social relationships. The
addicted person typically denies that his activity is detrimentally affecting
him. If the addict is forced to stop, he finds he suffers physical or
psychological withdrawal pains, and often feels compelled to resume his
excessive pattern.

Compulsiveness Is a Key

Moderation is the distinguishing characteristic. Most drinkers do not become
alcoholics, and most runners do not become running addicts. However, if the
runner is compulsively using his activity to cope with unresolved internal
conflicts to the extent that he keeps injuring his body or destroying his work
and family relationships, then he too has fallen victim to addictive behavior.
He has become so dependent on the physical ''high'' he gets from his
allencompassing running that he cannot concern himself with the difficulties it
is causing.

Seeing common features in compulsive behavior, the national academy's Committee
on Substance Abuse and Habitual Behavior has recently explored dependence on
opiates, alcohol, smoking, overeating, gambling and television watching.

The committee report, to be published in February, contains the section on the
addictive personality by Dr. Lang. He based his review largely on studies of
alcohol and drug abusers, the areas in which the preponderance of research has
been done. On the basis of these studies and his own research, Dr. Lang
concluded that ''there is no single, unique personality entity that is a
necessary and sufficient condition for substance use.''

Same Drug, Different Addictions

Reasons for this include the fact that the same drug can affect people
differently and that drugs fulfill various needs for different people. Among
alcohol abusers, for instance, the academy's report found that research had
focused on two types: first, the anxious, depressed neurotic who may drink to
kill his psychological pain; second, the unstable antisocial personality who
drinks for excitement or sensation-seeking.

Although Dr. Lang's contribution emphasized alcohol and drugs, the rest of the
report did not shy away from insights into addictive behavior involving
television-watching and overeating. According to Charles P. O'Brien, a committee
member and chief of psychiatry and head of the addiction research center at the
Veterans Administration Medical Center in Philadelphia, the academy committee
found that different types of addicts ''resemble each other in various ways.''

Dr. O'Brien said that people in all these addictions progressively needed
greater quantities of stimulation to satisfy their needs and developed symptoms
of withdrawal when deprived of the addictive activity. He also noted that
addicts to one activity would often switch to another when deprived of
opportunity to participate in the original addiction.

Dr. O'Brien said there are very important similarities in the personality
characteristics of the addictions studied, including tendencies to depression,
dependent behavior and difficulty in formulating long-term personal goals
because of a concentration on short-term goals.

While personality plays a significant part in addictive behavior, behavioral
scholars often note that addictions are a product of the subtle interplay
between social factors and psychological factors, as well as the physiological
components - and an understanding of the precise mix remains elusive.

Switching Addictions

Certainly the availability of drugs, and social and legal attitudes toward them,
play important roles in whether addictions develop and continue. For instance,
research on veterans addicted to heroin in Vietnam indicated that only about
eight percent of them continued the addiction after returning to the United
States. But many of those who stopped using heroin had troubles when they
returned home with a drug more widely available in the United States, alcohol.
This observation lends support to those who see personality traits playing a
part in crossing over from one addiction to another.

Drug availability and occupational stress help explain why ''physicians have the
highest rate of opiate addiction of any group,'' according to Dr. O'Brien. He
also notes that physicians have high rates of abuse of alcohol and mood-altering
prescription drugs.  Charles Winick, a sociologist at the City College of New
York, has also linked availability and stress to high rates of drug dependence
among physicians, particularly psychiatrists and surgeons.

Since most people do not become addicts, what is known about the ''non-addict''
profile? Dr. Robert B. Millman, director of the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Service
at the Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic at the New York Hospital describes the
best candidates for this group as ''those people who have strong families, often
with religious backgrounds and who have good social relations.'' Experts say
that the youth who has positive relations with his peers and with adults is less
likely to fall prey to drug addiction than the antiauthoritarian loner who is
achieving below his potential.

Although no one can say with certainty which kind of family is most likely to
produce an addict, many mental health experts have strong views on the subject.
For instance, Leon Wurmser, a psychiatry professor and former director of the
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Program at the University of Maryland School of Medicine,
notes that the potentially addictive child may well have been physically abused
by parents, who are often themselves dependent on drugs or alcohol. He notes
that the child has often been lied to, shamed and humiliated by parents who act
in a highly inconsistent manner.

''The mother may support something that the father strongly disapproves, or a
parent may tell the child one thing today and the opposite tomorrow,'' he says.

This legacy of brutality ''leaves the child in a helpless rage,'' Dr. Wurmser
says. He does not view authority, which has been represented by the parents, as
something which should be respected, but as capriciously cruel. The child can
feel completely out of control and is racked by feelings of violence toward
those around him. For him, the use of narcotics can be a way of trying to
suppress the highly aggressive feelings that have resulted from his early
trauma.

Dr. Hatterer agrees that cruelty to children often contributes to later
addiction; he says that most of the addicts of all kinds that he has seen in his
practice have been physically abused as children.  Dr. Hatterer also shares Dr.
Wurmser's view that inconsistent parental behavior shapes many addictive
persons.

Dangers of Inconsistency

''Every addictive adult I have treated has told either of excesses or
inconsistencies or of deprivation or overindulgence in early life. There were
shifts from too much to too little love, protection or discipline,'' Dr.
Hatterer has written. There were also frequent instances of ''marked swings from
unrealistic praise to destructive hypercritical behavior.''

While behavioral scientists agree that the addiction problem is one of great
breadth and depth, some point out that concern about all potentially addictive
substances can be misplaced. For instance, Dr.  Lang, the author of the academy
study on the addictive personality, wrote that some of the evidence he surveyed
''suggested that total abstinence from alcohol may indicate rigidity of
personality structure as maladaptive as problem drinking itself.''

Next week: the chemistry of addiction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: ADDICTION; First of three articles in Science Times

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 21, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'CAINE MUTINY'

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 919 words


STAMFORD WHEN it stays within the boundaries of its genre, Herman Wouk's ''The
Caine Mutiny Court-Martial'' remains a rousing courtroom drama. But when the
author begins to moralize about patriotism, the play becomes facile. What it
needs to carry an audience past the sermon is acting that is as polished as the
gold buttons on the naval officers' uniforms. For the most part, that is what it
receives in Arthur Sherman's revival at the Hartman Theater Company.

A large cast, led by John Rubinstein, William Atherton and Michael Moriarty,
brings a sense of conviction to its roles, approaching the familiar story as if
it were fresh from Mr. Wouk's typewriter. In other words, this is no mothball
''Mutiny.''

One's strongest memories of the work's various incarnations are of Captain Queeg
(Humphrey Bogart in the movie) rolling those marblesize steel balls in his fist
as he disintegrates on the witness stand and of the defense lawyer, Barney
Greenwald (Henry Fonda on stage), tossing a drink in the face of the
manipulative Lieutenant Keefer. According to the author, Keefer is the true
villain of the piece.

In tandem, Mr. Moriarty as Queeg and Mr. Rubinstein as Greenwald go a long
distance toward making us forget - at least temporarily - their distinguished
predecessors. Mr. Moriarty does it through understatement. He begins as a model
of rectitude - a young but a resilient Captain Queeg. Instead of breaking down
on the stand, he gradually reveals the fissures in his martinet personality.
Deep into his monologue, he nonchalantly takes those celebrated steel balls out
of his pocket and rolls them, catches himself in the unconscious act and,
without blinking, replaces them in his pocket. There is considerable strength in
Mr. Moriarty's restraint.

Mr. Rubinstein's Greenwald begins his defense of the rebellious Lieutenant Maryk
with evident distaste for his client's cause - more intense than one remembers
from earlier versions. He has an air of abstraction, as if he is not paying
attention to the trial, but entering battle, he warms to his mission and disarms
witnesses into entrapping themselves. Then, with icy resolution, he triggers the
self-exposure of Queeg. The artfully paced performance, gathering momentum,
reminded me somewhat of Paul Newman's lawyer in the film ''The Verdict.'' As
with Mr. Newman, the audience roots for Mr.  Rubinstein to get his courtroom act
together, and when he finally does, it is with cutting authority.

Throughout the testimony, his equal adversary is Mr. Atherton as the judge
advocate. The crux of the case is the argument between lawyers, and the actors
match each other, step by step. One thrusts, the other wounds, each using a
classic courtroom technique. Mr.  Atherton's lawyer is so confident that he
outwits himself, leading a friendly witness down the garden path to
contradiction.

In revival, the central conflict -was Lieutenant Maryk justified in relieving
Queeg of command during a typhoon? - retains its dramatic validity. What is less
convincing is the author's defense of militarism, and almost 30 years after the
original production (and also after Vietnam) the approach seems especially
untimely. There is a 48-star American flag on the wall of the courtroom - an
effective setting by John Falabella - and we can almost feel the flag waving.

In his direction, Mr. Sherman is clearly trying to take the edge off the
audience's disbelief and to mitigate the author's emotionalism. Just as Mr.
Moriarty's Queeg seems reasonable even in his irrationality, Gary Swanson's
Maryk is not cut from the heroic mold. The actor plays him as an average,
absent-minded journeyman - a bit too much so for credibility. He is not a good
witness for himself, a fact that makes his lawyer's task even more difficult.

The epilogue, Greenwald's accusation against Keefer, is awkwardly staged in
front of the curtained courtroom, but the trial scenes have a military
authenticity, and there is no question about Mr.  Wouk's gift for dramatic
confrontation. In addition to the leading actors, there is solid support from
Brad Sullivan, Geoffrey Horne and from J. Kenneth Campbell as the cowardly
Keefer. Mr. Rubinstein, in particular, deserves a smart military salute.

Military Authenticity
THE CAINE MUTINY COURT-MARTIAL, by Herman Wouk; based on his novel ''The Caine
Mutiny;'' directed by Arthur Sherman; scenery by John Falabella; costumes by
David Murin; lighting by Marcia Madeira; stage manager, Victoria Merrill.
Presented by The Hartman Theater, Edwin Sherin, producing artistic director;
Harris Goldman, executive director. At the Stamford Center for the Arts, 307
Atlantic Street, Stamford.  Lt. Stephen Maryk ........................Gary
Swanson Lt.Barney Greenwald ...................John Rubinstein Lt. Com. John
Challee ................William Atherton Captain Blakely
.......................Albert Stratton Lt. Com. Philip Francis Queeg
........Michael Moriarty Lt. Thomas Keefer .................J. Kenneth Campbell
Signalman Third Class Junius Urban Edward Alexander Lt. Willis Seward Keith
................Jonathan Hogan Capt. Randolph Southard .................Brad
Sullivan Dr. Forrest Lundeen ...................Leon B. Stevens Dr. Bird
...............................Geoffrey Horne Stenographer
............................Tom Paliferro Orderly
..............................Richard Arbolino Six Members of the Court William
D. Askin, Jeffrey W. Cook, Lloyd J.  Gross, Bill MacInnis, Joseph Mallon and
Louis Soltanoff.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 21, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES;
The searches of an Italian director.

BYLINE: By Chris Chase

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1427 words


AMONG the movies opening this weekend, there are, oddly, three that deal with
that rite of passage through which young people travel to become grownups. One
picture is Italian, another Australian and the third American, but in every
case, the young people are oldfashioned, in the sense that they believe in work,
love and honor (none of them sniff cocaine, or want to be rock stars); they meet
the challenges offered them, and they give an audience a chance to cheer.

The most gentle and romantic of the three is the Italian ''Sweet Pea,'' opening
Sunday at the Embassy 72d Street, which is about a 13-year-old boy, the child of
hippie parents, who becomes a father himself after a drunken party, when an
American girl built like Wonder Woman, ends up in his bed.

Peter Del Monte, the movie's director, says he could not have employed an
actress of less heroic proportions. ''She had to be exaggerated, a comic-book
representation, seen with the eyes of a child. And she had to be a stranger, and
she had to be naive, innocent, or it would have been distasteful.'' (The
American girl, in search of a modeling career, leaves one day, taking the baby
with her, only to send him back to his father like a Christmas present, two
years later. Which is where the saga of the two children really begins.)

Mr. Del Monte's own parents were not hippies, but their lives were fairly
unsettled. They were Jewish, and they fled Italy at the beginning of World War
II. ''I grew up until 10 in New York,'' he says, in accented English. ''Then my
father, he wants to go home.  Then I came here again when I was 19 because I had
to choose between Italian and American citizenship. But it was the time of
Vietnam, so I preferred going back to Italy.''

Is he at home in both worlds? He shrugs. ''I am not at home in any place. Last
year I lived in Paris because I did a film there. I'm searching for my home.''
In fact, all of Mr. Del Monte's movies (he has made three besides ''Sweet Pea'')
are ''search'' films. In ''Sweet Pea,'' the young father and his child wander
around Milan, studying billboards. ''In all the advertising pictures where they
see just eyes or the big mouth,'' says Mr. Del Monte, ''they search for this
mythical image, which is, for the older, the first touch of love, and for the
little one, the call of the mother.''

Luca Porro, who plays the ''father,'' came to Mr. Del Monte on his own. ''I was
looking for a very responsible kid,'' the director says. ''And I was getting
desperate. And one day, Luca came into my office and said, 'You're looking for a
boy? Well I think it's me.' He was the son of a barber down the street.''

Finding the 2-year-old was even harder. ''We were the monsters of Milan,'' says
Mr. Del Monte. ''In Italy, people are afraid, because of the kidnapping and the
terrorism, and they saw us every day looking through the fences of nursery
schools.''

The baby, chosen at last, reigned as the lord of the set. ''I remember one day
he wouldn't play,'' says Mr. Del Monte. ''And we were paralyzed. The technicians
were jumping around like monkeys, scratching, trying to invent new games, and he
just said, 'No, no, no.' I could do the film only because he permitted me to do
it.''
Bringing Experience

To Role of a Free Spirit

In the American movie ''Independence Day,'' opening today (reviewed on page C8),
Kathleen Quinlan plays a free spirit, a girl who wants to break out of the small
New Mexico town where she waits on tables in her father's diner and go off to
Los Angeles to be a photographer.

Miss Quinlan knows something about free spirits. Reared in Mill Valley, Calif.,
a demon athlete who expected to spend her life teaching gymnastics to kids, she
accepted an invitation from an agent to come to Hollywood and try her luck. If
she didn't get acting work in three months, she told herself, it would be back
to the diving board.

She got acting work. Then, in 1977, even though her luck had been extraordinary,
she flew to Hawaii, where she spent the better part of two years because, she
said, ''I wanted to learn something besides motion pictures.''

It was hard for the motion-picture industry to understand. Miss Quinlan had
caused a sensation as the teen-age schizophrenic in ''I Never Promised You a
Rose Garden,'' she'd starred on Broadway with Meryl Streep and Colleen Dewhurst
in a play called ''Taken in Marriage'' (for which she'd won a Theater World
Award), and here she was, turning her back on this blooming career.

Miss Quinlan didn't care if anybody else understood. ''I felt,'' she says,
''like I was 20, going on 35. I hadn't ever played.'' In Hawaii, she played.
''Hawaiians are family-oriented, lifecelebrating people,'' she says. ''When a
baby has his first birthday, they have a birthday luau, and friends and family
come, and all the ladies cook. It's incredible. In New York, the emphasis is on
work, that's the highest value. In Hawaii, the emphasis is on living your
life.''

But two years of paradise were paradise enow. Miss Quinlan decided she was too
young to retire. She came back to California, bought a house up above the Malibu
colony and made three movies - ''Independence Day,'' ''The Last Winter'' and
''Twilight Zone'' - in rapid succession.

Looking back on the last few years, she says: ''I have my father's adventurous
spirit. He would have understood if I'd called from Hawaii and said, 'Dad, I'm
staying here and having six kids.' My mother liked that I got out of Hollywood
for a while, too. But my mother's famous last words are always, 'Behave
yourself.' We used that in the movie, in 'Independence Day.' You know, where I
go out on a date and Frances Sternhagen says to me, 'Behave yourself'. I asked
her to do that. I said, 'Frances, please say, ''Behave yourself'' for my
mother.' ''
The 'Snowy River' Bunch

That Took Chances

''The Man From Snowy River,'' also opening today (reviewed on page C5), is based
on a classic Australian poem by A.B. Paterson, a man Australians seem to refer
to, in a proprietary way, as Banjo. The poem tells the heroic tale of an
orphaned mountain boy who conquers a herd of wild horses and wins the love of a
beautiful girl.

The movie version came out last year in Australia and has become the highest
grossing movie ever shown there, surpassing even ''Star Wars.'' What's more, in
the United States markets where 20th Century-Fox has tested it, it's done so
well that the studio is going to distribute it nationally this month.

Blond, blue-eyed Tom Burlinson plays the hero, and he credits a little buckskin
horse named Denny with much of his success. ''When you're in the bush, the
relationship between man and horse is critical,'' he says. ''I'd be riding, and
I'd think, well, here comes the tree, the dream is over, you're dead, and at the
last minute Denny would duck around and look out not only for himself, but for
me on top.''

When Mr. Burlinson, in his final year of high school, told his father he didn't
want to be a lawyer, but an actor, his father was dismayed. ''And my grandfather
wrote me a letter,'' he recalls, ''saying, 'You will be mixing with people of
unsavory character.' ''

Geoff Burrowes, the film's producer, listening to this story, nods wisely.
''Absolutely accurate,'' he says.  In the eight years since Mr. Burlinson's
high-school days, his family has adjusted. ''Especially when they heard I was
going to be working with Kirk Douglas in this picture. Now my father introduces
me to people as the Man From Snowy River.''

Even though he'd sat on a horse ''only twice in my life'' before he got the
part, Mr. Burlinson did the dangerous riding - ''what Banjo refers to as 'the
terrible descent' '' - himself. ''We took a big chance with Tom,'' says Mr.
Burrowes. ''But Tom took a far greater chance with Tom.''

For this movie, everyone took chances. Mr. Burrowes had never before produced a
feature, the director, George Miller, had never directed a feature and Mr.
Burlinson had never starred in a feature.  ''It was Amateur Alley,'' Mr.
Burlinson says. Then, when the movie came out, certain Australian critics took
exception to it. Their attitude, according to Mr. Burrowes, was, ''How dare they
cast Kirk Douglas, an American, as 'the old man with hair as white as snow' that
Banjo describes. And a few intellectuals thought we were bastardizing the story,
and then we did a lot of promotion, and some critics resented that. They had a
'You can't buy us' type of attitude.''

''But that was the critics,'' says Mr. Burlinson happily. ''The people took it
to their hearts.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Peter Del Monte

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 21, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW BLOOD AT MIDSEASON: NBC UNVEILING 3 SERIES

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words


THIS weekend brings the midseason unveiling on NBC of three new series that
programmers hope will help revive the network's sagging prime-time fortunes.
Having won higher compliments than ratings with such offbeat series as ''Taxi,''
''Cheers'' and ''Fame,'' NBC moves to more familiar ground with ''Mama's
Family,'' ''The Family Tree'' and ''The A Team.''

''The A Team'' charges in at 9 P.M. on Sunday with a two-hour pilot for what is
destined to be a series of one-hour shows. It's a soldiers-of-fortune tale,
featuring George Peppard as the cigarchewing macho leader of a small band of
Vietnam veterans, including a ferocious-looking man called B.A. for Bad
Attitude; a good-looking young fellow whose specialty is role-playing and an
odd-acting pilot. They are wanted by the authorities, in the person of a square
American colonel, who anyone can see is destined for frustration, humiliation
and slow burns in the weeks ahead.

In this episode, the team, which is available to perform good works for pay, is
enlisted to rescue an American newspaperman and an entire Mexican village from
as mangy a bunch of bandits as has been brought together by a casting director
since ''Treasure of Sierra Madre'' - not to suggest that ''The A Team'' has
anything in common with that estimable film. For those interested in Latin
American politics, these bandits are in league with guerrillas who are
exploiting the peasantry.

Much effort has gone into putting together a cast of colorful characters, but
except for Mr. Peppard, who establishes a goodhumoredly hard-boiled team leader,
the rest, including the formidable Mr. T. as B.A., display more color than
character.  Directorial control of the internationally undistinguished cast is
lax. Dwight Schultz overacts like mad as the crazy pilot, and that Mexican
bandit leader (Sergio Calderon) turns in a performance that seems aimed at
offending the Mexican-American Anti-Defamation League, if there is one.

The fun comes in the action scenes, which are innocently bloodless - lots of
crashes, explosions and acrobatics, from which nobody comes out dismembered;
most of the many bullets splatter into the dirt. There is a particularly lively
chase through a movie lot, with Mr. Peppard in a dragon costume; and there are a
couple of amusing exchanges: ''You ought to be hung up by the heels in a bucket
of pig slop,'' Mr. Peppard informs the bandit leader, who replies, ''You gonna
make me angry, gringo.''

Two hours is long for a show so short on plot, and future adventures at an
hour's length may present the A Team to better advantage. The first of these can
be seen Jan. 30 on Channel 4, after the Super Bowl. The series begins officially
Tuesday, Feb. 8, at 8 P.M.
Vicki Lawrence Is Back

In 'Mama's Family' Series

''Mama's Family,'' the half-hour situation comedy that joins the Channel 4
schedule tomorrow night at 9, brings back Vicki Lawrence as the redoubtable Mama
from ''The Carol Burnett Show.'' The collisions of this tough-talking softie
with son, daughter, younger sister, grandchildren and a neighbor, all of whom we
meet on this episode, will be the stuff of plots for weeks to come. This week's
main event turns on the divorced and dispossessed son Vini, played as an
earnestly amiable bumbler by Ken Berry, another Burnett alumnus, moving in on
Mama with his two teen-age kids. That means displacing Aunt Fran, aspiring
writer of steamy novels, from her ''studio.''

The first show has its moments, in particular an opening scene of Mama whisking
away the breakfast dishes before the last bite and sip have got past Fran's
palate. Son Vini, out but not down, gets to deliver the funniest line when he
attributes the failure of his locksmith business to the fact that ''people are
going through a phase of not locking themselves out.''

Central to all, of course, is Mama. Miss Lawrence's delivery of her one-liners
is sharp enough to make one wish the lines were better. They are about as
original as the laugh track.

Whether any surprises will be forthcoming from the characters so far assembled
and the situation created remains to be seen, but the show is worth tuning in at
least once for Harvey Korman's introductory takeoff on Alistair Cooke. Ensconced
in a tacky armchair and an accent to match, presenting his reflections upon the
nature and signficance of the evening's episode, first to one camera, then
abruptly to another, Mr. Korman has a jolly time with the conventions and
pretensions of public television. To get the joke, of course, the viewer needs
to have watched ''Masterpiece Theater.'' Can it be that the television audience
is more of a piece than one would have supposed, that the same people who watch
the situation comedies upstairs watch them downstairs, too?
A Likable Crowd

In 'The Family Tree'

''The Family Tree,'' which has its Channel 4 premiere tomorrow night at 10,
introduces us to a group of people who are likable because they appear to like
one another. The main protagonists, Annie and Kevin, engagingly played by Anne
Archer and Frank Converse, get the show rolling by deciding to marry. Each has
been divorced and has children by the first marriage - and it is the children
who provide the plot for the initial episode.

Kevin's teen-age son holds a grudge against his father for leaving him with an
unloving mother for five years. Annie's youngest child, Toby, who is deaf,
believes himself somehow to be responsible for his parents' breakup. As written
by Carol Evan McKeand and directed by Joan Darling, the main characters display
a depth of affection and sensitivity to one another that is doubtless too good
to be true, but warming to watch. They could grow on you.

The scene-stealing role of Toby, played with sweet simplicity by Jonathan Hall
Kovacs, adds considerable dramatic power to much of the episode. Particularly in
the climactic scene with Annie, Toby's deafness becomes not a handicap, but an
aid to frank talking - which seems to be the underlying theme of this
intelligently conceived series.

''The Family Tree'' is being presented for a ''limited run'' of six weeks. If it
catches on, it will probably be brought back for a longer stay next season. Good
luck, family.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Preppard

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 22, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CONSUMER PRICES OFF 0.3% IN MONTH ON MORTGAGE DROP

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FUERBRINGER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1202 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 21


The Consumer Price Index, pulled down by lower interest rates on home mortgages,
dropped by three-tenths of 1 percent in December, the Labor Department reported
today.

The decline brought the inflation rate for all of last year to 3.9 percent, a
full percentage point less than most economists had predicted. It was the lowest
increase since the 3.4 percent of 1972, when wage and price controls were in
effect, and far below the double-digit rates of 1979 and 1980. The index rose
8.9 percent in 1981.

Declines in food and apparel prices also helped produce the decline in December,
the second monthly drop last year. For all of 1982, the inflation rate slowed
chiefly because of the 6.6 percent drop in gasoline prices and because of the
decline in mortgage interest rates, which fell 12.5 percent.

Strongest Signal to Date

So sharp a fall in the price index, the most widely followed gauge of inflation,
is the strongest signal to date that, at least for a while, runaway price
increases that had provoked distortions in the economy had been arrested,

High inflation forced up interest rates, encouraged consumers and businesses to
spend, borrow and speculate, rather than save and invest, and helped stall the
economy. Finally, inflation brought on the general acceptance of a stringent
anti-inflation policy that brought the economy to a standstill.

In December mortgage interest rates dropped 4.8 percent and more than accounted
for the decline of three-tenths of 1 percent in the index. Without this decline
in mortgage rates, the overall index would have been up two-tenths of 1 percent.
Offsetting part of this decline were rises in prices for heating oil and natural
gas and household furnishings. Natural gas prices, which have been rising
steadily, were up 1.2 percent in December and rose a stunning 25.4 percent for
the year.

5.2 Percent Rate for Area

Inflation also eased in the New York-northeastern New Jersey area, as consumer
prices dropped six-tenths of 1 percent in December, bringing the inflation rate
to 5.2 percent for all of 1982. (Page 38.)

The Government also reported another encouraging economic sign, a record 12
percent rise in December orders for durable goods. (Page 35.)

The anti-inflation policy at the end of President Carter's tenure in office and
that of President Reagan mark the third round of a struggle against inflation
since the run-up in prices after the Vietnam War. In the early 1970's President
Nixon instituted wage and price controls that brought inflation, then at an
unacceptable level of 6.1 percent in 1969, down to 3.4 percent in 1971 and 1972.

But prices began to rise again after controls were lifted. The quadrupling of
oil prices that followed the Arab oil embargo and strong money growth helped
push inflation to 12.2 percent in 1974, despite the severe 1973-75 recession.
That recession finally managed to push the Consumer Price Index down to 7
percent in 1975 and 4.8 percent in 1976.

The current inflationary spurt came during the Carter Administration, and was
again helped by surges in energy prices and interest rates.

The Reagan Administration hailed today's report, the main positive result of its
economic policy. ''There is good reason to believe that we have finally ended
the upward spiral of inflation that began in the mid-1960's,'' said Martin S.
Feldstein, the chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, at a
special briefing at the White House.

But officials in the Administration and private economists acknowledge that the
17-month old recession, which is now the longest since World War II, is one of
the main reasons for the dramatic drop in inflation. While the 3.9 percent is
the lowest rate of consumer inflation since 1972, it will go down in the record
book alongside a 10.8 percent unemployment rate at the end of last year, the
highest since 1940, and a 1.8 percent decline in the gross national product, the
steepest one-year decline since 1946.

Mr. Feldstein would not say directly that the recession was necessary to bring
down inflation. But he did say he thought the Federal Reserve had been the
principal agent in bringing down inflation. Most economists agree that it was
the tight monetary policy of the Federal Reserve - especially the high interest
rates that resulted from that policy - that started and deepened the recession.
A policy change last summer has brought down interest rates, primarily to
stimulate the economy.

Critics of the Administration, however, said Mr. Feldstein was discounting the
cost of bringing down inflation. ''What a callous and shabby exercise it was to
send out your press secretary and chief economic adviser to proclaim victory at
recession-fed disinflation,'' said Charles Manatt, the chairman of the
Democratic National Committee, in a statement. ''That is akin to having a
general take credit for the bloodshed by his troops. General Reagan didn't drive
down inflation - it was the army of 12 million unemployed nonconsumers that
drove down the prices.''

Many economists think that the sharp decline in the inflation rate was real, but
that it was slightly exaggerated. They say that the sharp rise in mortgage rates
distorted the index in 1979 and 1980, pushing it too high, and that declining
rates last year distorted it again, pushing it too low. Mr. Feldstein agreed,
saying that the decline in interest rates ''slightly exagerates what is
happening in the current period.''

Inflation is tracked by several other guages besides the price index. One,
prepared by the National Federation of Independent Businesses, showed that in
the last three months of 1982, only 19 percent of the businesses it polls were
charging higher prices than in the previous quarter and that 20 percent were
charging less than in the previous quarter.

In December, grocery store prices fell five-tenths of 1 percent, following a
drop of one-tenth of 1 percent in November. Beef and veal prices were down 1.6
percent as were poultry prices. Pork prices fell 2.4 percent with bacon prices
down 4.2 percent. Fresh fruit prices fell 21 percent with oranges off 14.4
percent.

Groceries Up 2.2 Percent

For the year, grocery prices were up only 2.2 percent. Egg prices, which fell
6.3 percent in December, were down 12.9 percent for the year. Dairy products
were up only nine-tenths of 1 percent and fresh vegetables fell 3.2 percent.

Gasoline prices were down nine-tenths of 1 percent in the month, while used car
prices continued to rise, jumping 1.5 percent in December. For the year used car
prices were up 10.9 percent.

Medical care costs continued to rise, but the seven-tenths of 1 percent increase
in December was slightly slower than during the rest of the year. Still, medical
care costs rose 11 percent for the year.

All the figures in the Consumer Price Index are adjusted to remove normal
seasonal fluctuations in prices. The three-tenths of 1 percent decline in
December, which was matched by one in March, would become a compound annual rate
of a decline in prices of 3.2 percent if it continued for 12 months. The
compound annual rate is based on the unrounded number for the month, which in
December was a decline of 0.0027183146.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph of price index (page 38) graph of price index

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 22, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV: HOSPITAL-DISASTER MOVIE

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 189 words


If television series about hospitals are popular and if disaster movies are
popular, why not a television movie about a disaster in a hospital? Such, I
suppose, was the torch of inspiration that set off ''Uncommon Valor,'' the
made-for-television film on CBS-TV tonight.

The scene is Salt Lake City, where a cranky fellow (Gregory Sierra, doing a
mad-scientist number) sets fire to a hospital run by a goodlooking administrator
with a bad temper (Barbara Parkins, at a loss). We also meet a fire chief who is
dependable, in homely fashion (Mitchell Ryan), and lots of other firemen,
doctors, nurses, patients and even an alcoholic wife.

But the stars of this show are the special-effects people, supervised by Cliff
Wenger, who staged the battles against the flames and smoke and the crashing
walls, and who designed the hurried evacuations, particularly of a brood of
newborn babes. It's enough to keep one watching despite a want of interest in
whether the surgery under way in the west wing will be carried through
successfully or whether the Vietnam veteran in the psychiatric ward will prove
that he can be a hero again.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIOXIN'S PERIL TO HUMANS: PROOF IS ELUSIVE

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2156 words


The deadly chemical dioxin, an unwanted byproduct of herbicides, pesticides and
other industrial products, is raising increasing concern among government
agencies, scientific researchers and people who may come in contact with it.

Communities from New York to Oregon have reported human health problems that
they fear are linked to exposure to dioxin, although the links have not been
proved scientifically.

Officials in Missouri say the number of sites there believed contaminated by the
chemical has risen to about 100, and Gov.  Christopher S. Bond has asked his
Legislature to set up a special fund to help clean them up. Dioxin, he said,
could lead to ''public hysteria'' if not handled properly.

Accord on Animal Research

Research biologists and environmental scientists generally agree that in
laboratory experiments on animals, dioxin has more harmful effects, and in
smaller doses, than any chemical man has produced.  Twenty-five millionths of a
gram is known to be potent enough to kill a two-pound animal. There are 28 grams
in an ounce.

But scientific proof of the effect on humans has been elusive.  Conducting tests
of toxic chemicals on people is ethically unacceptable, and establishing
epidemiological proof by looking for correlations between exposure and effect on
a given population is not always possible. In some cases, cancer may not develop
for 30 years after exposure to a chemical carcinogen.

Among the other unknowns about dioxin is how much of it there is in the country
and how much is being produced.  Dioxin is nearly insoluble in water, but it
clings tightly to soil particles and dissolves in organic solvents like alcohol
or oil. It can enter the body by direct skin contact, ingestion or inhalation.

Dioxin was contained in oil sprayed almost a decade ago as a dustcontrol measure
at horse stables and along roadsides throughout eastern Missouri. In recent
months, concern has arisen about dioxin's long-lasting effects on residents of
Times Beach, Mo., and other areas, and state and Federal officials have been
finding more and more sites at which the chemical was dumped.

Dioxin was among the hazardous chemicals found in 1978 at the Love Canal near a
residential neighborhood of Niagara Falls, N.Y., and it has been found at
individual dump sites elsewhere in the country. It was also a chemical
contaminant of the defoliant Agent Orange, used in Vietnam. Humans who have been
exposed to it near Love Canal, in Vietnam or in situations such as train wrecks
or factory explosions have suffered a variety of severe health problems,
including kidney and liver ailments, birth defects and cancer.

But whether it was the dioxin that caused the ailments among the humans exposed
to it has not been determined to the satisfaction of medical researchers. The
Veterans Administration, which has said it will seek to determine whether a link
exists among Vietnam veterans, has relinquished control of the project to the
Federal Centers for Disease Control.

Scientists Are Progressing

Only in recent months have scientists begun to make what they now regard as an
important breakthrough. They believe a clearer understanding of the effect of
dioxin on health is emerging.

Not until recent years were many physicians even trained to recognize symptoms
of so-called chemical diseases. Moreover, scientists, underscoring the frequent
difficulty in proving cause and effect in medicine, emphasize that it took 40
years to establish a link between cigarette smoking and lung cancer, even though
the evidence seemed to point that way all along.

Now, in a series of experiments reported most recently in last November's issue
of the scientific journal Nature, a member of the dioxin group of compounds, one
called 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzene-pdioxin, or TCDD, has been shown to be what
is called a potent ''tumor promoter'' in rats and mice.

According to the paper, by Dr. Alan Poland and others at the University of
Wisconsin's McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, the model of tumor
production derived from these experiments is relevant to humans because the
excessive multiplication of cells in the skin of mice is strikingly similar to
that evoked by TCDD in human skin.

Dr. Poland said TCDD did not appear to be a complete carcinogen by itself. But
he said it enhanced morbid growth in cells already exposed to potential
cancer-causing agents; that is, exposure to TCDD, in conspiracy with other
environmental factors, brings on the cancer.

'Basic Mechanism Is the Same'

''There is no question that dioxin plays a role in tumor formation in animals,
and almost certainly has the same action on human cells,'' said Dr. Howard
Eisen, a medical officer at the National Institutes of Health. ''The basic
mechanism is the same.''

TCDD is the variety of dioxin found in Agent Orange, which is a mixture of 2,4-D
and 2,4,5-T herbicides, and the variety confirmed in Missouri soil by the
Environmental Protection Agency. Members of the dioxin family, known as
polychlorinated dibenzodioxins, or PCDD's, are byproducts not only of herbicides
and pesticides but also of dyes, pharmaceuticals, wood preservatives and other
products known generally as chlorinated phenols.

In general, these synthetic organic compounds are formed by adding chlorine to
hydrocarbon molecules that are derived from petroleum.  Two decades ago
commercial 2,4,5-T often contained as much as 70,000 parts per billion of TCDD
and sometimes more. But manufacturers say current techniques can reduce it to a
level of less than 10 parts per billion. The industry maintains that it can
assure safe products, especially since the material sprayed on fields is heavily
diluted.

What Spraying Might Do

If the TCDD content of commercial 2,4,5-T is 100 parts per billion, for example,
a single spraying might cause surface soil concentrations of 0.02 parts per
trillion. Estimates of TCDD soil contamination from Agent Orange in Vietnam are
about 0.08 parts per billion.

Spokesmen at the Dow Chemical Corporation said that by testing their output of
the dichlorophenol herbicide 2,4-D nine times every 24 hours, they make sure
dioxin contamination never exceeds 1 part per billion. Although 2,4-D is closely
related to 2,4,5-T, it is not generally contaminated with TCDD. It does contain
other less toxic dioxins, though there has been almost no research on the
effects of these substances.

The possible risk posed by even that level of dioxin must be weighed, industry
spokesmen say, against the enormous economic value of the products.

Industry specialists say they believe, further, that the risk is not so high as
to require special precautions other than those always taken in handling
hazardous substances like herbicides and pesticides.

Advice From Disease Agency

Assessing that risk is, of course, part of the problem. Researchers say the risk
begins to appear in animals with exposure in the partsper-1,000-billion range.
The Centers for Disease Control have advised Missouri officials that materials
containing more than one part per billion of TCDD should be removed from
residential areas.

But that figure itself has caused some confusion. Dr. Renate D.  Kimbrough of
the Federal disease agency expressed annoyance with some news accounts that
reported, incorrectly, that the agency considered dioxin concentrations below 1
part per billion in soil to be ''safe.'' Although this is the detection limit
being used in soil tests at residential areas in Missouri, she said, it
represents a compromise between health concerns and cleanup practicalities. Dr.
Kimbrough said exposure to lower concentrations over extended periods could
still present health risk.

In one area of Missouri, the Environmental Protection Agency said, dioxin was
found last fall in surface soil concentrations of 300 parts per billion. The
Federal agency calculates that exposure to this soil presents an added cancer
risk, for children who ingest it regularly, of as much as 35 percent. That is,
these children have a 35 percent greater chance of contracting cancer in their
lifetime than those who do not ingest the soil. This is regarded as above the
approximately 30 percent risk of cancer that all Americans face.

The special properties of chlorinated phenols, of which dioxins can be a
byproduct, are what make them so useful to an industrial society. But those
properties, such as heat resistance and electrical resistance, insolubility in
water, and chemical durability, are also what make the phenols biologically
threatening. Among other things, the substances may collect in living organisms
at higher concentrations than in the surrounding ecosystem, a process known as
bioaccumulation.

Problem With Enzymes

In virtually all types of tissue in every animal species tested, Dr. Poland of
the University of Wisconsin's laboratory said in an interview, TCDD induces the
production of enzymes that are the organism's attempt to metabolize, or render
harmless, the chemical irritant. But the enzymes are now often thought of as a
double-edged sword, because organisms that have a high capacity for producing
them are more susceptible to tumors at the spot where a carcinogen is
administered while those with a low capacity show distant cancers such as
leukemia or lymphomas.

Dr. Daniel Nebert, the branch chief of developmental pharmacology at the
National Institutes of Health, who is also active in dioxin research, concurred
with Dr. Poland's findings, calling them a ''major breakthrough.'' Other
scientists generally agreed with that assessment.

According to Dr. Nancy Kim of the New York State Department of Health's toxic
substances assessment unit, TCDD fits into one of two major cancer theories. In
the first, the hypothesis is that merely one foreign molecule attaching to DNA
can set off the cancer process. Because TCDD does not bind appreciably to DNA,
it does not match this scheme. But its ability to cause excessive cell
multiplication, known as hyperplasia, does fit the second theory, that cancer is
caused by repeated irritation of tissues.

Although scientists believe that current laboratory work showing the
similarities in animal and human cancer mechanisms has taken the research a
crucial step forward, such theoretical work is only half the puzzle-solving
process. The other half is human epidemiology, a tedious, time-consuming matter
hindered by all the real-world ambiguities that laboratory work can filter out.

Study of Chemical Plant Workers

Scientists at the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health are
studying an unusually high incidence of soft-tissue sarcomas among workers
exposed to dioxin at two chemical companies in Michigan and West Virginia. In a
letter to the medical journal Lancet for the January 1981 issue, the researchers
reported that three of 105 workers who died suffered from the rare cancer. This
was 2.9 percent of the deaths in the group; the general population would be
expected to show only seven one-hundredths of one percent.

The study might provide the first international confirmation of a 1977 report
from Sweden suggesting that forestry workers exposed to 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T have a
roughly fivefold higher incidence of softtissue sarcomas. In addition, several
studies have revealed an increased incidence of Hodgkin's disease in lumberjacks
and woodworkers. A Lancet editorial noted last year that any change in the
pattern of sarcomas, ''even in small numbers of cases,'' might strengthen the
causative association with dioxin.

Studies by Dr. Bertram Carnow, an occupational health consultant and editor of
the Journal of Occupational Medicine, examined a group of 47 men from 1980 to
1982 who had been exposed to dioxin after a railroad accident in 1979. In an
interview, Dr. Carnow said the exposure varied from 8 hours to 90 days at
concentrations in soil or liquid runoff of about 30 parts per billion. Five of
the men, or 10.6 percent, have developed skin cancers; the expected incidence in
the general population is about 0.17 percent a year. A significant number of
other disorders was also observed.

''The only safe level of dioxin is nondetectable,'' said Dr.  Carnow, whose
medical practice in Chicago has treated nearly 300 cases of dioxin exposure.

Besides the role of TCDD in causing cancer, the other great area of medical
concern regards apparently related fetus damage and other reproductive problems.
For animals, the evidence is straightforward and overwhelming. TCDD injures or
kills animal embryos at doses as low as one billionth of a gram administered per
kilogram of body weight per day. For humans, however, the record so far is
circumstantial.

The Environmental Protection Agency used emergency powers in 1979 to ban
virtually all use of 2,4,5-T in the United States after discovering a higher
than normal rate of spontaneous abortions in an Oregon region that had been
sprayed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Chart of the estimated risk of chemical pollutants

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 655 words


THIRD-WORLD AID CALLED DRAIN ON SOVIET RESOURCES

BRUSSELS, Jan. 22 (Reuters) - The Soviet Union's aid to its client countries in
the developing world has proved a significant drain on Moscow's limited economic
resources, according to a North Atlantic Treaty Organization study made
available today.

The study, compiled from data provided by NATO governments and completed last
year, estimates that total economic aid and arms deliveries to the 11 client
countries amounted to almost $6.3 billion in 1980, about half of it going to
Cuba. In its report, the NATO Economic Department stressed that some of the
estimates were only tentative.

The document makes a distinction between developing countries where Communist
governments are firmly established - Cuba, Mongolia, Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos and
North Korea -and other developing nations where Marxist-oriented administrations
are in power but are not considered to be in firm control. The second group
consists of Angola, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Afghanistan and Southern Yemen.

In 1980 the first group received a large amount of economic aid, totaling $4.7
billion, and relatively few arms, $350 million worth, the study said.

Stress on Arms for 2d Group

Countries in the second category were sent arms and equipment worth $900 million
but very limited economic aid, totaling $300 million.  Moscow's economic and
military aid to all 11 countries cost the equivalent of four-tenths of 1 percent
of the Soviet Union's gross national product, according to the study.

The report said that such a burden might appear light in purely economic terms,
but that it was not negligible and was probably closer than ever to the limits
of Soviet capacity in the light of other demands.

Among these demands the document cited the economic requirements of Eastern
Europe, the need to develop large areas within the Soviet Union itself, the lack
of public support for foreign aid programs from a population still short of
consumer goods and the cost of such help in hard currencies.

Africans Affected by Wars

It said the relationship between Moscow and its developing clients could come
under increasing pressure as the need for economic rather than military aid
grew. The cost of reconstruction in African countries affected by wars will be
one important factor, the study said, while Indochinese countries and Cuba are
expected to require at least as much help in the future as now.

But the NATO document said that despite apparent economic limits to Moscow's
ability to meet the increasing demands, the Kremlin's willingness to impose
sacrifices at home in return for political gains should not be ignored.

It said that the West would be unwise to spend large amounts on helping Soviet
client states, but that a certain amount of economic aid could be justified, at
least to let local leaders feel that an alternative existed.

Among third world countries, Cuba was the recipient of by far the largest amount
of Soviet economic assistance in 1980. It received aid worth more than $3
billion, equivalent to about 25 percent of the country's gross domestic product.

About 87 percent of the assistance received by the Cubans was in the form of
commodity subsidies, the report said. It said the Soviet Union bought Cuban
sugar at 42 percent above world prices and sold oil to the Cubans at about 40
percent below the world price.

----

Soviet Industrial Output Up 2.8%

MOSCOW, Jan. 22 (Reuters) - Soviet industrial output rose 2.8 percent last year,
the smallest increase since World War II, the Central Statistics Board announced
today.

In a brief survey of key figures, it said that national income, the main
indicator of economic growth in Communist countries, had risen by 2.6 percent.
This was also the lowest rate since the war.

The survey showed that the country failed to meet Government targets in most
important sectors apart from energy production.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Black Youths in Florida Pelt Police With Rocks

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 76 words

DATELINE: COCOA, Fla., Jan. 22


A crowd of black youths pelted police officers with rocks for two hours tonight
in a poor neighborhood known as ''Little Vietnam'' in apparent retaliation for
the arrest of a suspected drug dealer and five other people, the police said.
The area returned to quiet when two city council members, both of them black,
urged the crowd to go home.

Police Sgt. Cotton Hinshaw said two people, both white, were slightly injured by
debris thrown at their car.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CARMELITA HINTON, EDUCATOR WHO FOUNDED PUTNEY SCHOOL

BYLINE: By SHAWN G. KENNEDY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 388 words


Carmelita Chase Hinton, an educator who founded the Putney School, a progressive
secondary school in Putney, Vt., died Jan. 16 after a stroke at Emerson Hospital
in Concord, Mass. She was 92 years old and lived in Concord.

In 1935, after teaching at the Shady Hill School in Cambridge, Mass., Mrs.
Hinton went to Vermont to open a school that would, in her words, ''break
through some of the traditional ideas of education for adolescents.'' She bought
620 acres of farmland in Putney and, with 54 students and a small faculty, began
her school in converted farm buildings.

''School should be exciting,'' she once remarked. ''After all, children spend
most of their day in school.'' Under her directorship, Putney's program
stressed, along with conventional academics, an unconventional self-reliance in
learning as well as farmwork and manual labor, in place of athletics. Mrs.
Hinton, who retired in 1955, was in the forefront of educators who embraced
independent study, team teaching, community involvement and an evaluation system
without grades.

Graduate of Bryn Mawr

She was born in Omaha in 1890 and was graduated from Bryn Mawr College in
Pennsylvania in 1912. After college she worked with Jane Addams in Chicago at
Hull House, one of the nation's first settlement houses. In 1916, she married
Sebastian Hinton, a patent lawyer who invented the Jungle Gym. When her three
children were young, Mrs.  Hinton, influenced by her readings about Europe's
progressive nursery schools, began one in her Winnetka, Ill., home.

After her husband died in 1923, Mrs. Hinton moved her family to Cambridge, where
she taught at the Shady Hill School.  Mrs. Hinton, known for her energy and
buoyant demeanor, was still traveling, hiking, skiing and mountain climbing when
she was well into her 70's. She was active in protests against the Vietnam War
and for women's rights

''No, there's no use living on year after year just to live, to take a little
nourishment and take a little walk,''she said in an interview a few years ago.
''That's not life. If I can contribute, that's one thing. To stop creating is to
die.''

Mrs. Hinton is survived by two daughters, Jean Rosner of Concord, Mass., and
Joan Hinton Engst, who lives in China; a son, William Hinton of Fleetwood, Pa.;
10 grandchildren and two greatgrandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTH AFRICA'S FAILED SCHEME IS BIGGER LOSS FOR NAMIBIA

BYLINE: By JOSEPH LELYVELD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 942 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG


South Africa's effort to shape a political alternative to the insurgent movement
it has been fighting in the territory known as Namibia collapsed last week,
further frustrating Washington's hopes for a negotiated settlement of Africa's
most protracted diplomatic problem.

The Democratic Turnhalle Alliance, a multiracial front of 10 ethnically based
political parties designed to counter the black nationalist South-West Africa
People's Organization, was initially a brainchild of Pretoria's Department of
Foreign Affairs. When it was hatched five years ago, South Africa was
sufficiently confident of the alliance's electoral prospects to subscribe to an
agreement on a cease-fire and independence settlement that had been drawn up by
a ''contact group'' of five Western nations, including the United States.

But South African optimism faded when the potential of black political power
became clear with Robert Mugabe's landslide in Zimbabwe's pre-independence
election. Negotiations on Namibia then turned into a circular exercise. The
effects were devastating for the Turnhalle Alliance and its white leader, an
Afrikaner rancher named Dirk Mudge, who started to lose support among blacks and
whites alike at an alarming rate. Whites resented the efforts he made to attract
black support by erasing the vestiges of the apartheid system; blacks were
unimpressed by these efforts because they were mostly blocked by South African
officials concerned to avoid a backlash among right-wing whites. The erosion was
noted by South African military planners who thought the solution was to
redesign the Turnhalle Alliance and downgrade Mr. Mudge, replacing him with a
black leader who might offer a more plausible challenge to the black
nationalists. The harder they tried the surer the South-West Africa People's
Organization seemed to be of a victory as decisive as Mr.  Mugabe's if only the
South Africans would let an internationally supervised election take place. But
Mr. Mudge fought to save his political life by bringing the maneuvers into the
open and denouncing them.

When he finally resigned last week, South Africa had no alternative but to
reimpose direct rule by its top official in the territory, the Administrator
General - a tactic the state broadcasting monopoly in South Africa candidly
described as a ''holding action.'' Western and South African diplomats insisted
that the Mudge resignation would have no effect on the continuing negotiations.
The main focus of these talks has been shifted to neighboring Angola by the
joint insistence of Washington and Pretoria on the withdrawal of Cuban forces
there as a condition for a South African withdrawal from South-West Africa.

But if the long-shot Washington has been playing came home and an agreement were
reached in Angola, there would still be no escaping the oldest question in the
tortuous negotiations, which have now lasted six years: Is South Africa prepared
to hand over power in Namibia to the force it has been fighting on the
territory's northern frontier and thus risk sending a message to its own whites
and blacks that black nationalism cannot be stopped?

Some optimists among South African commentators expressed the hope that Mr.
Mudge could revive the Turnhalle Alliance's prospects now that he has shaken
loose from the persistent charge that he is a South African ''stooge.'' But, on
closer examination, it seemed that the alliance was even more tattered than many
suspected. Mr. Mudge had apparently hoped to persuade his black and other
nonwhite colleagues to resign their positions this week in the so-called ethnic
authorities that are supposed to oversee the schools and other interests of the
various racial and tribal groups that account for the slightly more than one
million Namibians.
Successes and Setbacks

But their desire to express solidarity with him and resentment of Pretoria was
not strong enough to move them to give up these sinecures. The fact that the
Administrator General kept the ethnic authorities going was an indication that
South African officials still hoped to piece together a new political patchwork
to replace the Turnhalle Alliance and had by no means resigned themselves to a
victory by the insurgents.

Assessing the political outlook, one of the most astute politicians in Windhoek,
the territory's capital, wrote off the possibility that further South African
maneuvering on the local political scene could do anything but boomerang.
''There's Swapo,'' he said, using the common acronym for the insurgents, ''and
there's nothing. There's no possibility at all of putting together any kind of
front or alliance.''

The political setback for Pretoria comes at a time when its initiatives have
never seemed more successful. For the time being, at least, its raids into
Angola have all but neutralized the Swapo insurgents as a fighting force. At the
same time, the pressure it is exerting - both through Washington and its support
of Jonas Savimbi's Union for the Total Independence of Angola - appears to be
causing realignments inside the Angolan regime.

The combination of military defeat and political victory is not unusual in
insurgent struggles. French forces were not driven out of Algeria, nor American
forces out of Vietnam. They left largely because the wars they were fighting had
become unpopular at home. But white South Africa is hardly clamoring for an end
to the much smaller war in Namibia and there is no sign of Prime Minister P.W.
Botha's Government starting to prepare white opinion by pointing out the
dividends that a withdrawal might pay in improved relations in the region and
with the West.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of students and Mudge

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM'S 10 YEARS OF 'PEACE'

BYLINE: By Tad Szulc

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1262 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Ten years ago today, Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho met in a French Communist
Party villa in Gif-sur-Yvette, a Parisian suburb, to initial the ''Agreement on
Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Vietnam.'' Four days later, the Secretary
of State and the Foreign Ministers of North Vietnam and South Vietnam signed the
document at a ceremony in Paris, and on March 27, 1973, the last uniformed
American soldier left Vietnamese territory, ending more than a decade of direct
American military involvement there.

Today's anniversary is an ironic and tragic occasion because Vietnam is still at
war, though this time against other enemies, and because it has become little
more than a pawn in the Soviet-Chinese rivalry in Asia. Moreover, Vietnam has
become a Soviet client state rather than the fully independent nation it had
hoped to be when Ho Chi Minh rose to overthrow French rule in 1945, and an
internationally isolated country with abysmally low living standards.

The question arising at this time is why the 55 million Vietnamese find
themselves in such an extraordinary external and internal predicament, with
millions forceably removed to ''new economic zones'' and other millions
officially listed as ''enemies,'' when the Communist regime ruling them was
supposedly the victor in what amounted to a 30-year war.

Much of the disaster, as it has unfolded over the last 10 years, may be
attributed to Vietnam's wartime exhaustion, its shattered infrastructure - both
North and South - and the dogmatic attitudes of the aging ideologues in power in
Hanoi.

Still, it remains a valid and fascinating question whether all the events since
1973 were, in effect, foreordained by history, or whether they might have been
averted or at least altered, had Vietnamese as well as United States policies
moved in wiser directions. I believe a case can be
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Tad Szulc is author ''Illusion of Peace,'' a study of United States foreign
policy in the Nixon years.

made for the proposition that a diplomatic and economic relationship might have
evolved that offered Vietnam alternatives other than the Soviet alliance and
internal calamity.

Today, to be sure, Vietnam's significance to the United States lies mainly in
its being the site of a major Soviet naval and air base - Cam Ranh Bay - that
poses a potential threat to American strategic positions in Asia and the Indian
Ocean, but this is still a secondary concern in the Pentagon's global
preoccupation.

The ultimate Communist vicotyr in Vietnam in 1975 hasn't produced the ''domino
effect'' in Southeast Asia that had been feared: Thailand, Malaysia and
Indonesia, for example, are not seriously imperiled.
And Hanoi's entrapment in the endless war of its own making in Cambodia and
Laos, pious propaganda notwithstanding, is not wholly unwelcomed in Washington
inasmuch as it is deeply damaging to all the Communist players in the region.

In a way that could not be foreseen in Paris in 1973, it is Vietnam that seems,
10 years later, to be the principal victim of that conflict. China has not fared
particularly well either, having lost most of its influence in Southeast Asia.
And considering America's immense investment - human and material - and the
profound societal consequences, it too suffered badly from this unnecessary war;
yet its fundamental long-range interests were not catastrophically affected.

If the war produced a winner, politically and strategically, it was clearly the
Soviet Union - albeit at a great continuing cost - because the conflict's
consequences neutralized China in Southeast Asia and permitted the Soviet Union
to acquire military bases both in Vietnam and Cambodia.

But looking back to the peace agreement and its aftermath, it seems evident that
the document provided the only way of taking the United States out of a war that
was no longer politically tenable at home. While the Nixon Administration had
armed the regime in Saigon to the teeth in the months preceding the final
American withdrawal (and sought to weaken the North through the Christmas 1972
mass bombings), in retrospect it is clear that a Communist victory was
inevitable if Hanoi wanted it. At the moment of the cease-fire, the overall
military situation on the ground favored the Communists.

Yet, there may have been lost opportunities on both sides - American and North
Vietnamese - for history to develop differently. First, President Nixon
promised, in a secret letter to the North Vietnamese Prime Minister, Pham Van
Dong, $ 4.75 billion in reconstruction funds, and agreed to a United
States-North Vietnamese Joint Economic Commission. An economic accord was to be
signed on July 23, 1973. What happened next is unclear. Though the chief
American negotiator had reported on March 27, 1973, the day the last American
soldier left Vietnam, that the aid pact was virtually ready, he was instructed
the following week to break off the talks. The official explanation was that Mr.
Nixon had decided to cancel the aid because Hanoi was infiltrating new military
equipment into South Vietnam, violating the cease-fire, and because it went on
fighting in Cambodia. Yet, Saigon was equally guilty of cease-fire violations,
and American B-52's had resumed the bombing of Cambodia. (Under the Paris
agreement, the cease-fire did not apply to Cambodia.)

What we do not know is whether Hanoi had resolved to sacrifice American aid for
tactical advantage or whether Mr. Nixon deliberately overreacted to the
violations because of opposition at home to reconstruction aid. Likewise, one
wonders whether Hanoi would have launched the victorious 1975 offensive if it
had been receiving American assistance. The inner workings of the Hanoi
leadership have always been a mystery.

Between 1975 and 1978, new opportunities developed. For more than two years,
Vietnam had resisted Soviet demands for military facilities at Cam Ranh Bay and
Danang, seemingly keen on maximum independence, while sending signals to
Washington that it wished to normalize relations. By 1977, the Carter
Administration responded favorably. Curiously, however, Hanoi wanted American
aid as ''reparations,'' an unacceptable notion. Hanoi abandoned that idea in
1978, but by then it was too late: Congress already had forbidden all aid to
Vietnam, and Jimmy Carter was moving ahead toward normalization with Peking, now
hostile to Hanoi.

Late in 1978, Vietnam joined Comecon, the Communist common market, and signed a
friendship treaty with the Soviet Union.  Then it invaded Cambodia to overthrow
the bloody, China-backed Pol Pot regime, and installed Heng Samrin as its
puppet. Early in 1979, Vietnam granted the bases to the Soviet Union, greatly
facilitating its naval operations between the Pacific Ocean and Indian Ocean. In
February, China attacked Vietnam in an inconclusive border war.  Vietnam's
destiny as a Soviet ally was sealed.

The consequences for Vietnam have been awesome. The Cambodian war, now in its
fifth year, is tying down 200,000 Vietnamese troops unable to defeat local
guerrillas (and there are 60,000 troops in Laos fighting Hmong tribesmen).
Economically, Vietnam is barely surviving despite $ 2 billion annually in Soviet
aid. Per capita income fell from $ 241 in 1976 to $ 153 in 1981. Millions of
Vietnamese have fled the country; a half-million are working in the Soviet
Union. The septuagenarian Hanoi leadership is frozen in immobility, unable to
cope with its problems.

This is Vietnam 10 years after the "peace" of Paris.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of French soldiers in 1954 in Vietnam and widos
in 1973

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'Longest War'

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 333 words


To the Editor:

Jacobo Timerman's ''The Longest War'' (reviewed Dec. 12) is full of cracks that
have been patched over by the author's passion. An otherwise valiant man, he has
a view of the world that has been molded by a lifetime in an Argentine oligarchy
where government is the oppressor and military power is for control of the
populace, not an instrument of foreign policy.

In spite of his experience as a journalist and his scars as a victim of
dictatorship, Mr. Timer-man's book distills into a peculiar naivete. On a guided
military tour of Lebanon, he seeks to reach small-town Lebanese by speaking a
few words of French - as silly a gesture as doing so would be in Vietnam. He
accuses Israel of genocide -reducing this terrifying concept to a Third World
cliche.  He calls for an international tribunal to judge Prime Minister Menachem
Begin and his generals -as if Jews had a College of Cardinals.

Thoughtful Jews understand the tragedy of war, but reviewer Amos Elon compounds
Mr. Timerman's hyperbole by lamenting that the Lebanon conflict will deny Jews
in the Diaspora ''the right to symbolize the pain of this century.'' Jews have
been ready to relinquish that distinction for 20 centuries.

A recent essay by Rabbi Irving Greenberg, director of the National Jewish
Resource Center, points out that recent events have focused on the Jewish
''transformation from powerlessness to power.'' In a reversal of nearly 2,000
years of history, during which Jews demonstrated the ''dignity of
powerlessness'' and how eloquently they could be sinned against, Jews created a
state that, like all nations, was capable of errors. It borders on racism to
think otherwise, he says, and Jews are prepared to take the risks of power even
as they endured the risks of powerlessness.

Mr. Timerman's passionate book seems to mask any understanding of two centuries
of Western democracy and 40 centuries of Jewish moral principle.
PHILLIP RITZENBERG, Publisher, The Jewish Week, New York City

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS IN MIDDLE OF DISPUTE

BYLINE: By SCOTT HIGHAM

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 11, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words


NEARLY a decade after an 18-month tour of duty in Vietnam, Randy Good
instinctively makes the gesture of reaching for a holster when a car backfires
or a low-flying helicopter startles him.

Recurring nightmares, and severe paranoia and depression resulting from his
combat experience, Mr. Good said, have led to strained relations with his wife,
his family and his friends.

''I put drugs on top of that,'' he said. ''I hit rock bottom.'' The 31-year-old
Army veteran decided last year to join the Long Island Vet Center program, then
in a Northport Veterans Administration Hospital. But after three counseling
sessions, ''I didn't like sitting around constantly reminiscing about what I did
over there,'' Mr. Good said. ''Sure, I was there, it happened - but it's not my
whole life.''

He said he had sought assistance from a private counseling center in Hauppauge
that has a contract with the Veterans Administration to serve Vietnam veterans
who are suffering from delayed stress syndrome and who cannot be accommodated by
the Long Island Vet Center program. The syndrome is an acute psychological
condition resulting from suppression of emotions associated with the Vietnam
War.

Mr. Good is now getting treatment at A Program Plan for Life Enrichment (Apple)
in Hauppauge. But Apple's deputy director, Muriel Farkus, contends that the
Veterans Administration has failed in its contractual responsibility by
obstructing funds for veterans such as Mr. Good.

Mrs. Farkus and the directors of three other counseling centers on the Island
with V.A. contracts have accused the V.A. of stalling since August on a
Congressionally authorized contract program designed to treat veterans suffering
from the delayed stress syndrome. The counseling center officials said the V.A.
had intentionally withheld funds from the program, and until about three weeks
ago had failed for nearly four months to provide them with any information on
how to proceed with the program.

According to Logan Lewis, executive director of Apple, the directors met last
week with a V.A. official, who explained the program's new billing and referral
procedures.

The accusations of stalling were denied by the V.A. ''Nothing has been
stalled,'' said Stanley Feidman, an assistant regional coordinator in New York
for the agency. ''It simply isn't a fact.  We've had some money problems, and
we're trying to provide better supervision of the contracting agencies.''

Mr. Feidman said the contract arrangement between the V.A. and private
counseling centers had been under review during the last four months because
some agencies in other parts of the country were billing the V.A. for ''extra
visits, or visits which didn't take place.''

The directors of the counseling centers on Long Island, however, say they remain
convinced that delays by the V.A. for the last four months have resulted in lost
revenue for their agencies, lost time from their yearlong contracts and lost
services for the Island's Vietnam veterans.

According to Mrs. Farkus, Apple has been treating 16 Vietnam veterans in
addition to Mr. Good since her agency received a contract from the V.A. in
August. ''We have meager funds and they stretch a long way,'' she said.
''Funding has not been made available to us while we've had these contracts and
while we're treating the veterans.''

The contract plan was authorized by Congress in 1979, along with the Vet Center
program, which has been very successful, according to Bob Frank, assistant
director of the V.A.'s Readjustment Counseling Service in Washington.

The centers, he said, are staffed and supervised directly by the V.A. and
provide counseling services through 137 ''storefront'' locations nationwide to
Vietnam veterans suffering from the delayed stress syndrome.

Contract-holding agencies, however, are privately owned and operated counseling
centers intended to augment the Vet Center program when veterans cannot get to a
center, when the center's treatment does not suit the veteran's needs, or when a
center's caseload becomes too large.

Mr. Frank said that veterans were referred through the V.A. to contracting
agencies, which billed the V.A. for their services. More than 400 contracts were
awarded last year, he said.

The Vet Center that was formerly at the Northport V.A. hospital and that now is
in Babylon and two private counseling centers in Nassau County and two in
Suffolk County will serve 70,000 Long Island Vietnam veterans, according to Mr.
Frank.

''There's nothing specifically wrong with the contracting agencies on Long
Island,'' Mr. Feidman said. ''But we want veterans across the country to get the
services they need at a cost that is within our budget.''

Last year, according to Cindy Alpert, a staff assistant for the Senate Committee
on Veterans' Affairs, the Reagan Administration cut the budget of the
Readjustment Counseling Service by $250,000.

With the contract program's review complete, and the new referral and billing
procedures in place, Mr. Feidman said the Long Island counseling centers could
expect both clients and funds later this month.

''We were given one-year contracts and four months have already expired,'' said
Al Peck, a Vietnam veteran and executive director of Help Aid Direction in
Hicksville. ''It's been great to have a veterans' program with no veterans and
no way of recovering the time that contracts said should be there for those
veterans.''

Since receiving contracts in August, Mr. Peck, along with the other directors,
contended that repeated attempts to gain procedural information from the V.A.
about the program had been unsuccessful.

''They kept telling us there was something wrong with the paperwork, something
they couldn't straighten out,'' said Robert Detor, director of the North Suffolk
Mental Health Clinic in Smithtown. ''We tried all the channels, but nothing.''

Mr. Peck could not estimate the number of veterans affected by the program's
delay, but he said, ''There must be veterans who need help and can't get it -
otherwise the Veterans Administration wouldn't have let these contracts.''

According to Mrs. Farkus, the V.A. in the last four months has offered her
widely disparate reasons for the program's delay, leading her to believe that
funds had been intentionally withheld.

''This is a situation where the V.A. has the bucks, and they're unwilling to
spend them in the hope that they will not be appropriated this way in the
future,'' she said.

Mr. Feidman called her assertion ''unreasonable.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 23, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CINEMATIC ART VS. REALITY IN INDONESIA

BYLINE: By Bernard Kalb

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1618 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Bernard Kalb, who covered Indonesia for The New York Times, is now the State
Department correspondent for NBC News.

As a title, ''The Year of Living Dangerously'' - we'll get to the film in a
moment - triggered a haunting memory of my own years in Indonesia. Of President
Sukarno, back in the late 50's, the early 60's, bemedaled as always, a black
petji cap on his head, a silvertopped baton under his arm, standing under a
torrid sun before thousands of Indonesians massed in front of Independence
Palace in Jakarta, inundating the entire archipelago with a cascade of oratory
on the country's Independence Day, each such performance a tour de force that,
with each year, fueled the controversy over whether ''the father of his
country'' was passe, a liability more than an asset in a nation gripped by
deepening poverty and torn by political tensions.

Always the master showman, the impresario of Indonesian nationalism, the
politician with a flair for the grandiose, Sukarno endowed each of his Aug. 17
speeches with a title: in 1957, it was ''Indonesia's Year of Decision''; in
1958, ''Indonesia's Year of Challenge''; in 1959, ''The Year of the Rediscovery
of the Revolution.'' By 1964, the crescendo of escalating titles had reached
''The Year of Living Dangerously.''

So it was with more than an ordinary sense of expectancy that I waited for the
screening room lights to dim and the movie, with that title, to flash on the
screen. Would it be the story of that climactic year? The story of a president?
Or a country? Would it accurately recount what had happened between Sukarno's
1964 speech and the cycle of explosive events that began at 4 A.M. the night of
Sept. 30-Oct. 1, 1965?

''The Year of Living Dangerously,'' directed by Peter Weir, which has just
opened at Cinema 1, turned out to be a couple of hours of living impatiently
with fictional characters whose personal concerns dominate a background in which
historic events are about to erupt: A coup attempt laid to the Communists, which
was followed by the destruction of the largest communist party in the
non-communist world, followed by an overnight ideological tilt away from
Sukarno's brand of leftism to a pro-Western neutralism, followed by a bloodbath
that reportedly left hundreds of thousands of Communists, Communist suspects,
and others dead, followed by Sukarno's own downfall. This upheaval affecting the
destiny of the fifth most populous nation in the world serves as a mere backdrop
for a macho journalist - Australian - and a lady intelligence agent - British -
who make goo goo eyes at each other while Jakarta burns.

My own time in Indonesia spanned the years between 1956 and 1961. I kept
returning on periodic assignments, so that my involvement has been fairly
close-up, and I must confess that, at moments during the film, I felt I was back
there again, amid the anti-West slogans; the massive anti-American
demonstrations; the all-night wayang shadow plays; the tinkling music of the
gamelan; real, giant Sukarno posters dominating the landscape. These quick
sounds and pictures have an authentic ring about them, stirring recollections of
the overwhelming impact of Indonesia the first time I arrived in Jakarta, on a
hot August day more than 25 years ago.

But so many things happen in the celluloid Indonesia that never could have
happened in the real Indonesia. For example, nobody - with an appetite for life
- would floor the accelerator of his car and smash through an army roadblock
during a time of increasing violence - and get away with it, unscathed. In the
film, the correspondent and the girl, played by Mel Gibson and Sigourney Weaver,
do just that, giggling like two teen-agers who have just careered through a
neighbor's garage.

On another occasion, the correspondent ignores repeated shouted orders by an
Indonesian officer not to proceed any closer to the Presidential palace. And in
the final scene and final flouting of Indonesian authority, the correspondent
simply waltzes past the immigration officials at the international airport, with
a little goodbye wave. No way.

True, a director is free to dip into the story of a country, to take what he
needs for his own purposes. But short-changing reality can result in anemic
history. ''The explosive, political climate of the era is reflected in a number
of scenes that includes the 1965 storming of the American Embassy in Jakarta
...,'' say the ''production notes'' available at the advance screening. ''...
amid this violent environment develops the love story....'' Now what is worked
into the film in the way of the unfolding drama in Indonesia at the time may be
enough for the film - that's for the reviewers to determine - but my own feeling
is that the only thing that seems to be missing in the ''notes'' is that
Indonesia's turmoil lived happily ever after.

O.K. Suppose it was never the script writer's intention to detail the full
dimensions of the clash between the Army and the P.K.I.  (Partai Kommunis
Indonesia), or to explore the complex issue of whether it was, in fact -as U.S.
intelligence analysts and others, but not all others, believe -the P.K.I. that,
beyond doubt, carried out the coup that failed and thereby changed the history
of Indonesia. Even so, the exposition here is too superficial, creating a
distortion.

As a result, the film may leave the viewer with the impression, intended or not,
that only P.K.I. followers were behind the effort to extricate Indonesia from
its mess - economic, political, diplomatic. The naivete here is obvious; the
P.K.I. goal, of course, was to turn Indonesia into a Communist state. The fact
is, many Indonesians, noncommunists and anti-communists, devoted their energies
and lives into redirecting the national life of Indonesia toward some form of
sanity.

If that element is lost in the film, so, too, are there other lost
opportunities. With its strategic location in Southeast Asia, its wealth of
natural if unexploited resources, and its population of more than 150 million,
Indonesia was - is - a nation wooed by both the West and the communist world.
Yet this critical fact is not even echoed. It is as though Indonesia, in the
film, occupied some sort of vacuum, its only purpose being to provide a locale
for a love story - and this, at a time when the United States was pouring its
troops into South Vietnam in a failed effort to blunt a communist triumph.

I can hear the protest coming in loud and clear. Doesn't the spook pass the word
to the correspondent that ''a ship has left Shanghai with arms for the P.K.I.,''
or words to that effect? That tip does provide one of the central elements of
the tension and drama in the film, but nowhere is there any reference to an even
greater internal drama then under way in Indonesia: the suspicions of some in
Indonesia's anti-communist army of the President's own complicity in the coup
plot.

In his 1967 investigative book called ''Indonesian Upheaval,'' published by
David McKay Co., Inc., in 1967, John Hughes, then of The Christian Science
Monitor and now the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, says
''Sukarno in mid-September sent his Communist-sympathizing air force chief, Omar
Dhani, on a secret mission to Peking. One of the objects was to clinch a deal
under which the Chinese Communists would deliver 100,000 small arms to
Indonesia, through unorthodox channels of the President's choosing and without
informing the army or regular defense ministry channels.'' That report takes on
an extra dimension of significance in view of Sukarno's Aug. 17 speech in 1965,
in which he indicated his support for an earlier P.K.I. proposal to create and
arm a so-called ''fifth force'' of peasants, to supplement the army, navy, air
force and police, against what he called the ''gun barrels'' of Necolim.'' Ah,
''Necolim''; I remember you well. It was one of Sukarno's most cherished
acronyms, referring to neo-colonialists and imperialists - that is to say, you
and me. None of that in ''The Year of Living Dangerously.''

In this film, we have a rarely glimpsed, imitation, one-dimensional Sukarno
portrayed as some kind of national evil, symbol of corruption, the leader
responsible for the tragedy overtaking the country. Here and there, a positive
line is tossed off; he's a god to the Indonesian people, a genius. Nowhere is
the hint of the Sukarno of the early years of the Indonesian Revolution, a
charismatic orator who could fire up the masses in their struggle against the
Dutch. Even as his day of reckoning approached, the army generals who stripped
him of his power did so in the Javanese way, a strip at a time, to try to
preserve some element, if only cosmetic, of dignity. Even on the sidelines,
until his death in 1970, he still cast a spell over wide segments of the
peasantry. None of that, either, in ''The Year of Living Dangerously.''

P.S.: I can't resist a word about the film's portrait of foreign correspondents.
To a certain extent, it does succeed in catching up their world, a fraternity
spiked with sharp competition for exclusives, small talk, big talk, rivalry,
camaraderie. To a certain extent. I mean, it just boggles my mind when I'm
called upon to believe that our hero, after confessing at the outset that he has
waited 10 - count 'em -10 years for this overseas assignment, and here he is, in
the middle of it, smack in the middle of one of the major stories of 1965,
sharing headlines with Vietnam, he chucks it all to run into the waiting arms of
- guess who?

Incidentally, the title - ''The Year of Living Dangerously'' - is never
explained, never even mentioned in the film.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mel Gibson (page 22)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WIDOW MAKES DOLLS WITH A VENGEANCE, THEY SAY

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Jan. 22


On Tuesday it will have been exactly two years since the radicals known as the
Gang of Four were found guilty of almost all the evils that racked China during
the bitter decade of the Cultural Revolution.

At the time of their conviction, the two ringleaders - Jiang Qing, the widow of
Chairman Mao Zedong, and Zhang Chunqiao, a former mayor of Shanghai - were given
suspended death sentences that could be changed to life imprisonment in two
years if they repented suitably.

Wang Hongwen, once a deputy chairman of the Communist Party, got a life sentence
and Yao Wenyuan, a propagandist, was given 20 years in prison.

During the long show trial, Miss Jiang taunted the court to execute her,
shouting that ''it is more glorious to have my head chopped off.'' There is no
sign that Mao's widow, having been blamed for everything that went awry in the
Chairman's last years, has shown the slightest remorse.

But no one expects her or Mr. Zhang to be executed, if only because it might
inflame dormant Maoist passions. Last August the party chief, Hu Yaobang, told
some French reporters that ''Jiang Qing lives well in prison, but she persists
in behaving as a political and ideological enemy of our people.''

'Jiang Qing Will Remain Alive'

Mr. Hu ventured that a court reviewing her case ''will take account of the
circumstances and reduce her sentence.'' When Peng Zhen, another member of the
ruling Politburo, visited Yugoslavia last summer, he too said that Miss Jiang
would not be executed. ''Jiang Qing will remain alive and we shall continue to
feed her,'' Mr. Peng told a Belgrade newspaper. ''She has only one mouth.''

The leadership must figure out how to justify the reprieve of Miss Jiang, whom
most ordinary Chinese still detest because of her role in the repressive years
of the Cultural Revolution, because she has shown none of the contrition
demanded by law. The weekly Literary Digest hinted last month at a face-saving
solution. It quoted a university student in Peking as saying: ''Jiang Qing's
crime did not consist of directly killing anyone. If she is spared, she will act
as a teacher of a negative lesson.''

It is rumored that Jiang Qing, now 69 years old, is confined to Qincheng Prison
in suburban Peking, where she has been put to work making dolls. Prisoners in
China must do something useful. But according to one version, she has
embroidered her name on each doll so they cannot be sold and are now piling up
in a warehouse.

As for the three other members of the Gang of Four, Zhang Chunqiao, now 65, is
said to be dying of throat cancer. Wang Hongwen, 47, who turned state's evidence
at the trial, has become a model convict at a labor camp in Shaanxi Province,
where he impresses warders and prisoners alike with his positive attitude. Yao
Wenyuan, 51, is working as a prison librarian and has fleshed out to nearly 230
pounds.
Profits and Smiles

The Peking municipality has just begun a drive to rid the downtown stores of
their old surliness and sloth by instituting the kind of responsibility system
that perked up economic performance in agriculture and industry.

From now on, stores will be allowed to retain part of the so-called profit shown
on their books. For example, the Tianqiao Department Store will be allowed to
keep 2 percent of the ''profit'' it normally hands over to the state, plus half
of what the Chinese accountants call surplus.

At Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang's suggestion, the change has been tried first in
the busy commercial district of Xidan and Qianmen streets, where 14,000 store
employees have been getting their regular pay regardless of their performance.

A Peking television crew visited a major grocery store on Xidan Street to
investigate how the system was doing. The 7 P.M. evening news reported that
sales since the beginning of January had jumped 31 percent over those for the
comparable period in 1982 and that quality and promptness of service had soared
too. There was even a greater variety of food available, it said.

Customer Finds Different Story

A customer who visited the model grocery store the next day saw five clerks
arguing with someone who wanted to buy candy. The customer asked an idle clerk
at another counter for a jar of fruit jam.

''There isn't any,'' the clerk said with a yawn.  But didn't the store sell jam?
''Yes,'' the clerk replied.  Then when was the next shipment of jam expected?
''I don't know,'' the clerk said, winding up the conversation.  By contrast, the
clerks over at the Xidan Department Store were helpful and polite. But the new
responsibility system has not been instituted there yet.
Diplomatic Chagrin

Peking's diplomatic circuit has its own tales about the new dean of the
diplomatic corps, Ambassador Nguyen Trong Vinh of Vietnam, who has been here
since July 1974.

The Vietnamese envoy has posed an embarrassment for the Chinese Foreign
Ministry, and not only because the two countries have remained virtual enemies
since their border war in early 1979. Mr.  Vinh has a habit of excluding from
ambassadorial functions those envoys representing countries he doesn't like,
such as the United States Ambassador, Arthur W. Hummel Jr., and the Chilean
Ambassador, Benjamin B. Opazo.

Another ambassador explained that when a colleague departed, the dean of the
Peking diplomatic corps was responsible for advising the other envoys and
collecting 15 yuan - nearly $8 - apiece for a farewell gift and presentation.
Mr. Vinh doesn't tell Mr. Hummel or Mr. Opazo because, he says, he can't deal
with ambassadors he has not met officially.

No Alternative, Chinese Find

For a while, the Chinese Foreign Ministry kept recognizing the Lebanese
Ambassador, Elie J. Boustany, as the dean, even though he had quietly gone home.
Mr. Boustany finally sent back word that he was not returning and this left the
Chinese with no alternative to Mr. Vinh, because of his diplomatic seniority.

A senior Asian diplomat considered the succession. When and if the Vietnamese
Ambassador leaves, he said, the next dean will be the Cuban Ambassador, another
Soviet-bloc envoy who is already known for making long speeches. He would be
followed by the Moroccan Ambassador, whom the diplomat called ''quite a good
fellow,'' and next the Hungarian Ambassador.

''But then we will have the Ambassador of Democratic Kampuchea,'' the Asian
diplomat said, referring to the ousted Pol Pot regime of Cambodia, which China
still recognizes. ''And he will be around forever.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jiang Qing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Decertify Hypocrisy on Salvador

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 424 words


Whenever Congress ties a string to American aid, it can put a knot in American
diplomacy. The mischief of legislative meddling is all too apparent in the
confusion and hypocrisy promoted by the law that compels the President to say
again, as he does semiannually, what hardly any American believes: that El
Salvador is ''making progress'' in its respect for human rights and political
reforms.

But this requirement would never have been written, and would not survive, if
Americans had more confidence in, or even clearer understanding of, the
Administration's purposes in Central America.  Politics abhors a vacuum.

When President Reagan failed to spell out the conditions for American aid to El
Salvador, and seemed impervious to its government's brutality, Congress
arrogated the task to itself. If it has done so imperfectly, its conditions are
still preferable to a blank check.

From the start, the Reagan Administration's design in El Salvador was implied
rather than argued. Americans are asked to accept on faith that vast interests
are at stake, that virtually anything is preferable to a guerrilla success, that
Cuban and Soviet intervention sustains the civil war.

Even so, a supporting consensus might have formed if the Administration had not
been so cavalier about the Salvadoran Government's disdain for human life and
rights, including American lives and rights. It has grievously misread American
opinion and also the history of the admirable restraints on our diplomacy.

Salvador is not Vietnam and, mercifully, has not been allowed to become
America's war. But as Americans learned in Vietnam, the French in Indochina and
Algeria, the British in South Africa, democracies will not long support ruthless
wars that betray their own ideals. We may on occasion blindly envy tyrannies
their advantage in being able to sustain an Afghanistan; we cannot emulate them.

Congress must decide whether to keep accepting murky assurances that the
political killings are fewer in El Salvador, that land reform and negotiations
are being advanced and that the courts are really moving to punish the killers
of five American churchwomen, two American land reform advisers and a Salvadoran
peasant leader.

On present evidence, El Salvador deserves no such certification.  Denying
certification for once might jolt El Salvador's leaders out of policies that
alienate their people and make peace unattainable.  It might even jolt the
Administration into defining a Central American policy that could make a
democratic people proud.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 26, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

China to Free 15 Vietnamese

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 56 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Jan. 25


China will release 11 captured Vietnamese soldiers and 4 convicted Vietnamese
spies on Feb. 5 so they can return to their families for Tet, the Lunar New
Year, the official New China News Agency reported today. Vietnam announced
earlier that it would release 35 Chinese captives for the holiday, which falls
on Feb. 13 this year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 26, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ALL THE COMFORTS OF A MILITARY HOSPITAL

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1096 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


A few years ago, Senator John C. Stennis was shot twice and critically wounded
by young assailants. As an ambulance team prepared to rush him to a university
hospital in downtown Washington, he groggily mumbled: ''Please take me to Walter
Reed.''

''It turned out splendidly,'' the Mississippi Democrat, now 81 years old, said
the other day, recalling his stay in the famed Army medical center in northwest
Washington. ''I had an amazing surgeon out there who was just back from Vietnam
where he had been doing abdominal surgery for gunshot wounds. I was very, very
near death.  They certainly did a great job for me.''

They also catered to his comfort. Mr. Stennis was housed in the same three-room
suite in which Gen. John J. Pershing, commander of American forces in Europe in
World War I, passed the last years of his life. It had wood-paneled walls and a
velvet couch.

Senator Stennis was but one in a long line of Government luminaries who have
used the facilities at Walter Reed or at the Naval Hospital in suburban
Bethesda, Md. Although the primary purpose of both hospitals is to care for
military personnel and their dependents, they are also available to politically
powerful civilians.

37,000 Military Patients

Each year, along with 37,000 or so military patients, the hospitals admit a few
dozen senators, representatives, judges, foreign leaders, ranking Pentagon
civilians and other dignitaries.

President Truman got most of his medical care at Walter Reed, and President
Eisenhower and Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas died there.

Every President since Lyndon B. Johnson, including Ronald Reagan, has used
Bethesda for at least minor treatment or checkups. But when President Reagan was
critically wounded in an assassination attempt in downtown Washington, he was
rushed to George Washington University Hospital close to the scene.

The attractions of the military hospitals to qualified civilians are good
medical care in the immediate Washington area, a relatively low price compared
with many top medical facilities and pampering, security and privacy for the
most famous patients.

Military patients receive free care. For most nonmilitary patients, the charge
is a flat $430 per day, which is based on average worldwide costs at military
hospitals. That may seem high at first glance, but is actually quite low for
complicated cases, since the charge includes physicians' fees, X-rays, drugs and
other services that are usually billed separately in civilian hospitals. ''It's
a lot to pay if you just have a cold but a real bargain for open heart
surgery,'' said a Walter Reed spokesman.

Most civilian patients are covered by some form of health insurance.

Embarrassment at Bethesda

Despite their distinguished clientele, the two hospitals enjoy only mixed
reputations. Some dignitaries swear by them; others never use them or consider
them a notch below the best.

Last year Bethesda suffered a double-barreled indignity when the Joint
Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals and the Navy inspector general's office
both found serious deficiencies. Hospital officials contend that the
deficiencies did not reflect on the quality of care but rather involved a
failure to document that quality. However, they declined to release the
accreditation team's report.

Since that embarrassment, however, the hospital has been reorganized and new
leadership brought in. The latest survey results, just in, give the hospital
accreditation for a full three years.

Both hospitals in recent years have replaced their old buildings with modern
structures that have improved the surroundings of the average patient but,
ironically, have probably reduced the splendor of the VIP surroundings. For
example, at Walter Reed, a conference room and office have been created from the
grand old suite where President Eisenhower spent his last days amid high
ceilings, plush carpets, carved woodwork and fireplaces.

Today celebrated patients are housed in rooms in a new unit that hospital
officials characterize as ''sterile and modern.'' The unit, which is off-limits
to the public and press for security reasons, contains five bedroom-sitting room
combinations and a more elaborate two-bedroom section originally built for
Presidential use but now available to others since Bethesda has been designated
to receive Presidents.

9-Room Presidential Suite

The Presidential suite at Bethesda, also off-limits, consists of nine rooms that
cover a full floor of the old hospital building.  There are bedrooms for the
President, the First Lady and a guest, as well as a dining room, kitchen and
medical offices.

But except for that seldom-used suite, hospital officials say, there are no
separate rooms for other high-ranking patients. ''We don't have any special
suites or special procedures,'' said Capt.  James J. Quinn, the hospital
commander. ''We just try to give them a private room, if possible.''

One flag officer who had a coronary bypass operation at Bethesda last year
laments the disappearance of those amenities that used to make high rank so
delicious. ''When I was an enlisted man during World War II, I dreamed of the
day when I'd be a flag officer,'' said Dr. Richard M. Krause, director of the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and an assistant surgeon
general in the Public Health Service, equivalent in rank to a rear admiral or
major general. ''But now that I'm a flag officer, all of those privileges seem
to have disappeared. I was in a private room at the naval hospital, but it was
just like any other private room. No paneling, no carpeting, no nurses running
in to see me more often than the other patients.''

Dr. Krause said he chose Bethesda because it was close to his office and home
and because his inquiries revealed that the surgical team was ''fantastic.'' It
was also free because of his commissioned officer status. ''I paid something
like $187 for the food I ate,'' he recalled, adding: ''It wasn't worth it.'' But
the results of the surgery were everything he had hoped for. ''I'm fully
recovered and am hiking the Billy Goat trail,'' he said.

Some physicians are less enamored of the two institutions. Dr.  Mortimer B.
Lipsett, former director of the Clinical Center at the National Institutes of
Health, one of the nation's leading research hospitals, said: ''I wouldn't say
they're the best places in the country. They're comparable to a lot of good
academic medical centers. There is some very good medicine being practiced
there. It varies from one department to another.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Johnson

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 26, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: LENNON DEATH RECALLED IN PRINCETON

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON, N.J.  AS we enter the cavernous McCarter Theater to see
James McLure's ''The Day They Shot John Lennon,'' the curtain is up to reveal a
life


size re-creation of the west side of Central Park West at 72d Street.

A traffic signal flashes; Beatles songs pour forth from a loudspeaker. The song
that's playing when the house lights dim is ''Help!'' As we hear the lyric
''When I was younger, so much younger than today,'' the stage suddenly fills
with nine forlorn figures, all in silhouette against a pink winter twilight sky,
all staring silently upward in the direction of the Dakota apartment house
across the street. And, for this one extended moment, Mr. McLure's play delivers
on its title: we're transported right back to that December 1980 day of mourning
when the songs of an era took on sad, new ironies, and when no one could think
of the right words to express an inexplicable loss.

But pretty soon this tableau must end, so that the author can get his drama
moving. What follows is a torrent of words, most of them inane. Almost every
line distances us further and further from the potent, inarticulate grief of the
prologue, until finally ''The Day They Shot John Lennon'' seems a totally
inadequate response to its subject. Mr. McLure, the author of such plays as
''Lone Star'' and ''Laundry and Bourbon,'' is a talented young writer, and
''John Lennon'' was obviously inspired by the genuine anguish he shared with so
many others two years ago. Are his wounds still so fresh that he's afraid to
probe them deeply? Whatever the explanation, his writing here is synthetic.

The play's nine characters, we soon discover, are a ''typical'' cross-section of
New Yorkers apparently rounded up from lesser movies and television shows: a
crochety elderly Jew, a loudly opinionated secretary, a trio of parochial school
teen-agers, a young advertising huckster, two drug-dealing Vietnam veterans and
a jivetalking black. None of them rises above stereotype.

Nor do we understand why these characters are in any way representative of those
who mourned Lennon on that fateful day.  Although the ad man and the secretary
say they were Woodstock participants in their pre-corporate salad days, their
nostalgic reveries about their pasts ring false: we feel they spent the 60's
drinking at fraternity houses, not dropping into the counterculture.  The high
school students and the black seem largely indifferent to the Beatles, as do the
Vietnam vets. The Jew, who wanders on for comic relief, thinks that the murder
victim across the street is Jack Lemmon.

The interstitched stories that keep these characters babbling also have little
to do with the play's ostensible point. Most of ''John Lennon'' is sentimental
situation comedy that could be set anywhere at any time. Will the secretary and
the ad man go off together into the night? Will the high-school girl reconcile
with her boyfriend?Will the young black, who aspires to be a comic, become pals
with the old Jew, who was once a vaudevillian? Mr. McLure not only fails to make
us care about these irrelevant prefab plots but also insists on resolving them
all with happy endings.

Here and there the playwright does return to the matter at hand, and when he
does he sometimes hits with an amusing line. ''You don't think of a killer
coming from Hawaii,'' says one of the kids.  Another mourner, who admires the
Edward Hopper show at the Whitney, notes that Hopper ''lived long enough to hear
the Beatles, but not long enough to hear 'Abbey Road.' '' At the end, Mr. McLure
introduces a standard theme, when one of the vets rages impotently at God about
all the assassinations and other horrible historical calamities of his
generation. ''Things never change,'' he shouts.  ''They just get worse.''

If the author doesn't seem to know or care about most of the people on stage -
and at times condescends to them - the actors are often even further afield.
Under the direction of Robert Lanchester, the performances are extremely broad;
the long-in-the-tooth teen-agers border on the ridiculous. Daniel Boylen's set
is far more authentic than any of the action that unfolds on it.

Of course, the songs are authentic, too - ''the background music for our
lives,'' as one line correctly puts it. That aural background still evokes
powerful memories in ''The Day They Shot John Lennon,'' but the human foreground
that might bring our shared past into a meaningful perspective is nowhere to be
found.

Things Getting Worse
THE DAY THEY SHOT JOHN LENNON, by James McLure; directed by Robert Lanchester;
scenery by Daniel Boylen; costumes by Susan Rheaume; lighting by Richard Moore.
Pre- sented by the McCarter Theater Company, Nagle Jackson, artistic director;
Alison Harris, managing director. At Princeton, N.J.  Fran
...................................Mercedes Ruehl Sally
.......................................Ann Adams Kevin
...................................Greg Thornton Mike
.................................Clifford Fetters Larry
....................................Damien Leake Morris
.....................................Karl Light Silvio
...................................Tony Campisi Gately
..................................Gregory Grove Brian
....................................Gary Roberts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 28, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

KIN OF LOST AMERICANS MARK INDOCHINA ACCORD

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 27


Mary Rose of Birmingham, Ala., still wakes up in the middle of the night and
imagines that her son, Capt. Scott Ketchie, is alive in a prison camp in
Vietnam.

''He was a navigator on an A-6, shot down in 1972 over the Ho Chi Minh trail,''
Mrs. Rose, who is no longer married to Scott's father, said quietly. ''The pilot
was rescued, parachuted out of the plane with Scott. But Scott was never
found.'' She shrugged. ''Death is final, I could live with that, but Scott was
my only child and, well, I guess I'll wait and hope forever.''

In the corner of a crowded lobby in the Hyatt Regency Crystal City Hotel,
Patricia Maves of Portland, Ore., stood with her 11-year-old daughter, Camille.
The girl was only 8 months old when her father, Capt. Richard A. Brett, was shot
down over Laos while serving as a pilot on an F-111.

''It's living with the uncertainty that's so hard,'' said Mrs.  Maves, who
remarried recently. ''I think there's a possibility that some men may be alive
somewhere, but not Richard. The uncertainty became too much for me and I guess I
just decided that Richard had died.''

Kept Asking for Her Father

She said slowly, ''When Camille was 3 or 4 she kept asking for her father and I
told her he was probably killed but nobody really knows and she said she was
going to find him. Well that just tore me up. It brought up a lot of pain.''

The two women were among more than 500 relatives of Americans still listed as
missing in action in Southeast Asia who gathered today for the start of a
two-day meeting to mark the tenth anniversary of the signing of the Paris peace
accords that ended United States participation in the war in Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia. The meeting today was marked by a speech by William P. Clark,
President Reagan's national security adviser, and an updating of reports on the
fate of the missing given by officials of the sponsoring organization, the
National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia.

The Air Force flew many of the relatives to Washington from 19 bases around the
country and will fly them home Saturday without charge.

The mood of the wives and children and parents of the missing was often
anguished. ''I doubt seriously that my husband is alive,'' said Susan Miller of
Corpus Christi, Tex., whose husband, Curtis, an Air Force major, was shot down
in an AC-130 over Laos in 1972. ''I would just like to see him back in Texas
soil.''

Reports Treated Warily

Although officials of the organization insist that ''eyewitness reports'' and
''sightings'' by refugees indicate that some men are alive - and that the
Vietnamese are withholding the remains of more than 400 Americans - Reagan
Administration officials speak warily of reports about American prisoners still
being alive in Southeast Asia.

Maj. Bob Shields, a Pentagon spokesman, said that the Department of Defense
''operates on the assumption that some could be alive.'' He added: ''We don't
have evidence that there are some alive, we don't have evidence that there
aren't. But we have to press on as if some were alive.''

Mr. Clark, in his speech today, said, ''Information now in our possession
disallows us from ruling out the possibiity that Americans are still being
detained against their will.'' Mr. Clark noted that President Reagan would speak
to the group on Friday, a decision that buoyed many of the families who assert
that the Reagan Administration has shown far more interest in the issue than did
the Carter and Ford Administrations.

''We not only care deeply about our missing men and you, their families, but we
are devoting our highest priority resources to the task of obtaining the release
of any prisoners who may still be held, the fullest possible accounting of those
missing, and the repatriation of remains of those who died serving our nation,''
said Mr. Clark.

Warning From Several Speakers

Vietnamese officials, including Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, have insisted
that the Hanoi Government has retained neither American prisoners nor American
remains, and that a substantial number of those listed as missing appear to have
disappeared in jungle areas difficult to reach.

At meetings today, several speakers, including Mr. Clark, warned families
against providing money - as some apparently had - to groups or mercenaries who
said that they had seen American prisoners alive in Vietnam and were planning to
rescue them in what the national security adviser termed ''private cross-border
forays.''

''Our experience is that such private groups operate under faulty
intelligence,'' said Mr. Clark, who added that unscrupulous people sometimes
take advantage of bereaved families.

After the speech and through the afternoon, many of the families drove to the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial across the Potomac to examine the names of their
fathers and sons. Kay Marker of San Antonio was planning to visit the memorial
with her two children, Jeff and Suzanne, who were 3 years old and 15 months old
when their father, Michael, an Army captain, was shot down in a reconnaissance
aircraft in the demilitarized zone in March 1971.

''He's not alive, I'm sure of that,'' said Mrs. Marker softly.  ''The children
didn't even know their father. We just want him back, we want his body back.''

50 Amerasians Leave Vietnam

HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Jan. 27 (AP) - Fifty Amerasian children and their
relatives left Vietnam en route to the United States today. It was the biggest
such airlift to date.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Camille and Patricia Maves

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 28, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES;
The hurdles a film maker must get over.

BYLINE: By Chris Chase

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1455 words


IN Australia, the movie business, which has flown high for a few years, may be
about to crash. A week or so ago, the actors' union decided to shut out
non-Australian performers, but nobody else seems to think that will solve the
industry's problems. Mel Gibson, who plays the lead in ''The Year of Living
Dangerously,'' says Australian film makers have been greedy. ''Sometimes they
act like a bunch of kids over there. You could get a tax writeoff if you
invested in a motion picture, so, rather than doing good films, people would do
stuff half-cocked. Now the tax laws have changed, and that's thrown a spanner
into the works.''

In Canada, too, the film industry has troubles. ''Threshold'' was made three
years ago and has only just come out. Why did it take three years? ''It's a
Canadian movie,'' says its star, Donald Sutherland. ''Generally, they don't come
out at all. Canadian tax laws are an incentive to have Canadian movies produced,
but most of the time the producers don't have distribution deals. Fox only
picked up 'Threshold' about six months ago.''

And in the United States, it isn't stretch limousines and suites at the Ritz for
every moviemaker, either. John Sayles, who wrote, directed and acted in
''Lianna,'' has learned about exhibitors and distributors, not because the
subject interests him, but because ''I have to know it in order to make stuff
and get it seen.''

Often, with a small movie, according to Mr. Sayles, you don't want to open in
New York first. ''The rental of a theater is so high,'' he says, ''you want to
start out in other places, get great reviews around the rest of the country, not
put everything on that one roll of the dice.''

As it happens, ''Lianna,'' which is playing at the Embassy 72d Street, was liked
in New York; one critic talked about Mr. Sayles's ''resolute intelligence'' and
''very real art.''

Where did the idea for ''Lianna'' come from? ''I knew a bunch of couples who
were breaking up,'' says Mr. Sayles. ''And the ones who didn't have children
were able to go about their lives, whereas the ones who did have children had to
be in each other's lives forever, to see each other every Friday, as the kids
changed hands. And then I knew a bunch of women who had been divorced or widowed
and had to go out and get jobs. And I knew some women at the point where they
were admitting they were gay. So I sort of combined all three. I had a situation
where there were kids, and the woman who was coming out of the closet had to get
a job, unlike in 'An Unmarried Woman,' where she just has a great apartment, and
who knows what she does for a living. Because most people don't just get this
vacation to work on their personal problems.''

Mr. Sayles, who began his writing career as a novelist, went to Hollywood hoping
to work on screenplays. ''And not long after I got there,'' he says, ''my agent
called and said, 'Look, Roger Corman needs a rewrite on something called
'Piranha.' You want it, you got it.' ''

Screenwriting brought him the cash to do ''The Return of the Secaucus Seven,''
which cost $60,000 and has grossed a couple of million. ''Lianna'' cost
$300,000. Mr. Sayles had hoped to raise a million, but settled for less.
''Finally,'' he says, ''we were getting money from relatives and friends, and
with $300,000, we were pretty sure we'd pay everybody back, and that took a lot
of pressure off me to soften the script or make it broader in its appeal.''

Some pressure of another kind may be taken off Mr. Sayles, at least for the next
five years. He has just been named a winner of an award from the John D. and
Catherine MacArthur Foundation of Chicago, which in its ''search for geniuses,''
subsidizes creative people for five years at a time.

Still, it's not easy for small movies to attract dollars, or other kinds of
support, Mr. Sayles says. ''I've been with 'Secaucus Seven' to a lot of film
festivals that are supposed to bring independent film makers together to share
information, and the only information they want is phone numbers of people with
money. Last year, I went to a seminar, and the first thing the agents and
producers and story editors on the panel said was, 'Please don't hand us
screenplays at the end of this session.' Writers asked, 'How do you get an
agent?' 'Well, you have to have something produced.' 'How do you get something
produced?' 'Well, you have to have an agent.' People got so frustrated, they
started screaming and throwing scripts on the stage.''

Mr. Sayles lives in Hoboken, N.J. He says New York ''is too expensive and
assaultive.'' He takes a bus into the city and walks to his production offices
on 54th Street, where he is already winding up work on his next picture, ''Baby,
It's You.'' He says he doesn't care about working for a big movie company.
''You'd have to make millions of dollars for somebody, before you'd get total
control, which is what I want. I'm lucky, because I write, so I can look at a
script and say, 'This is great, but I can't afford to make this movie, unless I
make a lot of compromises in the look of it.' You pay somewhere along the line
for anything you get.''
Donald Sutherland's Career

Is Back on the Track

Donald Sutherland would probably agree. After ''Klute'' and ''M*A*S*H'' had made
him a bankable star, he went off on an anti-Vietnam tour of the Far East with
Jane Fonda and came back to find that the tour had cost him - at least for a
while - his American movie career.

Today, he's hot again, and has been since ''Ordinary People.'' Right now, he's
the star of three new pictures. ''Max Dugan'' (by Neil Simon) comes out in May,
''Crackers'' (directed by Louis Malle) is due in August and ''Threshold'' is
already here.

Even critics who don't like the sight of blood have glowing words for Mr.
Sutherland as the surgeon who implants an artificial heart in a patient. To
prepare for the role, Mr. Sutherland watched Dr.  Denton Cooley perform 30
operations. ''It was exhilarating,'' he says. ''People with triple bypasses,
with new mitral valves. Cooley's a magician. He looks as if he's doing ordinary
stitches, but he's doing three times as many and smaller than anyone else can.''

Mr. Sutherland doesn't like to see his own movies until two or three years after
he's made them, and he has never worked with the same director twice. ''It's
like a lover when the relationship is finished,'' he says. ''It's embarrassing.
The first time I met Fellini after 'Casanova,' I was shy as I could be.''

Passionate about good writing (he says of James Salter, who wrote ''Threshold,''
that he's ''incredibly elegant and truthful''), baseball (''I find it a truly
beautiful sport'') and babies, Mr.  Sutherland has five children, the three
youngest by Francine Racette, a French-Canadian actress. Their 4-month-old son
hasn't yet got a name. ''Baby Bon-Bon is his name at the moment,'' says Mr.
Sutherland. ''I kind of like Angus, but Francine doesn't. I think she wants to
call him Robespierre. He's a terrific baby, he already has two teeth.''
Mel Gibson, Hot Property

In Films From Australia

Like Donald Sutherland, Mel Gibson is hot right now, too. Not only is ''The Year
of Living Dangerously'' in the theaters, but also ''The Road Warrior'' is being
released again. Born in the United States, Mr. Gibson moved to Australia with
his family when he was 12 years old, and even now, he says, ''I don't sound like
an Australian to the Australians.''

It was an older sister who steered him toward acting. She sent an application in
his name, along with $5, to a drama school in Sydney, and Mr. Gibson obediently
showed up for the audition. ''I was very raw,'' he says, ''but I guess they
liked it. Fate has a funny way of tipping you into these things. My first job
was in a film, and I'd been training for the stage, so I was a bit damp.''

Damp or not, he managed. He played in ''Tim,'' ''Mad Max'' (''The Road Warrior''
is a sequel to ''Mad Max'') and then ''Gallipoli,'' in which he played Frank
Dunne, the city boy from Perth, brought him to international notice.

Peter Weir, the director of ''Gallipoli,'' also directed ''The Year of Living
Dangerously,'' which has Mr. Gibson doing love scenes with Sigourney Weaver, a
sizable talent, and a sizable female as well. He says mildly, ''There's a lot of
her,'' and says he wore built-up shoes so he and she would look good together.

In Australia, where Mr. Gibson enjoys ''permanent resident'' status, he and his
wife, Robyn, and their 3-year-old daughter and 8-month-old twin boys live by the
shore. ''We've bought a seaside boarding house,'' he says. ''It still has the
numbers on the doors, and a sign on the upstairs toilet saying, 'Leave this
place as clean as you found it.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Sayles

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ACTION PLEDGED ON LOST G.I.'S

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 233 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 28


President Reagan today told families of American servicemen still missing in
Southeast Asia that United States intelligence agencies were ''fully focused''
on the problem and that the goal of a full accounting was ''the highest national
priority.''

''The anguish you've suffered - the families of brave men listed as prisoners of
war or as missing in action - is unspeakable, something the rest of us can never
really know even in partial measure,'' Mr. Reagan said in an emotional meeting
with more than 500 relatives, including wives, children and parents, of the
missing Americans.

Appearing at a meeting of the National League of Families of American Prisoners
and Missing in Southeast Asia, Mr. Reagan stood in front of the bleak black flag
of the organization and received a standing ovation when he said: ''Your vigil
is over. Your Government is attentive and the intelligence assets of the United
States are fully focused on this issue.''

Mr. Reagan's appearance at the meeting in the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Crystal
City, Virginia, near Washington, and the tone of his comments underlined his
strong involvement since the late 1960's in the issue of Americans missing in
action in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Reagan said that the ''full resources'' of the Government were committed to
the goal of a full accounting of the 2,494 Americans who remained unaccounted
for after the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Pres. Reagan and Ralph Gaither

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
SATURDAY, JANUARY 29, 1983

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


International
A Government shake-up in India brought about the resignation of the 60 members
of the Cabinet and Council of Ministers. Only Prime Minister Indira Gandhi
remained in office. It was believed likely that Mrs. Gandhi would accept most of
the resignations, which followed the recent unexpected and decisive defeat of
her Congress Party in two strongholds in southern India where the party had
never lost. (Page 1, Column 1.)
14 people were killed in Lebanon when a car packed with explosives blew up
outside an office building belonging to Yassir Arafat's Al Fatah Palestinian
guerrilla group. Beirut television said the attack took place near Shtaura in
eastern Lebanon. A group calling itself the ''Front to Liberate Lebanon From
Foreigners'' said it was responsible for the attack. (1:2.)
American officials were impressed by the strong concern of Egypt's President
that Syria, as well as Israel, withdraw its forces from Lebanon to prevent the
country from being permanently partitioned.  Officials who have spoken with
President Mubarak and senior Egyptian aides during a two-day visit to Washington
said Mr. Mubarak had told them of his distrust of the motives of President Hafez
al-Assad of Syria. (4:1.)
National
A $848.5 billion Federal budget for fiscal year 1984 that keeps an even pace
with expected inflation is proposed by President Reagan.  There is an
anticipated deficit of $189 billion provided that Congress enacts a series of
freezes and reductions in domestic programs. The plan assumes that recovery is
under way in the current quarter, will build steadily until midyear and then
average four percent growth for the next five years. (1:6.)
The economics behind the 1984 budget are ''realistic,'' Republican and
Democratic leaders in Congress said. They also said White House officials had
indicated a willingness to work out budget differences with Congress. The
Congressional reaction contrasted sharply with that of last year, when the
President's budget was quickly discarded in Congress. (1:5.)
A key Government economic index rose 1.5 percent in December. It was another of
the many recent signs that recovery is near. The increase in the index of
leading economic indicators, which is designed to forecast economic trends, was
the eighth in the last nine months and the largest in the last two years, the
Commerce Department said.  (1:4.)
A full account of missing servicemen in Vietnam has ''the highest national
priority,'' President Reagan told families of American servicemen still missing
in southeast Asia. At a meeting in Washington of the National League of Families
of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, Mr. Reagan said that United
States intelligence agencies were ''fully focused'' on the problem. (3:1.)
A new storm struck California's coast after four counties had been declared
disaster areas because of tidal and flood damage by Gov.  George Deukmejian.
Marin and San Mateo counties in the northern part of the state and Los Angeles
and San Diego counties in the south were designated as disaster areas. (7:1.)
Farm suppliers will be hard hit by the Federal program that seems likely to
leave much of the nation's farm land idle this year. Many of the farm suppliers,
which already financially troubled, are unlikely to survive a year of reduced
planting and spending by their customers, farm economists say. (7:1.)
Senator Paul Laxalt was elected to the new post of general chairman of the
Republican National Committee at a meeting in Washington, and a political ally,
Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr. of Nevada, was elected as regualr chairman, replacing
Richard Richards. (10:1.)
Metropolitan
Layoffs of New York City teachers were averted after Governor Cuomo said that $9
million in state funds would be provided in a state agreement with the New York
City Board of Education and City Hall.  (1:4.)
Higher state and city college tuition will be called for under the proposed
state budget, and layoffs and cuts in purchases will be required by the state
and city university system, Governor Cuomo's aides confirmed. Tuition at the 34
four-year colleges of the state system is scheduled by increase by about $250 to
$1,300 per year, and dormitory fees will be raised by about $150 to $1,400 per
year.  Tuition in the 17 senior colleges and the graduate school of the City
University of New York will be increased by $150 to $1,200. (1:3.)
An unemployment benefit increase of 36 percent, raising payments for the
unemployed to $170 from $125 a week, will be proposed by Governor Cuomo, senior
administration aides said. The proposal, now in the form of a draft bill, will
be submitted to the Legislature in a week to 10 days, the aides said.
Unemployment benefits were last increased in 1978. (25:5.)
Hillside, N.J., must desegregate its four elementary schools by the fall term, a
New Jersey Superior Court judge ruled. The decision by Judge V. William DiBuono
came after a decade of disputes between the New Jersey Department of Education
and Hillside, a town of 22,000 people near Newark. Judge DiBuono cited a lower
court's finding that the Hillside schools are ''impermissably imbalanced''
racially.  (27:1.)

Business Digest, Page Page 29

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

STUDY FINDS FEWER FRESHMEN IN COLLEGE LOOK TO TEACHING

BYLINE: By GENE I. MAEROFF

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 850 words


College freshmen today are less interested in becoming teachers than at any time
in the last 17 years, according to a national survey sponsored by the American
Council on Education and the University of California at Los Angeles.

Further, the survey indicates that freshmen are more materialistic and show less
social concern than in past years, consistent with a trend that began in the
middle 1970's. At the same time, an increasing percentage of freshmen say they
approve of sex if ''people like each other,'' believe abortion should be
legalized and favor a national health care plan.

The profile of the freshman class is produced annually by the education council
and researchers at U.C.L.A., providing a yardstick against which changes in the
attitudes and characteristics of college students can be measured.

Providing Reflection on Values

Information on career interests is considered especially important because it
reflects the values of students and predicts rises and declines in the
popularity of certain professions.

''Since 1966, when 21.7 percent of the entering freshmen were planning careers
as schoolteachers, student interest has declined steadily to the point where
only 4.7 percent of the 1982 freshmen aspire to teaching careers,'' says the
report on the survey, ''The American Freshman: National Norms for Fall 1982.''

The eroding interest in teaching seems to hold unfortunate consequences for
elementary and secondary education in the country, coming at a time when
education officials say that fewer and fewer good candidates are entering
teaching programs.

An especially serious shortage of teachers has developed in certain fields such
as mathematics and science and further disenchantment on the part of college
students seems to pose problems for school systems trying to fill vacancies.

A 'Grim' Outlook Is Seen

''When these trends are viewed in the light of other recent data about
prospective school teachers, the outlook for our educational system is grim,''
said Alexander W. Astin, director of the Cooperative Institutional Research
Program at the university, which conducted the survey.

''Since recent studies of college admissions tests show that education majors
have much weaker academic skills than students majoring in most other fields,''
Dr. Astin continued, ''it appears that we are headed for a crisis not only in
the quantity, but also in the quality of persons who want to teach in our
elementary and scondary schools.''

The fields whose popularity is rising among freshmen, who in many cases start
the major area of study upon entering college, are business, engineering and
computer programming. The percentage of freshmen choosing these three fields as
career choices reached a record in the 1982 survey.

Business has shown the sharpest rise of all, capturing the allegiance of 20.2
percent of the freshmen in 1982, as against 11.6 percent in 1966.

Better Pay as a Lure

The move toward better-paying professions seems to be an important factor in the
decline of interest in teaching. More than two-thirds of the freshmen, 68.9
percent, said that being ''very well off financially'' was an essential
objective. This was a goal of 65.2 percent of the freshmen last year and 43.5
percent in 1967. At the same time, to ''make more money'' was a reason ''very
important in deciding to go to college'' for 69.8 percent of this year's
freshmen, as against 67 percent last year and 49.9 percent in 1971.

The altruistic goals embraced by so many college freshmen in the late 1960's and
early 1970's, when the campuses become centers of dissent against the Vietnam
War, are less and less evident, according to the survey.

Students placed less importance than in other recent years on cleaning up the
environment, helping people in difficulty, promoting racial understanding and
developing a meaningful philosophy of life.  ''This would appear to be a general
societal phenomenon,'' said Dr.  Astin.

A Crowded Middle of the Road

In identifying their political orientation, 1.8 percent called themselves far
left, 18.9 percent were liberal, 59.8 percent were middle-of-the-road, 18.4
percent were conservative and 1 percent were far right.

The attitudes of the freshmen on a number of social issues were mixed. As
against a year ago, fewer freshmen favored abolishing the death penalty or
giving preferential treatment to the disadvantaged.  And more thought criminals
had too many rights and were against the legalization of marijuana.

At same time, however, more approved of school busing to achieve racial balance,
and fewer would prohibit homosexual relations.  The survey report is based on
the responses of 188,692 full-time freshmen with the results weighted to reflect
a representative national sample. Dr. Astin was assisted by Margo King Hemond
and Gerald T. Richardson of the Cooperative Institutional Research Program.

Copies of the report are available at $7.50 each from the Cooperative
Institutional Research Program, Graduate School of Education, 405 Hilgard
Avenue, U.C.L.A., Los Angeles, Calif. 90024.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Criticize Reagan On American Foreign Policy

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 48 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 29


President Reagan is ''incapable'' and has not learned from his mistakes, the
Vietnamese Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan said today.

''Reagan's State of the Union message proved that he had not learned
sufficiently from his setbacks and blunders,'' the paper said in a commentary.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

READING AND WRITING;
ON BOOKS ON WAR

BYLINE: By D.J.R. Bruckner

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 902 words


Plutarch tells of a Greek general who overheard a philosopher discussing
warfare. The general said the philosopher talked well but was not to be
believed, since he had never heard the blast of the battle trumpet. That story
says a great deal about how people have discussed war.

Among hundreds of books that appear every year about war, the memoirs of great
commanders have a value no historian or theorist can argue away. A war is a
terrific experience when it happens; it changes everyday life afterward, and its
leaders demonstrate qualities not otherwise seen.

At the end of his ''History of Warfare,'' Field Marshal Viscount Montgomery
wrote that ''nuclear weapons have given mankind a choice between abolishing war
or being abolished by it.'' If he is right and if mankind chooses not to be
abolished, we will need to replace some time-honored ways of discussing national
purposes, the discipline of great enterprises and the values we share. In an age
when we worry about financing military operations of client governments around
the world, and in the aftermath of Vietnam, we may forget both that this nation,
like many, was born out of a war and that it has fought some that we would now
be ashamed not to have fought.

Even handbooks on war can contain history and political ideas of great
importance. Frederick the Great's ''Military Instructions for the Generals'' and
Napoleon's ''Military Maxims'' embody clear notions of fair personal conduct you
will not find in ethics texts, as well as some clear advice about the whole art
of governance.

But it is in the personal histories of war leaders that one finds unique
expression of human aims. Charles De Gaulle's war memoirs and Winston
Churchill's ''The Second World War'' may not have much in common, but they share
a vision of free societies and of the fundamental decency of ordinary people
that was almost crushed in Europe in the 1930's. It is instructive to read them
at the same time. Churchill was much more candid, but there is a passion to De
Gaulle's ideals that leaves you with the feeling that he spoke for millions out
of a knowledge that was forced on him. Triumphant those books may be, but both
of them produce a revulsion against war. In a much quieter way, so does the
posthumous autobiography of Gen. Omar Bradley, which is being published this
year. And you cannot read the chapters on battle in Gen. Petro Grigorenko's
''Memoirs'' without understanding and admiring the courage of Russian soldiers.

War did not get its bad reputation from politicians, religious leaders,
philosophers or national historians. It first got its bad name from soldiers.
You have only to look into fighting men's personal
accounts in two recent books - Gordon W. Prange's book on Pearl Harbor, ''At
Dawn We Slept,'' or Donald Knox's collection of oral histories from the
survivors of Bataan, ''Death March'' - to see why. Many generals have been able
to express those experiences in ways poets and novelists cannot. Virgil's mythic
heroes give good speeches about duty and honor, but for the reality look into
Julius Caesar's books on the Gallic and civil wars. They are self-serving tracts
filled with political propaganda about Roman imperial aims, but they give
eloquent voice to the suffering of the infantry soldier.

No stranger to battle has exactly captured that kind of understanding. About 300
years ago the Scotsman Andrew Ramsey came close. His ''Histoire du Vicomte de
Turenne'' - a book about the career of that great general who not only saved
France in civil war but became one of the best military strategists in history -
reveals a man who had a deeper sense of the value of human life than all but a
few clergymen or philosophers in the bloody 17th century. But few biographies or
histories are that vivid. Even a gentle whisper from an old general can be
awfully powerful. Look into the little volume of ''Recollections'' that Robert
E. Lee's son put together from his father's conversations and papers. In them
you can learn the ideas behind a nation, the devastation of a fratricidal war
and the spiritual destruction it brought in a way you will never forget.

Some war books are dreadful, to be sure, but even a few of the appalling ones
tell us a lot about ourselves and our world. There is a frighteningly clear
vision of Spain, its fierce faith and the end of ancient civilizations and the
beginning of a new one in this hemisphere in the volume of Hernando Cortez's
letters on his conquest of Mexico or in Pedro Pizarro's ''Relation of the
Discovery and Conquest of the Kingdoms of Peru.''

There is a debate now, as there was at the time of Plato and at other times,
about whether people ought to read and think about war.  There is cause for
concern. The flood of books on war is wide and deep - histories, scenarios,
fiction, war games and, in recent years, an increasing number about
international intelligence intrigues. Some might tend to overheat people's
imaginations.

But there is not much evidence that books about war make people bellicose. It
would be easier to argue convincingly that some books about religion,
philosophy, history and politics have done that. Wars have sprung from many
other and much more complex causes. So far throughout our history, in any case,
when peace has failed, the generals have not only fought the wars but often have
had the most philosophical thoughts about them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOME L.I. HOSPITALS BALK AT PENTAGON REQUEST FOR SPACE

BYLINE: By SCOTT HIGHAM

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 14, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1270 words


LONG considered a scarce commodity by medical staffs and administrators,
civilian hospital beds on Long Island are being sought by military planners,
forcing many administrators to decide whether they can forfeit 50 beds each to
the Department of Defense.

As part of a nationwide program, the Pentagon last September asked 28 hospitals
in Nassau and Suffolk Counties to volunteer a total of 1,400 beds to military
casualties in the event of a large-scale war.  Although the plan has been
accepted by some hospitals and turned down by others, most administrators and
medical staffs on the Island have yet to make a decision.

''We've got hundreds of people waiting for beds,'' said Pete Schaefer, a
spokesman for St. Francis Hospital in Port Washington.  ''Right now, it's still
under review.''

To date, 7 hospitals on the Island have rejected the Defense Department's
invitation, 4 have signed agreements and 17 are undecided.

Proposed in 1980, the Civilian-Military Contingency Hospital System represents
the first request by Pentagon officials for civilian bed space to treat military
casualties of wars fought in foreign theaters. Under the plan, beds committed to
military casualties would remain occupied by the hospital's regular patients
until the military requests their use.

A spokesman for the Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, which has
accepted the proposal, said that services would not be denied to civilians even
if the military requested 50 beds. ''We have 680 beds, but our hospital can be
expanded to a 1,000-bed facility - we have a lot of extra room,'' said the
spokesman, Ed Smith.

Many critics of the plan, including the staffs of several prominent medical
institutions and associations, charge that the contingency plan is designed for
a nuclear war possibility and supports the idea that such a war is winnable.

Defense Department officials, however, maintain that because of more
sophisticated weapons and delivery systems, the majority of casualties would now
result during the first three days of combat, requiring the mobilization of
civilian hospitals. The contingency plan, according to Capt. Sherry
Stetson-Mannix, a Department of Defense spokesman, is designed solely for
conventional warfare.

''In the past, we had time to set up our own military system's hospital beds,
and we will not have that time in the future,'' said Lieut. Col. Rudy Hahn,
executive officer of the Patterson Army Hospital in Monmouth, N.J. ''The only
alternative would be to spend $5 billion and start constructing our own
facilities.''

Colonel Hahn, who is assisting the Pentagon in rural hospitals in the lower New
York region, said that the scope of conventional warfare had been drastically
altered at the Vietnam War.

But opponents of the contingency plan assert that it is the product of a
prevailing attitude among military officials that a protracted nuclear war is
survivable. They point to statements made by the Secretary of Defense, Caspar W.
Weinberger, and to his former assistant for military health affairs, Dr. John
Moxley, who in 1981 said that ''a war could escalate to a tactical nuclear
exchange, and planning must, of course, consider that possibility.''

Dr. Yale Solomon, director of the Suffolk County chapter of Physicians for
Social Responsibility, a national organization of medical professionals,
asserted: ''This is in preparation for conflict with the Soviet Union, and
conflict with the Soviet Union, according to the Defense Department, means
preparation for a protracted nuclear exchange. One has to assume intelligently
this is what they're asking.''

Dr. Solomon has sent a position paper to hospital administrators on the Island
urging them not to participate.  Within most Long Island hospitals, however,
debate over Defense Department's proposal has either been moot or nonexistent.
''There aren't enough beds to serve the public at the present time, and we
really don't have any beds to purely dedicate to the military,'' said a
spokesman for Brunswick Hospital in Amityville.

According to the Nassau-Suffolk Health Systems Agency, there are 9,157 beds in
28 Long Island hospitals. The Defense Department is seeking commitments on
1,400. ''For most hospitals, it's not even realistic to assume that they can
assign one bed to the military,'' Dr. Solomon said.

In addition to Brunswick, the Long Island hospitals that have rejected the
proposal are University Hospital, Southside Hospital, North Shore University,
Lydia E. Hall Hospital, Community Hospital and the Long Island Jewish-Hillside
Medical Center.

''We have to put patients in the halls sometimes because our beds are so much in
demand,'' said Sylvia Bakst, a spokesman for Long Island Jewish. ''We just can't
participate in the program.''

Representatives of the hospitals stressed that in emergency situations they
would provide the military with all available services.

''It would be our expectation to extend ourselves to limits of our resources in
any case,'' said James Rhatigan, spokesman for University Hospital at the State
University at Stony Brook. ''A formal agreement isn't necessary. Whether the
Army thinks it is, is certainly based on their information, not ours.''

Elsewhere in the United States, the contingency plan has been favorably
received, according to Captain Stetson-Mannix. Of 73 enrollment areas
nationwide, 48 have been completed and the Department of Defense has already
exceeded its original goal of 50,000 beds.

On the Island, the Defense Department has received signed agreements from
Southampton Hospital, the Nassau County Medical Center, Franklin General in
Valley Stream and Central General Hospital in Plainview, representing a total of
175 beds.

''I'm trying to run a little hospital out here in the country, and I can't get
involved in all those great big international decisions,'' said John Pfister,
executive vice president of Southampton Hospital. ''They're only asking us to
help our sons and daughters and nephews. What's wrong with that?'' Southampton
Hospital, Mr. Pfister said, volunteered 25 beds to the program.

But most hospitals in the lower New York region, particularly those in
Manhattan, because of their across-the-board rejection of the plan, and those on
Long Island, because of the widespread indecision, have been a stumbling block
for Defense Department officials.

According to Frank Jones, executive director of the Deans of Associated Medical
Schools in New York, all 17 municipal hospitals in Manhattan have declined to
participate. The program has been attacked as an ''unrealistic propaganda
effort,'' he said, by the Health and Hospitals Corporation, the Students Medical
Association, the Deans of Associated Medical Schools and major unions
representing hospital workers.

In an effort to persuade indecisive hospitals to join the program such as those
on Long Island, the Defense Department has distributed a video-cassette tape
that contains endorsements of the contingency plan from the American Medical
Association, Mr. Weinberger and administrators of participating hospitals. But
so far, none of the Long Island hospitals have expressed interest in viewing the
tape.

Instead, Colonel Hahn said, ''we've gotten the V.A. Hospital in Northport to
help us contact the Long Island hospitals again so we can know one way or
another what their decisions are.''

''I don't think the Defense Department is going to get a very positive
response,'' said Carol Hauptman, a spokesman for North Shore University Hospital
in Manhasset. ''I think most administrators feel that if they don't look at it,
it will go away.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A LOSER IN PRINCETON AND A WINNER IN MILLBURN

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 2, Column 2; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1286 words


PRINCETON IT IS Dec. 9, 1980, the morning after John Lennon was shot. Nine
characters are standing around on Central Park West, across the street from the
site of the crime. They are supposed to be reflecting upon what it all
represents.

What comes out is a lot of rambling and bickering for 100 interminable minutes.
We hear about everything that's wrong with the country. We're told, by turns,
that things will ''never be the same,'' things ''will never change,'' and ''the
60's are over.''

Someone concludes that it's a ''lost cause.'' Which could be a critic's summing
up of the intermissionless play at the McCarter Theater Company's Mainstage. The
title, ''The Day They Shot John Lennon,'' is as misleading, gimmicky and
unworthy of its source as everything else about it.

''They,'' of course, is supposed to suggest a conspiracy - a theory that is
hardly mentioned, much less developed. More accurately, it should be called
''The Morning After We Shot John Lennon,'' for the playwright, James McLure,
clearly intends to implicate us all. When the characters look at the crowd in
front of the Dakota apartment building, they are looking at us.

''We've all got to take responsibility for society,'' someone says. At one
point, the house lights come up and we become that crowd.  In a sense, we were
there and we have our own recollections of how and when we heard the shocking
news, and I bet most of them are more interesting and telling than the ones we
hear from the stock types on stage.

Cast of characters:

- Two alienated Vietnam veterans who were ''shot at and shot up.'' They
shoplift, sell drugs and have contempt for all civilians who never encountered
death.

- wo teen-age boys and a girl to whom Lennon was a missionary of love and truth
- and who have their own love-and-hate squabbles.

- An advertising man and a legal secretary who ''were there in Woodstock'' - and
now go to singles bars and acknowledge the irony of their Establishment jobs.

- An elderly Jewish man who never heard of John Lennon and a black teen-ager -
the first black the man has spoken to in 10 years - who is carrying a big stolen
silver radio. (That radio, from which Beatles songs burst forth, most welcomely,
from time to time, is as necessary a prop here as a telephone in a two-character
play.)

The young people complain that the old people have no respect for them. The old
man complains that the young people have no respect for him. Each character
thinks no one else is capable of understanding the magnitude of what has
happened. The personal warfare among these watchers is resolved in standard
sit-com style.

Mr. McLure, who has written better things, constructed the piece with a certain
sense of self-conscious rhythm. In overlapping dialogues, the last word of one
becomes the first word of the next.

Robert Lanchester directed it to the last degree of pretentiousness.  Gary
Roberts and Mercedes Ruehl play the advertising man and secretary - who go off
together into the sunlight - in the manner of a Nichols and May routine. The
others seem to be trying to take it all very seriously, while acting very
broadly, a most peculiar combination.

The setting by Daniel Boylen is realistic and diverting. There are two park
benches, a stone wall and ''Walk'' and ''Don't Walk'' signs that light up all
during the play. The latter flashes four times; the former does not. Each stays
on for 30 seconds.

Counting seconds is one way to pass the time. The play runs through next Sunday.

MILLBURN IN CONTRAST to the intended relevance of Mr. McLure's contemporary,
heavy-handed - and ultimately - dated effort, Moss Hart and George S. Kaufman's
''You Can't Take It With You,'' circa 1936, is pure fancy, sublime escape and
touches our lives deeply.

What Kaufman and Hart said about being an individual, about loving, about living
is so fundamental that anyone who really hears it, looks at it and is willing to
indulge in some self-examination could be threatened to the core.

Practically speaking, the play is so sentimentally coated and deliciously laced
with lunacy and good cheer that one has only to be entertained and momentarily
moved. On that level, ''You Can't Take It With You'' is one of the American
theater's all-time upbeat experiences. Awed by its perfect construction, one can
safely say that they don't build them like this anymore.

Ellis Rabb's staging at the Paper Mill Playhouse is played for softness rather
than showiness, which is valid, since the elements of eccentricity might not
come off so well if overly emphasized.

The production is not as precisely paced as the one Mr. Rabb did so memorably
for the A.P.A. Repertory Company in the 1960's. And even with an imposing lineup
of excellent actors, you can't get ''You Can't Take It With You'' together in a
few weeks. (The four-week run ends Saturday and the production is expected to
move to Broadway.)

Still, it works - wonders, at times, and, on the whole, as upliftingly as it
must.  Jason Robards has the warmth and the wisdom for grandpa, who does what he
wants to do and doesn't believe in working - or in paying income tax. (He
wouldn't mind paying for something sensible, but not for the President or for
protection from foreign invasion.) One feels suddenly relaxed and reassured when
Mr. Robards announces that there's plenty of love left in the world.

As Penelope Sycamore, who uses a cat as a paperweight and writes plays because a
typewriter was once delivered by mistake, Elizabeth Wilson too brings out the
production's pastel colors. A glowingly and knowingly understated performance.

Maureen Anderman is Alice, the ''normal'' one. Whether she's mortified by her
family's antics or veritably floating with ardor, she is enticing. When Nicolas
Surovy as Tony Kirby tells her he will follow her not only into the kitchen but
even to the ends of the earth, he makes us believe every word and we believe
Miss Anderman when, for all her embarrassment, she says ''there's a kind of
nobility'' about her nutty family.

Miss Anderman and Mr. Surovy have revived romance on stage.  Herewith, this
viewer's gratitude, with a gulp.  George Rose plays the Russian ballet teacher,
Boris Kolenkhov, with great glee. He won't acknowledge he is doomed to be
earthbound. The actor's perpetual attempts to leap balletically in midsentence
are like commas struggling to be exclamation points.

In a cavernous theater where acoustical problems haven't yet been solved, Mr.
Rose is perhaps the only member of the cast who speaks out with an awareness
that there is a last row out there, somewhere.  The performance is impeccably
timed and inflected - and very funny.

At last Sunday night's show, Olga, the Grand Duchess, who ''hasn't had a good
meal since before the revolution'' was played by Carrie Nye, instead of Colleen
Dewhurst, who had to miss several performances because of a prior commitment but
who later returned to the cast. Miss Nye knows all about the grand gesture.

One could hardly expect such generosity in getting a replacement for a ''cameo''
part that hardly lasts more than 10 minutes in the third act. But then, one
would hardly expect an actress of Miss Dewhurst's caliber to take it on in the
first place.

In a bountiful supporting cast, Arthur French and Rosetta LeNoire as the
servants and Meg Mundy - talk about the grand style; what a delight to see her,
however briefly - and Lawrence Weber as Mr. and Mrs. Kirby are just ideal. The
others are less so.

James Tilton's settings and Neil Spisak's costumes look wonderful; everything is
perfectly in period. In a mellow production, ''You Can't Take it With You''
survives shiningly. And it dares to suggest that maybe happiness is enough.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GENERALS FINALLY FIND SOMETHING NOT IN COMMON-AN INDICTMENT

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 448 words

DATELINE: PEMBROKE PINES, Fla., Jan. 30


For 20 years, three generals with the same last name got one another's mail and
telephone calls.  Now one of them has been indicted on embezzlement charges, and
one of the others says the resulting confusion was ''a little scary.'' Last week
a grand jury indicted Maj. Gen. Richard B. Collins of the Air Force, retired, on
charges of embezzling $445,000 from the military when he was stationed overseas.
General Collins, 53 years old, of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., promised to appear in
court this week and was not jailed.

Maj. Gen. Richard Collins of the Army, retired, 78, of Alexandria, Va., said he
is not worried about being mistaken for the other man in this instance, however,
because of the differences in their age and where they live.

''I don't expect to have any bothers here on that account,'' he said Saturday.

Wrong Man's Wife Gets News

But another retired Air Force General, Richard G. Collins, who is also 53 and
who lives in Pembroke Pines, said his wife was at a beauty parlor when the owner
announced her husband had been arrested. He said he thought something was
strange when old friends in Colorado and California telephoned, asking if
everything was all right.

''It's a little scary,'' said Richard G. Collins, who retired in 1975 and now
practices law in nearby Fort Lauderdale. ''Our careers have been so similar in
so many ways. We've been confused for so many years. I don't need his publicity.
This is not doing my business or my reputation any good.''

The similarities between the two Florida generals' careers are highly unusual.
Both graduated from the Industrial College of the Armed Forces, a military
school for senior officers. Both have masters' degrees and both were stationed
in Europe and Southeast Asia.

They were stationed at Wiesbaden, West Germany, and at the Pentagon at the same
time. Both spent their careers as fighter pilots and each flew more than 100
combat missions in the Vietnam War.

Both Highly Decorated

Both men were awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross three times and both won
the Legion of Merit Award and the Air Medal. Richard G.  Collins got 15 oak-leaf
clusters and Richard B. Collins got six oakleaf clusters.

The Fort Lauderdale Collins, who retired in 1978, was charged by a grand jury in
a six-count indictment with embezzling $445,000 from American military accounts
in Swiss banks while on active duty in West Germany in 1977 and 1978.

The grand jury said the money in the accounts was under General Collins's
control because of his Air Force assignment.  If convicted, he faces a maximum
penalty on each count of embezzlement and theft of public property of a $10,000
fine and 10 years in prison.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AN AMERICAN OPPURTUNITY IN VIETNAM

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 304 words


To the Editor:

Tad Szulc's Jan. 23 Op-Ed article on Vietnam is, in the opinion of one who has
just completed his 16th trip to Vietnam within three years, both dead accurate
as to America's many lost opportunities for a productive U.S.-Vietnamese
rapprochement and inaccurate in a number of instances regarding current
conditions.

Dwelling on the inaccuracies in Szulc's commentary:

* While many thousands (not millions) of Vietnamese were indeed sent to New
Economic Zones in an unsuccessful experiment to improve agricultural production,
many, if not most, of these people have now returned to their urban homes
without penalty.

* Hanoi's ''war of its own making'' in Cambodia was in fact an understandable
(if not justifiable) reaction to repeated military attacks on its territory by
the murderous Pol Pot regime and Hanoi's having to house 300,000 refugees from
Cambodia and Vietnam at great cost.

* China has indeed fared very well in Southeast Asia, despite Szulc's claim to
the contrary: 300,000 Vietnamese troops are tied down defending their country's
northern frontier; 200,000 troops are making little headway against not a local
but a Chinese-armed insurgency in Cambodia, and Southeast Asian countries like
Thailand and Singapore are far more responsive to China's wishes than they are
to U.S. policy initiatives.

* As for the Soviet ''win'' in Indochina, what kind of victory is it when the
Soviets have to spend $2 billion a year supporting two governments whose own
functionaries criticize every aspect of their presence and dwell repeatedly on
their preference for U.S. aid to that of a demanding, clumsy ally?

America should not waste a great opportunity in Indochina. It is there for the
asking.
RICHARD M. WALDEN, Executive Director, Operation California, Beverly Hills,
Calif., Jan 24, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HOW DAVID HARE FAILED TO SELL A SCRIPT TO U.S. TV

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words


Is television drama a tough field to crack in America? Not just tough, says
David Hare, the successful British playwright, it's virtually impossible.

Mr. Hare, whose highly acclaimed play ''Plenty,'' is at the Plymouth Theater in
New York, walked into a stone wall in trying to sell a television screenplay in
this country and came away convinced that American television is basically
unreceptive to serious drama and the talented young people who write it. On the
other hand, his problem could be his subject matter.

''Saigon,'' a film for television about the last days of the American presence
in Vietnam, with a script by Mr. Hare, has been produced in London because, Mr.
Hare said the other day, no one that he approached in United States television
would consider it.

''It was impossible to get it done here,'' Mr. Hare said of the film that he
wrote in 1979 and that was finally made in 1980 and 1981 by Thames Television in
London. Much of the filming was done in Thailand. The picture stars E.G.
Marshall, Frederick Forrest and Judy Dench.

Conflict Between Officials

The story centers on the final days of the United States in Vietnam in 1974 and
the conflict between the Central Intelligence Agency station chief there and the
United States Ambassador, played by Mr.  Marshall.

''On another level,'' Mr. Hare said, ''it is a story about people refusing to
accept reality - people who know the end is coming and refuse to recognize it.
It's about the feeling of living a life you know is going to end but cannot
admit it is going to end. It's about why you Americans messed up the evacuation
of Saigon because the Ambassador at the time refused to prepare for defeat; it's
about the impossibility of Americans admitting to themselves that they were
going to lose the war.''

Mr. Hare was in Saigon in 1974 as a tourist. ''Everyone else wanted to get
out,'' he said, ''and I wanted to get in. You may recall that there was a phony
peace in the months before the end came, and the South Vietnamese Government
even made an attempt to promote some tourist trade. I may have been the only
tourist they attracted.''

Took Script to Julie Andrews

Mr. Hare said he first took his script to Julie Andrews with the idea that she
would play the feminine lead. ''She was really keen to do it,'' he said. ''She
had the idea that she might be able to get one of the networks to do it,'' Mr.
Hare said, ''so she took it to Grant Tinker.'' Mr. Tinker had just become
president of NBC Television. According to Mr. Hare, Mr. Tinker told Miss Andrews
that NBC had recently completed a poll showing that the single most unpopular
topic with the American television audience was Vietnam.

NBC officials both in New York and Los Angeles denied any knowledge of the Hare
project, but a spokesman for Miss Andrews, Julian Myers, said Mr. Hare's version
was ''essentially correct.''

Mr. Myers said that the Saigon project had gone to Blake Edwards Entertainment
and that Tony Adams, vice president in charge of production, had seen it as a
possible vehicle for Miss Andrews. Mr.  Edwards is Miss Andrews's husband.

Mr. Myers said the project had indeed been dropped after Mr. Tinker advised that
Vietnam was, according to surveys, a singularly unpopular subject with American
audiences.

The television networks have routinely elicited viewer reaction to film
concepts. One institutionalized version of this process, called TAPE -television
audience program evaluation - was dropped this year by CBS.

Importance of a Subplot

Next, Mr. Hare said, he took his idea to Linda Yellin, a prominent independent
producer. ''I'd been told she was a most serious producer,'' Mr. Hare said.
''She told me that she would not be interested because the story had a subplot
and consequently would be too difficult for an American audience. She told me
that Americans wouldn't be able to deal with two story lines at once. She said
they can only think of one thing at a time - and she said it totally without
irony.''

''That's the most idiotic thing I've heard in a long time,'' said Miss Yellin,
who is now producing and directing a film based on Jacobo Timerman's book
''Prisoner Without a Name'' and starring Roy Scheider and Liv Ullmann. ''I don't
believe that there is anything an American audience can't handle.''

Miss Yellin remembered Mr. Hare's play ''Plenty,'' which she liked, but did not
recall the ''Saigon'' project. ''We turn down so many things,'' she said, ''but
we review, oh, 25 projects a week.''

''I've found the networks very receptive to any serious idea if it is seriously
presented,'' Miss Yellin continued. ''The opportunities are limitless so long as
a project has dramatic viability.''

Meanwhile, Thames Television, the independent London production company, had
agreed to make ''Saigon'' but was seeking co-production partners for the
expensive project. Thames approached WETA, the public-television station in
Washington.

Some Lessons Are Suggested

''They were so incompetent,'' Mr. Hare said, ''that they lost the script for six
months. Then they got the idea that I had sent it as an unsolicited manuscript
that I wanted them to produce. I got it back with a letter from some woman who
said I was a promising writer who had got hold of an interesting theme but
didn't know how to handle it. I think she suggested that I take a course in
playwriting.''

This was at a time when Mr. Hare's plays had achieved a considerable reputation
on both sides of the Atlantic, beginning with ''Slag,'' which he wrote for the
Royal Court Theater in 1971 and which starred Lynn Redgrave and Anna Massey.

Joyce Campbell, programming director at WETA, recalled the script.  She said it
had been sent to the director of production. ''That's a technical job here,''
she said, ''and it was actually located in another town. Someone in that office
called me about it, and I said 'send it over.' As I recall, we read it and sent
back a letter saying simply that we were not in a position to undertake the
project.''

Miss Campbell expressed admiration for Mr. Hare's work but stood by her original
contention that ''Saigon'' was not for WETA.  ''As for the idea that there are
no outlets for serious drama,'' she said, ''that's not true. What is a fact of
life,'' she added, ''is that the British have far more money for television
production than we do.''

''Saigon'' cost more than $2 million to produce, Mr. Hare said, because of the
location shots, the performers and the expensive props, such as military
helicopters.

While there are no set plans to bring ''Saigon'' to this country, Mr. Hare is
happy that it was done by Thames and will be shown in Britain. ''I'm sure they
will try to sell it,'' he said.

''The whole experience gave me some insight into the complete inaccessibility of
American television to new writers,'' he said.  ''It's scandalous the way
scripts are considered here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of David Hare

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 752 words


FINGERPRINT. An Uncommon Autobiog- raphy. By John Sack. 230 pages. Ran- dom
House. $13.95.

SAMUEL RICHARDSON once wrote of ''Tristram Shandy'' that it was filled with
''unaccountable wildness; whimsical incoherencies; uncommon indecencies.'' The
same might be said of John Sack's ''Fingerprint,'' an uneven, idiosyncratic
autobiography roughly modeled on Laurence Sterne's classic.

Like Laurence Sterne's ''Tristram Shandy,'' ''Fingerprint'' begins with the
events leading to the author's conception and birth, and it similarly boasts a
narrative positively crammed with digressions and asides. A camping trip makes
Mr. Sack think of a poem by Gerard Manley Hopkins, which makes him think of
paganism, which makes him think of God. And a snowball fight makes him think of
Kepler's observations on snowflakes, which makes him think of Descartes.

So fluid is this free association that in the course of learning how Mr. Sack
came into this world, we are treated to lessons in cell biology, natural history
and urban sociology. There are some delightful riffs on Wonder Bread and
marshmallows, on airplane crashes and garter snakes; and there are quotations
from practically everyone - from Voltaire to Joni Mitchell - on practically
everything from geometry to God. Because Mr. Sack can be glib and amusing in a
stoned, spaced-out sort of way, these passages are at first welcome, but about
halfway through the book, one begins to tire of the increasingly pointless
displays of erudition. Indeed, the book starts to read like an almanac of facts
and aphorisms, and Mr. Sack comes to resemble one of those earnest young men who
copy lines out of Bartlett's and try to impress their dinner partners with a
succession of carefully memorized quotations.

Actually, the portrait Mr. Sack aspires to give of himself is that of an
oppressed, put-upon former infantryman, who sees the entire world ranged against
him, ready to stamp out any spark of spontaneity with authoritarian control. A
romantic at heart, he worships nature, mistrusts the intellect and chafes
against society and its rules. Convinced that ''the womb is the last place left
on the earth where we're free,'' he resents being ''drafted'' into life and
regards almost everyone he encounters as a heartless disciple of his nemesis -
the great god Efficiency.

His mother subscribes to the teachings of Holt - a pre-Spock doctor who believed
that kissing babies was to be avoided as communicating TB - and she feeds him on
a regimented schedule as though he were ''a parking meter that is guaranteed not
to turn red until all four hours are up.'' His father is a clerk, so obsessed
with statistics that he measures the number of inches his son has walked when he
takes his first tottering steps. In grammar school, Mr. Sack resents the
''dogged objectivity'' that compels his teacher to insist that two plus two
equals four, and in the Army, he rebels against having to use regulation tooth
powder instead of his favorite toothpaste.

Gifted with an eye for physical detail and a canny ear for dialogue, Mr. Sack is
at his best when he sticks closely to the facts of his own life -his portraits
of boy scout camp and Fort Dix are very funny indeed. It is when he attempts to
pontificate on the larger evils of society that he becomes trite and moralistic.
''The quest of efficiency would end in extermination,'' he writes. Or, ''A world
that's without surprises is one without laughter, too.''

These diatribes against modern society eventually engulf the story of Mr. Sack's
own life. What's more, ''Fingerprint'' suffers from the same thing that marred
''M,'' the author's otherwise excellent book on the Vietnam War - namely, a
reductive tendency to regard all that is American as debased and corrupt. ''I
didn't know if I'd been born in America, AMERICA, Amerika, or some satellite of
Antares,'' he writes in ''Fingerprint,'' ''but I knew I had been delivered into
a great dictatorship or, as the kids in the 1960's would say, a fascist state.''
Hyperbolic statements like that simply undermine the rest of Mr. Sack's
arguments and lend the black humor of the book an unnecessarily paranoid tone.

In ''Tristram Shandy,'' Sterne also purveyed a comic view of the world, but he
never forgot his own dictum that there is a vast difference between ''Bitterness
and Saltness, - that is, -between the malignity and the festivity of wit.'' Mr.
Sack's book lacks the good-natured humor of its predecessor, and a bitter
aftertaste lingers in its wake.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Sack

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PRIVATE RAID ON LAOS REPORTED

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 272 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 31


Four American soldiers of fortune with some backing from Clint Eastwood and
William Shatner led a secret mission into Laos last November but failed to free
120 Americans reportedly being held there, news reports and Thai officials said
today.

The United States Embassy in Bangkok refused to comment, but intelligence
sources in Bangkok corroborated reports from California and Thailand about the
mission, which had the code name Operation Lazarus.

The Thai Foreign Ministry denounced the mission and said it was looking for
those involved. It was reportedly led by former Lieut.  Col. James G. (Bo) Gritz
of the United States Army Green Berets.

Reached by telephone in Los Angeles, Mr. Shatner said he gave money to Mr. Gritz
but said: ''I bought the film rights to Bo Gritz's story. It is now in fact at
ABC and has been there a couple months.''

Mr. Eastwood could not be reached for comment.  One of the Americans on the
mission, Charles J. Patterson, told The San Diego Union newspaper that the
mission ended shortly after the four Americans and 15 Laotian guerrillas, armed
only with four Israeli-made Uzi submachine guns, crossed into Laos the night of
Nov. 27. He said Laotian paramilitary forces ambushed them.

One of the Americans, Dominic Zapone, was wounded and taken prisoner. He later
was freed for a ransom of about $17,000 and medical supplies.

Mr. Patterson said the mission was undertaken after the raiders learned from
Laotian refugees in Thailand that up to 120 American prisoners of war from the
Vietnam War were being held near the town of Tchepone.

The fourth American in the raid was not identified.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Troops Attack Cambodia Refugee Camp

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 165 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 31


Vietnamese troops and artillery launched an assault against the biggest refugee
camp on the Thai-Cambodian border today and thousands of Cambodians were
reported fleeing into Thailand.

Ground fighting was reported outside Nong Chan camp between Vietnamese troops
based in Cambodia and insurgents from the non-Communist Cambodian Peoples'
National Liberation Front. The camp is home for some 30,000 displaced
Cambodians.

At the same time the Vietnamese kept up a steady barrage of shells, rockets and
mortars. At least 50 shells landed in Thai territory, killing a 66-year-old
farmer and damaging several houses and a Buddhist temple, a Thai military
spokesman said.

International Red Cross doctors were forced to abandon their hospital in the
camp and moved out with the refugees and 35 injured to Cao-i-Dang camp inside
Thailand, Red Cross officials said. They added that at least 10,000 refugees had
left Nong Chan and the rest of the camp's inhabitants were expected to follow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FISCAL PLAN FORECASTS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 31


The budget for the fiscal year 1984 that President Reagan sent to Congress today
projects deficits of a size unimagined even a year ago, roughly $200 billion a
year for three years, and contains assumptions about the economy more cautious
than those made by most past Presidents.

It is also laced with admissions of past ''large forecasting errors'' by the
Reagan Administration, ''little progress'' in reducing what the Administration
now calls the ''structural budget deficit'' and a more ''disruptive'' 1981-82
transition away from double-digit inflation than had been expected.

For these reasons, the 1984 budget is being called realistic, candid, possibly
even too pessimistic, depending upon one's political view. And yet, like all
Presidential budgets, it is founded on several assumptions that are optimistic,
if not blatantly heroic.  And, like most budgets, it fails to say some things
that seem only too plain.

The budget assumes that Congress will adopt Presidential proposals to restrain
spending for such emotional and politically delicate matters as Medicare
benefits, civil service pensions, and farm price supports. Each of these
proposals will be opposed by a powerful political constituency.

Standby Tax Not Likely

The budget also assumes that Congress will pass legislation this year
authorizing a Reagan proposal for tax increases to take effect in late 1985 if
needed to keep the budget deficit from growing too large relative to economic
expansion. Yet, as the Administration undoubtedly knew, Congressional tax
writers are not likely to do any such thing.

Optimistically, the budget assumes the economy will expand for six years at an
average rate of 4 percent, which is respectable but not strong growth, while
inflation will hold at 4.5 percent, low when compared with the double-digit rate
of three years ago. But, relative to the yearly rates before the 1970's, it
would be high for peacetime. Furthermore, there is reason to believe it could
accelerate given a steady economic growth that gradually moves the economy
toward its limits.

In an interview, Martin S. Feldstein, the chairman of the Council of Economic
Advisers, acknowledged the assumption on inflation was ''optimistic relative to
previous experience.'' He went on to argue, as does the President's budget, that
the optimism is justified because more is known about how to manage the money
supply, and it is the money supply that determines the overall level of prices.

Broadly speaking, the Reagan 1984 budget assumes that much will go right with
the economy despite the prospect of large deficits in the next few years, which
are huge not just in dollar amounts but, more critically, in relation to the
economy. As a proportion of the gross national product, the deficit is projected
at 6.5 percent this year, 5.4 percent in the fiscal year 1984, which starts Oct.
1, and 5.1 percent the next year. If the contingency taxes then took effect, the
deficit proportion would fall to 3.6 percent in 1986 and 2.4 percent by 1988,
according to the budget plan.

Danger of Higher Rates

Federal deficits are financed through borrowing by the Treasury.  The danger, as
the Reagan budget states, is that higher levels of borrowing drive up interest
rates. This could crowd out of the capital markets businesses that want money to
finance expansion and modernization. Indeed, it is to avoid just such
displacement, which would hamper economic growth, that the President has
proposed standby taxes, a corporate and individual income surtax and an oil tax
of $5 a barrel. These would take effect Oct. 1, 1985, when rising industrial
activity would presumably be putting pressure on production capacity.

The budget assumes that the 1983-84 deficits can be financed without causing
interest rates to rise again, an assumption that economic experience supports so
far, but one that is still to be tested by the economic recovery the White House
predicts will start by March. Mr. Feldstein, the architect of the more
conservative economic forecast this year, said today that if the recovery began
as expected, he would not be surprised by year end if the economy grew by 5
percent over the fourth quarter of 1982, as against the 3.1 percent rise
projected.

Mr. Feldstein's conservatism may have been adopted not only because credibility
required it but because it diminished the risk of a new round of fiscal
disappointments as the 1984 Presidential election comes closer.

5% Percent Rise Optimistic

Whatever the political calculation involved, the Reagan budget's discussion of
the economy argues in some detail that an assumption of 5 percent growth is too
optimistic ''because the economy is not as healthy or as balanced as it was in
the early 1960's,'' when expansion occurred without accelerating inflation. It
also argues that a 3 percent forecast ''is unduly pessimistic.''

As for the 4 percent increase yearly, Mr. Feldstein cautioned that the figure
should not be taken literally, saying it represented an average.

For all its self-criticism and cautions, the 1984 Reagan budget seems to avoid
saying some things that seem plain. At a minimum, the projection of deficits
through fiscal 1988, even given the tax increases and six consecutive years of
economic expansion, a long period without recession, seems to imply that
balanced Federal budgets are a thing of the past. Since 1960, Congress has
balanced the budget only once, in 1969, when it dared to use the Vietnam War as
the reason for a temporary income tax increase.

The Administration argues that if the deficit is small enough in relation to the
economy, under 2.5 percent, the gap need not be worrisome. Few economic experts
would dispute that. What may be more important is to ask whether the expectation
of smaller deficits through 1988 is credible given the Reagan Administration's
inability in its first two years to bring nonmilitary spending under what it
regarded as adequate control, even though its political muscle presumably was
greatest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION;
LAW TYING DRAFT REGISTRATION TO LOANS CHALLENGED

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 2; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1516 words


ANEW law denying Federal grants and loans to students who have failed to
register for the draft has produced conflict between the Federal Government and
some of the country's leading colleges and universities.

The University of Minnesota has announced plans to challenge the
constitutionality of the law, as have several Quaker colleges. Some have devised
plans to make up for any aid that students lose because of it. Student groups
also said last week that they plan to lobby for changes in the legislation.

''The requirement is unnecessary, unconstitutional and discriminatory,'' said
Miriam Rosenberg, national director of the National Coalition of Independent
College and University Students.  ''We plan to do whatever we can to repeal this
provision.''

The Administration, however, which last week released a draft of regulations to
implement the law, stands behind its enforcement mechanism. ''The law is
designed to help us with our emergency preparedness,'' said T.H. Bell, the
Secretary of Education. ''We all ought to be interested in doing that.''

The legislation at issue is an amendment to the Military Selective Service Act
that was signed by President Reagan Sept. 8. It stipulates that male students
who are at least 18 years old must be registered for the draft to qualify for
Guaranteed Student Loans, Pell Grants, work-study and other student assistance
programs. Last year these programs provided more than $8.5 million in aid.

Under the proposed regulations, which were made available last week for public
comment, college financial aid officers must attach a letter from the Selective
Service System, confirming such a student's registration, to the application
forms.

The most widespread objection to the law in the higher education community has
been that it uses education legislation - and thus colleges themselves - to
enforce unrelated laws concerning military preparedness.

The American Council on Education, the principal umbrella group of American
colleges and universities, lobbied against the legislation last spring on this
ground.

''We did not oppose draft registation,'' said Sheldon E. Steinbach, its general
counsel. ''But we think that hooking registration to student aid is an
inappropriate way to get the universities involved.'' John B. Jones Jr., a
Washington lawyer who is chairman of the board of Haverford College, agreed.
''Mixing two legislative goals is poor policy,'' he said. ''You just can't work
government that way.''

College financial aid officers have also argued that the law creates additional
paperwork, and some have found it ironic that an Administration committed to
reducing the Federal bureaucracy seems to be moving in the other direction.

Defenders of the law, however, reply that there is ample precedent for Congress
to use legislation in one area to reinforce other objectives. Colleges, for
example, are deeply involved in laws against discrimination on the basis of race
and sex.

Proponents of the new law, which goes into effect July 1, also contend that the
proposed regulations impose minimal paperwork on financial aid personnel. ''The
burden is on the student, not the institution,'' said Secretary Bell.

No Option for Conscience

Another set of objections to the legislation revolves around the issue of
conscientious objection. Robert Stevens, the president of Haverford College, a
Quaker institution, argues that the regulations as presently drawn offer ''no
option to someone who has a question of conscience about registering.'' For this
reason, he said, his college has offered loans to students cut off from Federal
aid.

Representative Paul Simon, the Illinois Democrat who is chairman of the
subcommittee on postsecondary education of the House Education and Labor
Committee, said he would favor amending the law to let students say they are
conscientious objectors on their aid applications. ''To deny assistance to go to
college because someone is not registering for the draft for reasons of
conscience is not in the national interest,'' he declared.

Supporters of the law, however, argue that whether someone is a conscientious
objector is not relevant to registration itself.  ''There is no draft, and there
are no draft boards,'' said Mr. Bell.  ''Even in the remote chance that we would
have a draft, there is plenty of room for conscientious objectors to appear
before their draft boards and be recognized as such.''

Constitutional Arguments

The issue of conscientious objection is also central to arguments that the law
is unconstitutional. Last week a Federal district judge in St. Paul ruled that
the Minnesota Public Interest Group, which had challenged the law, did not have
standing to bring suit. The challenge is being pursued, however, by three
anonymous students, and the University of Minnesota and Macalaster College, also
of St.  Paul, are expected to file friend of the court briefs in their behalf.

James D. Miller, executive director of the Minnesota Public Interest Group, said
the constitutional challenge is based on three arguments. The first is that the
law constitutes a ''bill of attainder,'' under which someone is punished by
legislation rather than through the judicial process.

Second, the plaintiffs argue that the law is discriminatory in that it focuses
not only on men in a certain age group but also on poor students, the ones
eligible for Federal aid. Third, they assert that since students who fail to
produce their draft registration forms are automatically ineligible for aid, the
law violates constitutional guarantees of due process and against
self-incrimination.

Attorneys for the Selective Service System and the Department of Justice
declined to comment on these arguments because of the pending litigation. Others
who had been involved in writing the law as it stands, however, rejected all
three arguments.

'No Right to Aid'

Gary Holmes, an assistant to Representative Gerald B.H. Solomon, the Republican
from New York who introduced the amendment in the House, argued that there is no
constitutional issue because ''no one has a constitutional right to student
aid.''

''The denial of aid is not punishment, because it is up to the Government to set
whatever regulations it wants in setting up such programs,'' he said. ''The
discrimination argument is more political than constitutional, because you
discriminate by having a means test in the first place. And the
self-incrimination argument does not make sense because no one is forcing anyone
to sign a statement saying that they have not registered.''

Some colleges have complained that the law does not take into account the
possibilities of students misplacing their letters or bureaucratic delays on the
part of the Selective Service System. To deal with these objections the proposed
regulations say that if a student has lost the letter confirming his
registration, he can, at the discretion of the university, sign a statement that
he will obtain it within 120 days.

One argument sometimes made by supporters of the legislation is that during the
war in Vietnam, when resistance to the draft was widespread, colleges routinely
worked with local draft boards in notifying them when students enrolled and when
they graduated or otherwise ceased being full-time students.

'Fundamental' Difference Seen

But Mr. Jones, Haverford's board chairman, said he sees a fundamental difference
between that earlier cooperation and what the new law's requirements. ''At that
point the college was sending out information that would keep students out of
war,'' he said.

In addition to the political and constitutional arguments, there seem to be some
practical considerations involved in the opposition to the new law. Peter J.
Gossens, director of governmental relations for the National Association of
Independent Colleges and Universities, said private colleges ''may lose some
students'' because of the law. Some educators also suggested that some college
presidents are worried primarily about the possibility of stirring up student
unrest like that of the 1960's.

Several colleges have said they will make up for aid lost by students who fail
to register for reasons of conscience. Last Friday Earlham College, a Quaker
institution in Indiana, decided to extend such a policy to include new as well
as current students. Without making reference to conscientious objectors, Yale
University has said its long-standing policy of meeting ''unmet need'' will not
be altered by the current legislation or regulations.

Representative Solomon has said he will seek new legislation to withdraw
financial aid of all kinds from institutions that replace lost funds.

Secretary Bell declined to take a position on Mr. Solomon's proposal, but he
expressed disapproval of institutions that take the position adopted by Earlham
and, inferentially at least, by Yale.  ''Making up aid would mean that the
institution is joining the student in refusal to comply with the law,'' he said.
''I don't think we ought to start picking and choosing what duly passed laws we
will obey.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of T.E. Bell (Page C3)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 2, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE BURN CAMBODIAN CAMP

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 1


More than 4,000 Vietnamese troops have overrun and burned an armed
anti-Communist camp a mile inside Cambodia near the Thai border, driving more
than 20,000 Cambodian residents into Thailand.

Thai and Western officials in Bangkok said that at least 48 Cambodians were
wounded in the assault, which began on Monday with intensive artillery, mortar
and rocket bombardment. Red Cross officials said they believed some camp
residents died in the attack.

Dozens of shells also landed in Thailand on Monday, reportedly killing two Thais
and wounding several others.  A Vietnamese attack had been expected since the
start of the dry season more than a month ago. The camp, named Nong Chan, is
opposite the Thai border village of the same name and north of Aranyaprathet.

International aid workers said that 20,000 to 25,000 of the camp's residents,
most of them civilians, were now clustered in open terrain on the Thai side
about a mile south of the fighting. They were on the far side of an antitank
ditch that runs for miles along the frontier, and a Thai military spokesman said
Thai troops had stopped them there.

The spokesman said the Vietnamese attack had been opposed by about 500 members
of the anti-Communist Cambodian People's National Liberation Front, which is
loyal to Cambodia's former Prime Minister, Son Sann. The spokesman said also
that the fighting stopped today.

Report of More Fighting

But a Western diplomat who follows events in Cambodia closely and a member of
the International Committee of the Red Cross said that fighting, though
diminished, kept flaring all day. The diplomat, whose Government supports a
coalition of Cambodian nationalists and Communists opposing Vietnam, estimated
that Son Sann's troops at Nong Chan numbered 2,000 at the start of the battle
and that hundreds of other soldiers loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's
former chief of state, had fought as well.

The differing accounts of the attack could not be independently checked. For
months, the Thai military has kept reporters away from the border area, although
international aid workers, Cambodian insurgent leaders and, reportedly, some
arms are allowed to cross into Cambodia.

The Thai military said today that the refugees would be sent back into Cambodia,
half a mile east of their tank-trap encampment, when the shooting stopped.
Several international aid officials and Western diplomats said they believed
Thailand would let the refugees seek safety farther west if they were threatened
by continued fighting.  There are thousands of children, old people and other
noncombatants among those who lived in Nong Chan, which was set up more than
four years ago.

It was unclear tonight how many refugees from the burned camp were still in
Cambodia.

2 Tent Hospitals Open

By this afternoon, the International Red Cross had removed 48 wounded, though
not from the Nong Chan camp itself, and taken them to the nearby Cao-i-Dang
refugee center. The United Nations border relief operation, which in recent
months has fed as many as 50,000 people at Nong Chan camp, has delivered food to
the refugees, and two tent hospitals have been opened.

Aid workers said late today that refugees were still coming in from the paddy
fields and flat woodlands toward which they had scattered during Monday's
artillery bombardment. At least 500 refugees were reported to have arrived at
another Cambodian border camp opposite Nong Samet, five miles north.

The Vietnamese began the attack against a section of the camp where Prince
Sihanouk's troops were based and invaded the camp late Monday afternoon. Most of
the Cambodian insurgents were assumed to have escaped.

With shells also falling into Thailand, civilians were evacuated Monday from
several border villages.  Son Sann's National Liberation Front, whose military
strength has been growing, is widely thought now to have 9,000 soldiers. Several
months ago they began attacking Vietnamese outposts, and for three weeks in
January they held the Cambodian village of Yang Daeng Kum, five miles east of
Nong Chan. The Vietnamese eventually forced them back to their main base.

Vietnam and the Cambodian Government that it backs in Phnom Penh have launched
offensives against their Cambodian opponents each dry season since early 1979,
when invading Vietnamese troops overthrew the Communist regime of Pol Pot.

Pol Pot's guerrilla force, 30,000 strong, is still the largest and best trained
among Cambodia's three main insurgent factions, which joined last summer in a
political coalition. Prince Sihanouk, the coalition's president, and Khieu
Samphan, Pol Pot's longtime lieutenant, met briefly in western Cambodia last
week with Son Sann's representatives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of Indo-China

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 2, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WORKING PROFILE: PAUL H. NITZE;
AN ARMS NEGOTIATOR DETERMINED TO GET HIS WAY

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1215 words

DATELINE: WASHNGTON, Feb. 1


How is it that an American arms control negotiator can take a walk in the woods
near Geneva with his Soviet counterpart, work out an understanding that almost
totally violates his instructions, be rebuked by the White House and then lobby
half the world to change the Administration's negotiating strategy - all without
being dismissed and, in the end, even convincing the Administration to give him
new negotiating flexibility?

The answer is that it can be done if the man is Paul H. Nitze, the 76-year old
patrician conservative Democrat, master of the bureaucracy, skillful manipulator
of the news media and intimate of the New York financial community. He is
regarded by virtually all who know him as smart, devious, charming, tough and
fiercely determined to get his way. Among his many jobs, he has been director of
policy planning in the State Department under President Truman, Deputy Secretary
of Defense under President Johnson and a senior member of the arms limitation
negotiating team under President Nixon.

''While everyone else is running around expending their energies on 50 different
things,'' said one close friend, ''Paul zeroes in on one issue, gives it all his
time, and presses all the buttons.''

Mr. Nitze is back in Geneva now as head of the American delegation to the talks
on limiting intermediate-range nuclear forces. He is trying to get the Russians
to present their new proposal formally so that he can untie his own hands and
offer a new American proposal.

He Can 'Out-Argue Anyone'

Mr. Nitze spent the last two months in the United States, trying to maneuver the
Administration away from its so-called zero/zero proposal, under which the West
would forgo future American deployment of new missiles in Europe if Moscow
destroyed its existing force of 600 missiles.

As his associates and adversaries tell the story, Mr. Nitze has already learned
far more about the subject of intermediate-range missiles than any senior
Administration official and as much as any middle-level expert. ''He can go to a
meeting and simply out-argue anyone,'' said a high official.

But pushing people along in formal meetings was only a small part of the web
Paul Nitze was weaving. He always made it a point to go alone to see senior men
such as Secretary of State George P. Shultz and William P. Clark, the national
security adviser, so that no staffers would interrupt the flow of conversation.
He always leaves them with a ''very private'' short paper, two or three pages,
not the 25-page papers customarily manufactured by interdepartmental study
groups.

The Perfect Starting Place

His message has been that the President's zero approach was the perfect place to
start from, but that it would backfire if the Administration continued to refuse
compromise. America's NATO allies would feel that the Administration was not
bargaining in good faith and all support in Europe for deploying the new
American missiles would be eroded. Lower sights and try to cut a deal now, he
urged, before the roof caves in. The President would get the political credit
and could still keep the zero/ zero goal as the ultimate target.

Mr. Nitze also took this message, in somewhat diluted form, outside the
Administration, to foreign policy discussion groups and diplomats in Washington
and New York. Articles began appearing in newspapers, and columnists began to
criticise Administration rigidity. The opinions of people who matter were all
swinging around to the Nitze position. To be sure, Mr. Nitze was not doing this
by himself, but those who know him well believe he was at the helm.

It was a very dangerous game, going against the Administration so blatantly.
Word of his activities seeped back to his adversaries, mainly in the Pentagon
and some in the White House. Many of them were already furious at him because of
his famous July walk in Geneva with his Soviet counterpart, Yuli A. Kvitsinsky.
In this walk and in other conversations, the two men supposedly worked out an
''understanding,'' a compromise settlement that diverged substantially from the
President's zero option. Neither the White House nor Mr. Shultz even knew about
these conversations until weeks later.

Impact of Rostow's Dismissal

The unhappiness over this was much in the minds of Administration officials as
Mr. Nitze went about his rounds in December and January. So, for all his skill,
he was getting nowhere, by all accounts, until the White House decided to
dismiss Eugene V. Rostow as director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
Mr. Rostow was the only senior Administration official supporting Mr. Nitze's
new approach.

The dismissal generated news articles and a lot of political heat because of the
apparent connection between Mr. Rostow's departure and the fight within the
Administration over Mr. Nitze's ideas.

By all accounts, the heat did not trouble Mr. Nitze at all.  Combined with the
''peace'' offensive begun by the Soviets at the same time, it was changing the
political climate in Washington in ways partial to the Nitze plan.

Under the circumstances, the Administration could afford neither to dismiss nor
rebuke Mr. Nitze. To do so would merely reinforce the view that the United
States was not prepared to bargain in good faith. According to a number of
officials, the net effect was to forge a new Administration consensus on the
need for a new American proposal, to be unveiled after the Soviets present their
new position.

To aficionados of labyrinthine Washington, it was a bizarre turn of events, even
to those who were applauding Mr. Nitze's efforts. After all, this was a man who
had built a record for more than 20 years as a hard-liner on dealing with the
Russians.

Resigned From '74 Delegation

Mr. Nitze resigned from the arms talks delegation in 1974, partly on the ground
that Mr. Nixon and Secretary of State Henry A.  Kissinger were giving too much
to Moscow. He then formed the Committee on the Present Danger in good part to
oppose the second Soviet-American accord to limit nuclear weapons negotiated by
the Carter Administration. In 1981, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
opposed his appointment as negotiator to the talks on intermediate-range
missiles on the ground that Mr. Nitze had made plain his objections to even
holding such talks with Moscow.

Why the transformation? Some friends and adversaries say that Mr.  Nitze is
seeking a final jewel to crown his public career. Others insist that he is at
heart a problem solver and that, given a job, he tries to get it done.

Still others see the answer in the complexity of this Harvard educated man who
helped to formulate the Truman doctrine for containing Soviet expansion in 1947,
then went on to make a fortune in investment banking and help start the skiing
craze in Aspen, Colo. For all his avowed hawkishness, he did in 1967 argue from
his vantage point as Deputy Defense Secretary that the United States should
phase down military involvement in Vietnam. For all his objections to past arms
control accords with Moscow, he continued to devote much of his energies to this
enterprise.

Many of those who know him best are reluctant to predict his next move. But
their feeling, privately expressed, is that he will either get his way or
quietly bow out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paul H. Nitze

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 2, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT REAL ESTATE;
JAPANESE BROKERS IN AREA GROW WITH JAPANESE INFLUX

BYLINE: By DIANE HENRY

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 809 words


In Japan it would not be unusual for the chairman of the board and the president
of a major company to share an office. It is a custom that Japanese real estate
brokers in New York can turn to their advantage. Knowing the customs and tastes
of their clients helps Japanese brokers to court them.

There is a small but growing number of Japanese brokers, both residential and
commercial, in the region who cater specifically to Japanese businessmen and
their families. Figures from the Japanese Consulate demonstrate the logic of
their efforts: The number of Japanese companies in New York grew to 678 in 1982
from 455 in 1979.

George Kyotow, who has recently joined Pearce, Urstadt, Mayer & Greer, provides
an example of ways in which real estate firms are trying to reach this market.
Formerly president of Canon Camera U.S.A., and later president of another
Japanese company, Sunstar Industries, Mr. Kyotow retired last year but was
persuaded by Pearce, Urstadt to try a new profession - commercial real estate
brokerage.

''Just because you look like them, you won't automatically get their business,''
said Mr. Kyotow, who was born in Alaska of Japanese parents. Knowing the
language, understanding the culture and decades of experience with Japanese
businessmen should should give him an edge, he said, but ''being the same race
is not any virtue at all.''

''When you're looking at space it can be hard for an American broker to
understand that Japanese businessmen often work in one huge room,'' Mr. Kyotow
said. ''Desks are lined up side by side in one big open room. They'll all be
talking on the phone at the same time, but they're used to it. There are some
private offices, but not nearly as many as in U.S. businesses.''

He also said that Japanese businesses were wary of committing themselves to
long-term leases in foreign countries. He said that at first the practice of
Japanese companies was to have an office only in California. But he added that
an increasing number were finding it necessary to have an office in New York as
well.

If American companies do not respond to the needs of Japanese businessmen, he
said, the Japanese will start their own brokerage businesses.

Pearce, Urstadt is not the first real estate concern to recognize the merit in
Mr. Kyotow's argument. The Futterman Organization, which specializes in New York
retail space, has had a Japanese broker, Naomi Okada, for 15 years.

Mr. Okada, who said he was probably the dean of the Japanese brokerage
community, estimated that there are 30 or 40 Japanese brokers in Manhattan
working for both American and Japanese firms.

Moreover, there are Japanese real estate firms trying to corner the Japanese
market.  Tak Furumoto, president of Furumoto Realty Inc., is a 38-year-old
Vietnam veteran who started a brokerage business in Fort Lee, N.J., about 11
years ago and has since opened offices in Westchester County and on Fifth Avenue
at 56th Street in Manhattan.

He began as a residential broker and his business, which employs 65 people, is
still about 80 percent residential. With the opening of the Manhattan office,
however, he is planning to seek a larger role in commercial leasing.

He said he opened an office in Hartsdale, N.Y., a year and a half ago for the
same reason he originally opened in Fort Lee: Both have large Japanese
communities.

Mr. Furumoto, who was born in an internment camp in California during World War
II, calculates that he has placed about 3,000 Japanese businesses in offices.

Language and service are the keys to doing business with the Japanese, he said.
''Japanese are used to much more service than Americans,'' he continued. In his
early years in business, he said, he would help register the children in school
and interpret the advice of doctors.

With the growth of the Japanese community he is no longer called upon for such
services, he said, but added that there was still ''a definite culture gap in
terms of service.''

Mr. Furumoto said his staff was geared to help more than just Japanese clients
and that he considered the company an international firm. His employees speak 10
languages among them, including Korean, Chinese and Greek, he said.

Aside from real estate brokerages, the Japanese have also begun to make
themselves known in development and construction.  For example, Kajima
International, based in Fort Lee, is a design and construction company that has
been in the New York area for about 10 years. The company's biggest current
project is the $3.5 million interior renovation of 180 Maiden Lane.

A sister company, the Kajima Development Corporation, which started in Los
Angeles, bought land in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., last year and is currently
selling 43 residential subdivided lots. The parent company for both concerns is
Kajima International, Japan's largest general contractor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 3, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AS VIETNAM TRIES TO RESCUE ITS ECONOMY

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 385 words


To the Editor:

I do not wish to detract from Tad Szulc's thoughtful article about Vietnam
(Op-Ed Jan. 23), but there are a few points of fact and one of interpretation
that beg for comment:

It was the Americans, not the Vietnamese, who insisted on calling possible
postwar assistance ''reparations.'' The Vietnamese were careful to use the
vocabulary of the Paris peace agreement, which called for help in ''healing the
wounds of war.''

The Vietnamese miscalculation was in continuing to hope for at least some aid as
part of the package, until too late in the negotiations. By the time they
yielded that point, the United States had already decided to put relations with
China on the fast track and derail talks with Vietnam.

* The most recent Western estimates put Vietnamese troop strength in Cambodia at
140,000 to 150,000, still a serious drain on the Vietnamese economy but some
reduction (180,000 was generally quoted a year ago).

* That half a million Vietnamese are working in the Soviet Union is certainly an
overstatement. Reports from Bangkok, including one in the Aug. 3, 1982,
Christian Science Monitor, give more weight to official figures from Vietnam and
the Soviet Union, which put about 11,000 Vietnamese workers and students in the
Soviet Union - part of some 50,000 in the U.S.S.R. and Eastern Europe combined.
The same article notes that these jobs are considered plums - no surprise
considering that pay in the Soviet bloc is many times higher than that in
Vietnam.

* If Mr. Szulc had followed internal developments in Vietnam over the past two
or three years a bit more closely, I believe he would agree that the country's
leaders are not ''frozen in immobility.''

There has been a remarkable thaw in their views on economic policy. They have
been experimenting with material incentives in agriculture and industry, and
this has already improved the country's food supply.

They have been listening to policy recommendations even from some of the Old
Saigon political figures, such as Nguyen Xuan Oanh, a onetime Saigon Government
minister and former I.M.F. official.  Whether any new policies the leadership
follows will be enough to pull Vietnam out of the economic quicksand remains to
be seen.
JOHN SPRAGENS JR., Fellow, Indochina Project, Washington, Jan. 26, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 3, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


An Off-Limits Benefit

T he State Department has refused to grant permission for a Vietnamese diplomat
at the United Nations to attend a Hollywood benefit to raise money for a private
relief group that is aiding Amerasian children in Vietnam. These are the
children fathered by American G.I.'s in the war who have become outcasts in
Vietnamese society.

Julie Andrews, the actress, is sponsoring a celebrity party in Beverly Hills on
Feb. 11 to raise money for Operation California, a relief group that is
providing aid to the Amerasian children. Rich Walden, who heads the private
organization, said the event was nonpolitical and had the support of celebrities
ranging from Jane Fonda to Debbie Boone. The event will include entertainment
and a fashion show starring, among others, Patti Davis, President Reagan's
daughter.

''There will be no speeches and no politics,'' said Mr. Walden, who had invited
Nguyen Ngoc Dung, Vietnam's deputy delegate to the United Nations, to attend the
affair. ''I just wanted someone from Vietnam to be there to see that these
children have a real constituency in this country and to report to Hanoi that
something is being done for them in the humanitarian area,'' Mr. Walden said.

The United States does not have diplomatic relations with the Hanoi, and
Vietnamese diplomats at the United Nations need special permission from this
Government to travel beyond a 25-mile radius of New York City.

Mr. Walden said that L. Desaix Anderson, the State Department's desk officer for
Southeast Asia, had told him in denying the travel request, ''If she wants to go
to Disneyland in a few weeks, she can do that, but she can't go to the
benefit.''

Mr. Anderson referred a reporter's telephone call to Norman Barnes, a State
Department spokesman who said the travel request had been denied because ''she
wouldn't be traveling for the purpose of U.N.  business.''
On the White House Grill

W ith Kenneth L. Edelman's nomination to be director of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency encountering problems in the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, senior White House officials are badmouthing the committee chairman,
Senator Charles H. Percy of Illinois, for not exerting stronger leadership in
clearing the path for Mr. Edelman's confirmation.

James A. Baker 3d, the White House chief of staff, and other aides have
privately complained that Senator Percy has apparently forgotten the political
favor President Reagan did him recently. Mr.  Reagan, much to the displeasure of
conservatives, traveled to Chicago last month to keynote a Percy fund-raising
dinner that gathered more than $1 million for the Illinois Republican's campaign
coffers.

''That's gratitude for you,'' grumped one White House official.
Bonzo Strikes Again

S ome of Washington's movers and shakers gathered the other night for the annual
dinner of the Alfafa Club, a select, all-male group that has been poking fun at
politics and nominating one of its own as a candidate for President since 1913.
This year's Alfafa nominee was Edward Bennett Williams, the noted trial lawyer,
and Mr. Williams delivered an acceptance speech that spared few of the
politicians in the audience, including President Reagan.

Although the dinner was off-the-record, some guests scribbled a few of his
better one-liners on napkins and, as often happens in this town, passed them to
reporters on the outside.

Mr. Williams, keeping a serious face, used the occasion to reveal what he
insisted was the real story behind the President's economic program: After
filming ''Bedtime for Bonzo,'' Mr. Williams said, Mr.  Reagan gave his co-star,
the chimpanzee, a portable typewriter as a gift. After 30 years of pecking away,
the lawyer added, Bonzo came up with an economic plan called Reaganomics.

Mr. Reagan joined in the laughter.
When Truth Slips Out

A dministration officials, even when talking to reporters on the basis that
their remarks may not be attributed to them, have exercised extreme caution in
commenting on the situation in Lebanon.  On rare occasions, however, they reveal
their true feelings in private conversations with close friends and associates.

A senior American diplomat involved in the Middle East peace negotiations was
asked by a friend the other day why the Administration's prediction that all
foreign forces would be withdrawn from Lebanon by the end of 1982 had not come
to pass.

''That's easy,'' replied the official, relaxing his diplomatic guard.
''Incompetence, recalcitrance, stupidity and politics.'' Phil Gailey Warren
Weaver Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 4, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Pressing Attack On Cambodian Rebels

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 110 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 3


Vietnamese troops pressed their attack today for a fourth day against
anti-Communist Cambodian forces on the Cambodian side of the border with
Thailand.

Reports here quoted unidentified Thai military sources as saying hundreds of
Vietnamese troops entered Thai territory in the last four days in pursuit of
Cambodian rebels as part of their dry-season offensive. At least 20
anti-Communist Cambodians have been killed, Cambodian rebel leaders said.

The head of the International Committee of the Red Cross here, John de Salis,
said after visiting the embattled border area north of Aranyaprathet that up to
40,000 Cambodians fled into Thailand this week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 5, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI BATTLES CAMBODIANS FOR 3 DAYS IN THAILAND

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 600 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Feb. 4


International aid workers here said today that Vietnamese troops and tanks had
been battling Cambodian insurgents just inside Thailand for the last three days.

More than 4,000 Vietnamese troops began an attack on Monday on an armed
Cambodian refugee camp named Nong Chan, which straddles the Thai-Cambodian
border, and overran it on Tuesday, driving thousands of refugees into Thailand.
Since then both Vietnamese and Cambodian combatants have been fighting on Thai
soil, according to more than a dozen Western Europeans and Americans who
represent virtually all the international organizations here that are caring for
refugees.

Seven refugees were reported killed and 15 wounded today by artillery or rocket
fire.  (Cambodian insurgent sources said they had killed 30 Vietnamese soldiers
since Thursday, United Press International reported.) The Thai Government has
protested the Vietnamese attack against the Nong Chan camp, 15 miles north of
here, on the ground that it has displaced thousands of Cambodian civilians and
killed or wounded Thai villagers with stray shells. But there have been no Thai
protests about Vietnamese troops fighting inside Thailand.

Reporters Barred From Border

The international aid workers, who asked not to be named for fear the Thai
Government might make their work more difficult, have access to the
Thai-Cambodian border area. Foreign reporters have been barred from there since
the beginning of the Vietnamese attack. Western diplomats acknowledged today
that they had also been kept out by Thai troops.

Much of the fighting in the last three days, witnesses said here today, has
taken place within a strip of Thai territory between the Nong Chan camp and a
long antitank ditch that the Thais have dug about a mile to the west, parallel
to the border.

Since the Vietnamese attack began, about 30,000 Cambodians, including several
thousand guerrillas, have gathered inside Thailand in an area a mile and a half
southwest of Nong Chan. Ten thousand others, also including guerrillas, have
gathered a mile and a half farther south. Thai soldiers have prevented them from
fleeing deeper into Thailand.

International groups that have been working along the border include the United
Nations Border Relief Operation, the United Nations High Commission for
Refugees, the International Committee of the Red Cross, Catholic Relief
Services, Medecins Sans Frontieres and Save the Children.

Panic in a Refugee Camp

This morning, after shells landed inside one of two refugee areas, the Thai
military authorities told Western doctors that for security reasons they could
not return on Saturday morning to tend the sick and wounded near Angsila, a Thai
village.

The shelling this morning reportedly caused panic in one of the two new refugee
camps. Witnesses said several hundred Cambodian civilians tried to flee south,
along the Thai antitank ditch, and also west before being pushed back to their
original positions by Thai soldiers who fired their automatic weapons into the
air.

The first and largest camp is called Camp No. 3 by the Thai authorities, since
it is three kilometers from Nong Chan. It is occupied largely by Cambodians
loyal to the former Cambodian Prime Minister Son Sann. Camp No. 3 was shelled
repeatedly this morning; civilians and guerrillas alike were hit.

The second and smaller new encampment, which like the first has been supplied
with food, water and plastic sheets by the United Nations Border Relief
Operation, is inhabited mostly by Cambodians loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
their country's former chief of state.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

3D-WORLD GROUP APPEARS TO EASE RADICAL STANCE

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 626 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Feb. 5


In a shift reflecting a move from radical to more moderate leadership, the
nations grouped as nonaligned are considering a declaration that implicitly
blames the Soviet Union as well as the United States for most of the world's
tensions.

The paper, which was prepared for a meeting of nonaligned nations in New Delhi
in March, is regarded as a triumph for such countries as Egypt, Yugoslavia and
India. It appears to represent a successful effort by them to recapture the
leadership of the movement from radicals like Cuba.

At the last gathering of its leaders, held in 1979 at Havana, the movement
repeatedly condemned the United States by name in a similar summary of the state
of the world.

Soviet Moves Cited

An African delegate close to the drafting attributed the more evenhanded
treatment of the superpowers to the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and the
takeover of Cambodia by Vietnam, a Soviet ally.  The latest draft, 35 pages
long, is restrained on both issues. It calls only for the withdrawal of foreign
forces from both countries.

When the leaders meet in New Delhi March 7-11, the pro-Soviet nations are
expected to make a determined effort to toughen the text against the United
States. Even the current document, although more evenhanded, does make more
unfavorable, if indirect, references to the United States than to the Soviet
Union.

In the one instance in which the United States is mentioned by name, it is urged
to adopt a ''constructive position'' and negotiate with Nicaragua, a nation
described as the victim of attempts to ''harass and destabilize'' the country.

Paper Drafted by India

The paper was drafted by India, which is replacing Cuba as the movement's
chairman for the next three years.  Among passages critical of both superpowers
is one saying ''the inflexible positions adopted by the most powerful nuclear
weapons states'' were responsible for the failure to achieve agreement on
disarmament at the special General Assembly session last June. The document
urges a freeze on the production, development, stockpiling and deployment of
nuclear weapons as a prelude to complete disarmament.

Israel Is Criticized

The text strongly condemns Israel, accusing it of ''systematic onslaughts
against Palestinian camps in Beirut which assumed genocidal proportions.''

But the paper contains an implicit recognition of Israel's right to exist. It
says that if Israel evacuates all territory seized in the 1967 war, including
Jerusalem, and if the Palestine Liberation Organization is allowed to create a
sovereign nation, then a peace would follow ''insuring the right of all states
in the region to existence.''

In a passage apparently aimed at the United States, the text ''strongly condemns
Israel's policy of expansion, which was made possible by massive military,
financial and political support.''

South Africa Assailed

South Africa is denounced as a ''racist regime'' engaged in ''barbarous acts of
oppression and discrimination against nonwhites.'' It is accused of
''destabilizing and sabotaging'' its black neighbors and illegally holding the
territory of South-West Africa, or Namibia.

The paper deplores ''the continued collaboration of certain Western countries
and Israel'' with South Africa, notably in investments and support for nuclear
development.

The paper also deplores what it describes as the failure of the ''Western
contact group'' to use its ''enormous leverage'' to gain independence for
Namibia. The nations negotiating this issue, or contact group, are the United
States, West Germany, Canada, Britain and France.

Perhaps the sharpest jab at the United States is the paper's call for ''support
for the people of Puerto Rico to determine their own future.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

China and Vietnam Exchange 50 Captives at a Border Pass

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 80 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 5


China and Vietnam exchanged 50 prisoners today at the Youyi Pass on the border
between the two countries, the New China News Agency said.

China released 11 captured Vietnamese servicemen and 4 people it described as
spies, while Vietnam handed over 35 Chinese fishermen who, the agency said, had
been kidnapped by Vietnamese authorities.

Peking said last month that it would free 15 captives to mark the Lunar New Year
on Feb. 13, an important festival in both countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GALLERY VIEW;
AN EXPERIMENTAL OUTPOST LOOKS BACK

BYLINE: By Grace Glueck

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1352 words


As decades go, the 1960's may not have been the profoundest in recent art
history, but it was certainly one of the liveliest. It started out with a bang:
the self-destruction of Jean Tinguely's suicide machine at the Museum of Modern
Art (1960); and it ended noisily, too, with demonstrations echoing the spirit of
rebellion in the larger world by artists fired up over the Vietnam war and the
small representation of women and black artists in museums. It had a swarm of
movements: Happenings, Pop, Color Field, Op, Minimal, Psychedelic, Kinetic,
Funk, Conceptual, and numerous ways of promoting them, from the savvy
exhibitions initiated in 1962 by the late Alan Solomon at the Jewish Museum to
the ambitious performances staged by artists involved with the
special-effects-loving group known as Experiments in Art and Technology.

Seen from where we are now, perhaps through a screen of glamorizing nostalgia,
the 60's also seemed to have a special zeitgeist: an optimistic sense of
possibility carried over from the glory days of Abstract Expressionism; a belief
in the pursuit of art and its power to affect where the world was going. And
there was something else that seems missing in today's expanded scene - a
feeling of camaraderie, the notion of a common endeavor. As one artist put it
wistfully the other day, ''The 60's was a community; the 80's is just a
market.''

Now, by way of reacquainting us with this influential decade, P.S.  1, the
alternate space in Long Island City, has mounted what it says is its first
''historical exhibition,'' a melange of shows devoted to 60's creativity in
painting, sculpture, video, film, architecture, photography, performance and
fashion. The main attraction, around which clusters this miscellany of other
exhibits, is ''Abstract Painting: 1960-69,'' arranged as a kind of personal
homage to a certain breed of painters of the 60's by Donald Droll, a collector,
exhibition organizer and former dealer who has bona fide 60's credentials, and
Jane Necol, an art historian and former curatorial assistant at the Museum of
Modern Art.

Not intending the show as a definitive survey, they have made the emphasis very
Minimal, concentrating on artists who tended to paint cool, quiet and extremely
reductive surfaces. Mr. Droll stresses that the exhibition is a ''personal
choice,'' and so loose was the curatorial concept that artists were asked to
select their own works. With today's Expressionist prevalence, he felt that ''a
lot of abstract artists I'd known were getting a bum rap, because only a few
examples of the work can be seen at any one time, and so many young people today
only know it from reproductions. I wanted to bring it back into focus.''

A number of important 60's abstractionists are missing, among them Frank Stella,
Larry Poons and the whole range of painters, such as Kenneth Noland and Morris
Louis, who worked in the mode known as Color Field. But 15 artists who were very
much part of the period are here: Jo Baer, James Bishop, Sally Hazelet Drummond,
Marcia Hafif, Al Held, Ralph Humphrey, Will Insley, Lee Lozano, Robert Mangold,
Agnes Martin (present more in spirit than in actual works, since most collectors
refuse to lend their fragile Martin canvases), David Novros, Doug Ohlson, Robert
Ryman and Tony Smith.

And in fact, so accustomed are we now to emotive, pigment-loaded paintings with
a story to tell that the roomfuls of these big, geometrically oriented works,
finically concerned with such factors as edges and angles and grids and color
relationships, have a certain power to shock - the same, no doubt, that they had
on their first appearance after two decades of Abstract Expressionism. The
closest we get to Expressionism here is a 1964 canvas by Al Held, who started
out as a ''second generation'' New York School painter himself, then shifted
gears in the early 60's. His highly simplified ''Red Gull,'' a vertical plane of
robustly painted blue topped by a chevron band of bright red inflected by a
yellow triangle, is certainly a romantic breed of Minimal, although his two
other canvases, both very black, show far more formal constraints.

But once the eye gets used again to works whose impact derives from color and
structure alone, it can be seen that, despite their formal appearance, some of
these paintings are not all that emotionally neutral. Brice Marden's densely
painted fields in various hues of gray - one marked and tracked and scuffed like
a well-worn wall - perversely manage to make this achromatic hue a sensuous
experience.  The smallish, rarely exhibited canvases of Sally Hazelet Drummond,
obsessively constructed of Pointillist dots of color that intensify at the
center, and Ralph Humphrey's muted tonal mists, have a lightloving quality we
could even be persuaded to describe as ''lyrical.'' The appeal of Lee Lozano's
series of ''sound wave'' paintings lies in the calm intensity with which ripples
of color cling to their closevalued grounds.

Not at all oddly, though, the more formalist the work, the more dated it seems
to be. Jo Baer's squarish canvases, blank expanses of white double-bordered by
thin bands of black, white and colors, are arresting, but seem locked into an
arbitrary format that has nowhere else to go. Will Insley's shaped, gridded wall
pieces, black with yellow lines, have a nice, neat air of problem-solving that
reflects a certain 60's smugness. Playing with scale and shape, Robert Mangold
and David Novros produce handsome wall embellishments that seem excessively
concerned with ''objectness,'' a 60's preoccupation. To borrow a quote from the
artist Robert Huot, relayed by the critic Lucy Lippard in one of many
interesting short reminiscences of the 60's in the catalogue for the show,
''Less is more, but it's not enough.''

Yet, as an expression of the committed taste of one appreciator, ''Abstract
Painting: 1960-69'' - even though limited in scope - provides an intense
experience of an important side of 60's art. (And don't think this movement has
faded away. ''New Abstraction,'' a show organized by Marcia Hafif of artists
whose work ''redefines radical abstraction'' opens this week at the Sidney Janis
Gallery.)

A much shorter attention span is required for the rest of this giant exhibition,
which goes off in all directions, a typical P.S. 1 overload that's fine for
quick takes but doesn't give a robust sense of curatorial engagement. Thus, in
several special rooms we find mini-shows of several other 60's artists: Richard
Tuttle, whose whimsical wallpieces are observable in transition from sculpture
to painting; Oyvind Fahlstrom, the late, gifted Swedish artist here memorialized
by his Dadaesque sound environment, ''Birds in Sweden,'' and Paul Thek, a 60's
enfant terrible noted for his ''Death of a Hippie'' tableau, who contributes a
selection of bloody, fatencrusted meat hunks embalmed in plastic. Richard
Bellamy, a key 60's dealer, has assembled a roomful of appealing work by Pat
Passlof, Dan Christensen and Milet Andreovic. The thunder and lightning of 60's
anti-institutional protests is well evoked through flyers, posters and other
documentation in a mini-show by Lucy Lippard and Jerry Kearns, but Carol
Squiers, P.S. 1's photography curator, doesn't get very far in her sketchy study
of how blacks were perceived in 60's photographs and photo-essays.

There's more, a lot more, including no less than eight hours of very 60's video
viewing, drawn from popular culture (the Beatles, etc.) and the early
experimental years, including works by Nam June Paik, Jud Yalkut, the
Videofreex, Bruce Nauman, Nancy Holt and Robert Smithson; a polemical show of
alternative 60's architecture assembled by Andrew MacNair, director of the
International Network for Art and Architecture, and a fashion show, organized by
Hollywood DiRusso, of the work of Betsey Johnson, during her years as designer
for the boutique Paraphernalia. Well, from the depths to the shallows - that's
the 60's, and that's P.S. 1.

The shows run through March 13. P.S. 1, 46-01 21st Street, Long Island City;
Thursdays through Sundays, 1 to 6 P.M..

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of portion of ''Abstract Painting: 1960-69''

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARMS REACH

BYLINE: By KAREN W. ARENSON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1439 words


ALL the military skill in the world could not camouflage the hefty increases in
defense spending in a Federal budget proposal marked mostly by cutbacks and by a
$189 billion deficit. Even before the budget documents for fiscal 1984 were
formally distributed last week, the President's plan to raise real defense
spending (after inflation) by 10 percent was drawing fire. It would bring
defense to 43 percent of Federal spending if Social Security and net interest
payments, so-called uncontrollables, are removed.

Many of the fears that the economy could not accommodate a buildup as rapid as
the budget calls for - authorizations total $1.8 trillion between 1984 and 1988
-have evaporated in the face of high unemployment and idle production capacity.
But concerns remain that defense spending will clash with recovery by keeping
deficits up.  ''It is clear that the downturn in the economy has freed up excess
capacity for defense,'' Murray Weidenbaum, former chairman of President Reagan's
Council of Economic Advisers, said. ''But I'm concerned that as the defense
program really hits its stride there won't be enough capacity, and that it will
push up prices.''

Though the Reagan request for defense is not expected to be passed whole, it is
widely expected that military spending will be allowed to grow, and that, as in
the past, the White House program's structure will remain little changed. As
Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin, puts it, ''Congress has never
framed defense policy. What it does is nip away at the edges.''

When Mr. Reagan took office, there was a consensus that defense ought to receive
greater emphasis. The perspective continues to be shared. ''The Russians have
increased their forces enormously over the last 10 or 15 years, and we have
not,'' Herbert Stein, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers in the Nixon
and Ford Administrations, said last week. ''All of this fear about what is going
to happen to the American economy if spending increases by another 1 or 2
percent of G.N.P. is absolutely ridiculous. The difference will hardly be
noticed.''

But there have been many complaints about how Mr. Reagan has proceeded, and last
week's proposals have only fueled the fire. The Reagan military strategy has
come in for some criticism. A recent internal Air Force study group concluded
that ''we are trying to do too much with our current budget and as a result we
are not doing many things well'' and that ''the true cost'' of planned weapons
purchases was not covered. But the issue that has probably caused the greatest
unease is the impact of a defense buildup on the economy and on the defense
industry itself.

Concerns about industry's role are not new. In 1946, Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower,
then Army Chief of Staff, recognized that military hardware had become so
complex and sophisticated that a specialized industrial capability to turn it
out would have to be maintained even during peacetime. (It was not until 15
years later, when President Eisenhower was leaving office, that he coined the
term ''the military-industrial complex'' and warned of its pervasive influence.)

Today, there are many who doubt the capabilities of the militaryindustrial
sector that encompasses hundreds of thousands of prime contractors,
subcontractors and parts suppliers, employs more than one-fifth of all American
scientists and engineers and pre-empts onethird of all research and development.
The critics see a system of overruns and waste, of self-interest, of poor or
nonexistent planning. They question the system's ability to handle a surge in
demand under war conditions - and even its ability to handle a smaller peacetime
buildup.

Many military analysts are also bothered by interrelationships among the
military, the industrial sector and Congress which they say distort decisions
about what to order. ''What makes the militaryindustrial complex different is
that it is really a political, rather than an economic, segment of the
economy,'' David Gold, director of military research at the Council on Economic
Priorities, a liberal nonprofit research group, says. ''Most contractors are
sheltered from competitive pressures, and incentive mechanisms are quite
different.''

Anatomy of the budget, pages 2 & 3

Part of the concern stems from the fact that the Administration plans the
biggest buildup since World War II, one-fourth bigger than Vietnam, which was
widely viewed as a key inflationary factor. To many analysts, the question is
how big a share of the economy defense will get. When defense spending
(excluding personnel costs) is viewed as a share of the goods-producing sector,
it is growing significantly. According to Gary M. Wenglowski and Rosanne Cahn,
economists at Goldman, Sachs & Company, it will move to 10 percent, from 4.7
percent, and that means that the present rise in defense spending is likely ''to
put more inflationary pressure on the economy than many conventional analyses
have indicated.''

Also troublesome is the apparent shrinkage in the defense sector after the
Vietnam War ended. As defense spending grew less rapidly than the rest of the
economy, prime contractors kept work they had previously sent out, and so
subcontractors and parts suppliers went out of business or turned to other
markets, vowing not to return to the fickle defense business. Between 1968 and
1975, by one count, the number of active aerospace industry subcontractors fell
to fewer than 4,000 companies, from 6,000, while the foundry industry lost 240
companies.

The Defense Department recognizes some of these problems. Its annual report to
Congress, issued last week, noted that ''a key part of the efforts to rebuild
our defense forces is the improvement of industrial responsiveness.'' It listed
several programs aimed at encouraging greater private investment in defense
production, including more spending to assist in the application of advanced
technologies and processes, analyses to determine the need of certain industries
for import relief, and a program to encourage productivity improvements. At the
same time, the department predicts few bottlenecks.

Whether the programs will work remains to be seen. Jacques S.  Gansler, a former
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for acquisitions, is skeptical. ''They
tried to encourage multi-year procurements, but Congress fought that because it
takes away their flexibility,'' he said. ''The Defense Department has not really
dramatically changed the way it's doing business. Therefore, the likelihood that
bottlenecks will occur remains. The economy is pretty dry, but there are
shortages in areas such as computers, communications and semiconductors. And
defense spending is just beginning to surge.''

Indeed, despite the Government's apparent awareness of the problems associated
with quickly raising purchases, it plunged ahead. One signal that all was not
going smoothly came when the services put in a request for 6,000 more
procurement officers, because additional contracting could not be handled. In
1980 and 1981, when many programs were still only in research and development
and higher production outlays had not yet begun, there were other signs of
difficulty. Lead times for many defense goods increased, and their prices rose,
although both have now improved.

Another problem in the rapid buildup is that the Pentagon does not appear to
have found a way yet to smooth out the stop-and-go ordering that makes defense
contracting unattractive to some companies. ''They are trying to take care of
all the backlogs in war reserve stocks in one to three years,'' Mr. Aspin said.
''But people can't improve if you are telling them that you are going to drop
them back to a lower level. No one wants to tool up for a pinnacle if they are
going to be there only one year.''

Other analysts have fears of a different sort. Seymour Melman, a professor of
industrial engineering at Columbia University, is concerned that what he sees as
lax attitudes in the militaryindustrial sector will spread to other industries.
''The military, by providing capital with a lavish hand, teaches everyone to
design as if cost doesn't matter,'' he said. The military buildup ''will infect
the rest of the system.''

Lester C. Thurow, a professor of economics at M.I.T., is also concerned about
the economic effects of the defense buildup. He believes inflationary
bottlenecks are less likely now than a year or two ago. But, he said, ''The
question that remains is what happens if we put all our skilled engineers to
work on defense? How do we compete down the line with the Germans and the
Japanese?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of M-1 tanks under construction graphs of military
budget and its growth

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACKS: NEW AND NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 31, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 892 words


OH WHAT A PARADISE IT SEEMS. By John Cheever. (Ballantine, $2.50.) Lemuel Sears,
described by his creator as ''an old man but not yet infirm,'' battles to save
idyllic Beasley's Pond from becoming a dump in this ''very short and often
lovely novel,'' John Cheever's last.  Cheever is our Chekhov, John Leonard said
in his review, ''the poet of our displacement, our sense of a lost past and a
'sacred grove,' our feeling that we came from another country and left a better
self behind.'' Acknowledging the book as ''minor art,'' Mr. Leonard declared
that ''many of us will never grow up to achieve it.''

WHEN BAD THINGS HAPPEN TO GOOD PEOPLE. By Harold S. Kushner. (Avon, $3.50.)
After his 3-year-old son was diagnosed as having the rare disease that was to
kill the child 11 years later, Rabbi Harold Kushner felt compelled to confront
an age-old question: Why, if there is a God who is just and all-powerful, does
He cause good people to suffer? This book, an attempt to make sense of the
world's pain and evil, presents views ''at least as plausible as the more common
explanations we hear,'' Clifford D. May said in his review; it has been on our
hard-cover nonfiction best-seller list for nearly a year.

ISLA NEGRA: A Notebook. By Pablo Neruda. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $10.95.)
Roughly 100 autobiographical poems make up this collection by the 1971 winner of
the Nobel Prize in Literature, who lived in Isla Negra, Chile. Superb
translations by Alastair Reid appear on the right-hand pages, with Neruda's work
in Spanish on the left. ''Neruda means this book to sum up his life in poetry,''
Robert Bly said in his review; ''in the poems he gives evidence of the
astonishing abundance human imagination has when mingled with memory.''

HUNGER OF MEMORY: The Education of Richard Rodriguez. An Autobiography.
(Bantam/Windstone, $3.95.) Richard Rodriguez, who was born into a
Spanish-speaking Mexican-American family, tells of learning English and being
assimilated into the American middle class to reveal how education can - and
should - change people, how it extracts them from their families and minority
communities and gives them access to the public world. In his review Paul Zweig
extolled the ''remarkable language'' in which the book is written, calling it
''even-tempered, carefully modulated, clear ... but also unashamedly personal.''

STRANGER WITH MY FACE. By Lois Duncan. (Dell/Laurel-Leaf, $2.50.) People keep
telling 17-year-old Laurie Stratton that they've seen her in places she knows
she hasn't been. Eventually she learns that she is adopted and that she has an
evil identical twin who travels by astral projection and is detemined to inhabit
Laurie's body. Written for young teen-agers, this story ''is both spine-chilling
and perfectly reasonable as Lois Duncan tells it,'' our reviewer, Jean Fritz,
said.

DUPE. By Liza Cody. (Warner, $2.50.) In Britain ''Dupe'' won a John Creasey
Award as the best first mystery novel of 1981. The detective in this stylish and
smoothly written book, young and good-looking Anna Lee, is a veteran of five
years on the police force. Now employed by Brierly Security, she is assigned to
investigate a fatal automobile crash that the victim's parents don't believe was
accidental. The case entangles Anna with London film makers and gives her a
chance to prove to her clients and her boss that she's more than the ''slip of a
girl'' they take her for.

ATTENDING MARVELS: A Patagonian Journal. By George Gaylord Simpson. (University
of Chicago Press, $9.50.) George Gaylord Simpson - who is living proof that
scientists have all the fun, according to R.L.  Duffus's 1934 review of this
journal - went to Patagonia when he was 28 to study fossils of peculiar species
never found on any other continent. Readers with and without an interest in
vertebrate paleontology can enjoy his report on the trip because ''Dr. Simpson
possesses humor, a keen interest in unfossilized, or only partially fossilized,
human nature, and a good narrative style,'' as well as ''a gift for getting into
exciting situations.''

BIG STORY. By Peter Braestrup. (Yale University Press, $9.95.) A careful,
thorough study of ''How the American Press and Television Reported and
Interpreted the Crisis of Tet 1968 in Vietnam and Washington,'' ''Big Story''
was published in two volumes in 1977 and is available now in an abridged
one-volume paperback edition with emendations and a new introduction by the
author (who reported on the Vietnam war and was in Saigon during the Tet
offensive). In his 1977 review of the hard-cover edition, Edwin Diamond said it
presented valuable lessons on how press performance can be improved.

BLAKE'S 'JOB': William Blake's 'Illustrations of the Book of Job.' Introduction
and commentary by S. Foster Damon. (Brown University Press/University Press of
New England, $8.95.) ''Blake's early and prolonged interest in the trials of Job
is proved by a variety of drawings, paintings, engravings, quotations and
comments starting about 1785,'' S. Foster Damon notes as he introduces the 22
blackand-white engravings reproduced from proofs of a first edition dated March
8, 1825. Above: ''The Just Upright Man Is Laughed to Scorn.'' Like each of the
other illustrations, it is surrounded by the biblical text and additional
pictorial elements and accompanied by Mr. Damon's comments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

U.S. FEARS FORAYS INTO INDOCHINA MAY HARM TALKS

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


The Reagan Administration has become concerned that privately organized
expeditions into Indochina in search of missing United States servicemen may
upset delicate talks with Laos and Vietnam on efforts to recover more remains of
Americans lost during the Vietnam War.

At least one armed expeditionary force, headed by a former United States Special
Forces officer, entered Laos in recent months in search of Americans rumored
still to be alive and held captive. The foray was unsuccessful and has been
denounced by Laos, as well as Thailand, the country from which the expedition
was mounted.

United States officials say that other forays have taken place and that they
periodically receive rumors that still more expeditions are being planned.
Families of missing men report having been asked, off and on, to give money for
private expeditions and intelligencegathering activities.

Some 2,500 Americans are still missing from the war. American officials believe
that most, if not all, are dead. United States combat involvement in the region
ended in 1973.

Possibility Not Ruled Out

But the possibility that some of the men might still be alive and in prison, as
refugees from Southeast Asia periodically report, has never been totally ruled
out. In fact, several years ago, when negotiations with the Laotians and
Vietnamese were getting nowhere, the United States Government reportedly
sponsored its own search expedition. It returned empty-handed.

Since then, the negotiations have been more productive, according to American
officials. The Laotians and Vietnamese have denied that any prisoners are still
being held, but delegations from the United States have been received by both
countries and the remains of a number of men have been returned.

The United States has no diplomatic relations with either Laos or Vietnam.  ''We
have been making some progress and so these private raids are
counterproductive,'' a White House official said after learning of the recent
incursion into Laos. ''We've been encouraged up to now by what we've been
hearing from the Laotians and, to a lesser extent, from the Vietnamese. We don't
want to lose this headway. It's a delicate situation.''

One of the main goals of the negotiations with the Laotians is to win permission
for American recovery experts to accompany Laotian officials on visits to
several hundred sites where United States planes are known to have crashed
during the war. About a fourth of the Americans still unaccounted for in
Southeast Asia were lost in Laos.

Last week, during a convention of the National League of Families of American
Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, President Reagan said the United States
Government had placed the ''highest national priority'' on obtaining a full
accounting. His remarks were enthusiastically received by league members, some
of whom had questioned the commitment of previous Presidents and had contributed
money to private search efforts.

The league also heard from William P. Clark, the President's assistant for
national security affairs, who said the Reagan Administration was ''resolutely
opposed'' to private across-theborder forays. ''Such actions,'' he said,
''interfere with and damage legitimate efforts on a number of fronts. Our
experience has been that such private initiatives operate with faulty or
fabricated intelligence and lack even marginally adquate operational
capabilities.''

The latest expedition into Laos took place in late November and involved several
Americans and about a dozen sympathetic Laotian guerrillas. The group,
reportedly led by James G. Gritz of Los Angeles, a former lieutenant colonel in
the Special Forces and a Vietnam War veteran, went in search of 120 Americans
who refugees had said were being held in prison.

Shortly after crossing into Laos from Thailand, the group was fired upon. It
suffered casualties and withdrew.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 8, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday on private searches for
missing servicemen in Indochina incorrectly described relations between the
United States and Laos. They maintain diplomatic relations.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 741 words


Schmidt on Speech Circuit

H elmut Schmidt, the former West German Chancellor, is about to join the growing
list of political celebrities in this country who are reminding us that there is
no such thing as a free speech, even at a free lunch.

Mr. Schmidt will be coming to the United States next month to work on his
memoirs and to cash in on the booming speech economy that for some has become
the pot of gold at the end of the political rainbow.  At the suggestion of his
friend Henry A. Kissinger, Mr. Schmidt signed up with the Harry Walker Agency of
New York, whose client list includes Mr. Kissinger, former President Gerald R.
Ford and Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Carter's national security adviser.

Mr. Schmidt's extended visit here will begin in mid-March, after the West German
elections, and the word from a close associate is that the former chancellor
will command up to $20,000 a speech, which should be sufficient proof that even
in times of recession America is still the land of opportunity for defeated
politicians. In between speeches, Mr. Schmidt will have use of Secretary of
State George P. Shultz's house in Palo Alto, Calif., where he plans to work on
his book.
The Cost of Terrorism

S ince Iranian militants seized the American Embassy in Teheran in 1979 and held
52 Americans hostage for more than a year, the State Department has been quietly
reinforcing security for diplomats stationed in high-risk countries. Frank H.
Perez, the deputy director of the Office for Combating Terrorism, disclosed to
the World Jewish Congress recently that 15 cents out of every dollar spent by
the State Department now goes to protect American personnel and facilities
against foreign terrorist attacks.

Mr. Perez said the State Department recorded 746 cases of terrorist incidents in
the world in 1982, 37 more than in the previous year.  That figure, he added,
represented a 10 percent increase over the average number of terrorist attacks
for the past five years. In 1982, according to the official, there were 235
bombings, 22 kidnappings, 28 hijackings and other incidents that left 126
persons dead and 741 wounded. Oddly, Mr. Perez's office does not have figures on
how many Americans were among the victims of these attacks.

The official declined to discuss what steps have been taken to strengthen
security for American diplomats, other than to say that improved intelligence
work is ''the key to dealing with international terrorism.'' Mr. Perez said the
State Department was still seeking Congressional support for a program to train
foreign law enforcement officials in counterterrorism tactics.

Meanwhile, Mr. Perez predicted that that terrorist incidents would increase in
the months ahead as ''the more radical and violent elements'' of the antinuclear
movement in Western Europe resort to violence to make their points.
To Celebrate Tet

F or many Americans, the very mention of the word Tet conjures up unpleasant
memories of the surprise military offensive that North Vietnam launched in
February 1968, the significance of which is still being debated by historians
and military experts. Fifteen years after that military episode, the Smithsonian
Institution is planning a celebration of Tet, the new year's holiday in Vietnam,
as part of its exhibit on important events in the cultural and social lives of
other countries.

Vietnamese living in the Washington area, many of them refugees of the war, have
been invited to participate in the three-day celebration that is to begin Feb.
12 at the Renwick Gallery. There will be native food and entertainment,
including the dragon dance, and settings to represent a Vietnamese home, a
flower market and a temple, all of which play a part in Tet. Children and
grandchildren will offer their New Year's wishes to their elders in a formal
ceremony, as is done in Vietnam on the first day of Tet. The elders, in turn,
will give the children small red envelopes (red is the color for happiness in
Vietamese society) that contain small bills for good fortune. On the way to
temples, the Vietnamese traditionally stop at flower markets to pick the buds of
the first flowers, also considered to be a good luck gesture.

Tet is supposed to represent a sense of community and happiness in Vietnamese
life, but sadly, for the thousands of Vietnamese who fled their homeland after
the war, it also is a reminder of what they have lost.  Phil Gailey Warren
Weaver Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SURVEY CITES RIGHTS VIOLATIONS AROUND THE WORLD

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1315 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 8


The Reagan Administration, seeking what it terms ''an active, positive human
rights policy,'' issued its annual human rights report today. The document cited
serious human rights violations in nations around the world, including some that
are friendly to the United States.

The 1,300-page report to Congress contains long descriptions of human rights
violations in the Soviet Union and eastern-bloc nations as well as Middle East
and Asian countries with strained ties to the United States. It also lists
examples of torture, brutality and violence in South Africa, Pakistan and El
Salvador, where the Administration has sought to improve relations.

At a news conference in the State Department, Elliott Abrams, the Assistant
Secretary for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, cited improvements and
''moves toward democracy'' in such countries as Brazil, Uruguay, El Salvador and
the Dominican Republic.

Vietnam Termed 'the Worst'

But he said in response to questions that civil liberties seemed to have
worsened last year in such countries as Iran, Czechoslovakia, the Soviet Union
and Lebanon. And he said the ''toughest'' section of the document involved
Vietnam. ''It seemed to me the worst country to live in,'' Mr. Abrams said.

The annual study draws on reports from United States missions abroad,
Congressional studies and human rights groups. It includes a country-by-country
examination of political and press rights, freedoms of speech and religion,
arbitrary arrest and imprisonment.

In a section on Israel, the report says that although that nation is a
parliamentary democracy with full freedom of speech and the press, relations
with Arabs in the occupied territories have caused ''significant human rights
problems.'' In the West Bank and Gaza, the report said, Israeli forces were
observed ''roughing up'' individuals, freedom of expression was ''restricted''
and there were cases of Arabs being imprisoned for several months without formal
charges or trial.

'The Question of Tactics'

Although the Reagan Administration has been criticized for muting its human
rights concerns, especially in nations friendly to the United States and
rightist dictatorships, the report says, ''Human rights is at the core of
American foreign policy.''

''As to the question of tactics, the Reagan Administration's test is
effectiveness,'' the report said. ''With friendly countries we prefer to use
diplomacy, not public pronouncements. We seek not to isolate them for their
injustices and thereby render ourselves ineffective, but to use our influence to
effect desirable change.''

The report added that President Reagan had made the development of democracy
throughout the world a ''central goal of our foreign policy.'' It also said,
''Too often our human rights policy has been reactive or negative, responding to
events by punishing people for bad behavior.'' It added, ''The President wishes
to go beyond this to an active, positive human rights policy.''

The report makes these points about key countries:

Chile
Although the human rights situation in Chile has ''improved considerably'' since
1973, when the military overthrew the elected Government of Salvador Allende
Gossens, the report said that ''recent trends show that the pace of improvements
has slowed in the past two years.'' It added that human rights groups contend
that the Government has ''constrained peaceful opposition and relied excessively
on the artbitrary action of police and security officials to suppress dissent.''

China
The report said that ''China's human rights record had ups and downs within a
longer-term positive trend since 1976.'' It added, ''In general there remains
gradual movement towards a more open society, coupled with continuing harsh
controls on fundamental dissent.''

Cuba
The report says that Cuba holds more than 1,000 political prisoners in jail and
that ''freedoms of speech and press do not exist in Cuba.''

El Salvador
''Serious human rights problems continued in El Salvador in 1982, despite signs
of improvement throughout the year,'' the report said.  It added: ''Incidents of
political assassinations, killings of civilians, disappearances and torture
continue to be reported, although at substantially lower levels than in 1981.
Disappearances in El Salvador averaged 38 a month, and deaths fell to 219 a
month from 445 last year.''

''Torture by elements of the armed forces, and on occasion by guerrilla forces,
does occur,'' it added.

Nicaragua
''The human rights situation deteriorated markedly in 1982'' in Nicaragua, the
report said. It said that last year was marked by persecution of native Indian
populations, attacks on the church and some cases of disappearances and torture.
''The Government currently holds about 7,000 prisoners,'' the report said.
''About 3,600 of these can be considered political prisoners.''

Philippines
''Political opposition is tolerated, but within a limited scope,'' the report
said. It added that ''abuses by some military personnel, including torture and
summary executions, continue to be reported'' and that disciplinary action had
been taken in some cases. Last year, the report said, freedom of speech was
''generally exercised more assertively.''

South Africa
The report said there had been ''continued erosion of the rule of law and its
replacement by administrative fiat'' as a result of increasing opposition to
apartheid. National elections are ''free and fair,'' the report said, but only
the 16.2 percent of the population that is white may participate. ''The press is
free, but circumscribed by Government pressure,'' it said.

It added: ''Flowing out of the defense of and opposition to apartheid in South
Africa, a vicious cycle of violence is developing in southern Africa involving
African National Congress attacks into South Africa and South African attacks
against the African National Congress in neighboring states. This growing cycle
of cross-border violence is a challenge to both human rights and political
stability in the entire southern African region.''

Soviet Union
''Cruel and degrading treatments, including doses of powerful and painful
drugs'' are being applied to dissidents in Soviet psychiatric hospitals, the
report said. It added that there had been an escalation in 1982 of ''repression
of dissent'' aimed at severing the contacts between Soviet citizens and
foreigners.

''The regime has intensified its harassment of foreign diplomats, journalists
and tourists,'' the report said. It also contended that the Soviet Union had
used chemical weapons against tribesmen in Afghanistan, Cambodia and Laos and
was apparently using forced labor in the construction of the gas pipeline from
Siberia to Western Europe.

Vietnam
The report said that more than 60,000 political prisoners remained imprisoned in
Vietnam, without ever having been bought to trial, presumably on suspicion of
having been associated too closely with the former South Vietnamese Government.
''The Vietnamese citizen today is potentially the victim of arbitrary arrest
either for past association with the former regime or for espousal of ideas
contrary to Communist ideology,'' the report said.

Human rights groups, which have been critical of the Administration's human
rights policy, reacted warily to the report.  Michael Posner, executive director
of the Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights, in a joint statement
with two other human rights organizations, Helsinki Watch and Americas Watch,
said that ''disturbing biases'' were evident in sections dealing with such
countries as Yugoslavia, El Salvador, Turkey and Zaire, ''where the
Administration has a strong political stake.''

''These are countries where the human rights situation continues to be extremely
grave,'' Mr. Posner said, ''yet the State Department's report tends to present a
more optimistic picture.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WHO ARE THE FOREIGNERS IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA?

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1070 words

DATELINE: SANYA, China


Beyond the southern horizon of this port town on Hainan Island lie scores of
barren islets, atolls and coral reefs scattered like stones across the South
China Sea.

The Chinese, who claim sovereignty, call them the Xisha and Nansha -Western and
Southern Sand - Islands. The Vietnamese, who also claim sovereignty, call them
the Hoang Sa and the Truong Sa archipelagos.  Almost everyone else knows the
island clusters as the Paracels and Spratlys.

Until recently, the islands, some of which vanish with high tide, were worth
little more than their deposits of phosphates and bird droppings. They have
become more valuable, and a possible flashpoint for a new confrontation between
China and Vietnam, after the discovery of potential oil deposits in the
surrounding waters.

China and Vietnam have already argued, and clashed, over the islands, some of
which are also claimed by Taiwan, the Philippines and Indonesia.

4,000 Chinese Civilians in Paracels

About 4,000 Chinese civilians are now settled in the Paracels, according to Lei
Hu, the district commissioner of Hainan Island, whose territory theoretically
encompasses all the smaller islands.  Mr. Lei told some foreign journalists
visiting Hainan that this population, most of whom apparently live on the major
island of Yongxing, did not include military or naval units. Their size and
dispositions remain a secret.

Mr. Lei said that Taiping, the largest island in the Spratlys, was also under
Chinese administration.  ''But some other islands are now inhabited by
foreigners,'' he acknowledged. ''The Philippines and Vietnam sent some of their
people to live on the islands there.''

China also lays claim to two other small island groups in the South China Sea:
the Pratas and the Macclesfield Bank, which the Chinese call the Dongsha and
Zhongsha - or Eastern and Central Sand - Islands.

The Paracels, which lie about 165 miles southwest of Sanya and 225 miles east of
the Vietnamese port of Danang, have been theoretically under the civil
jurisdiction of Hainan's Yaxian County since 1911. In fact, they are strictly
run by the Chinese Army.

Mr. Lei indicated that the buildup of the Paracels was the immediate priority.

Construction of Harbor

''Our construction is being carried out in the Xisha,'' he said.  ''As is known,
we haven't begun construction in the Nansha yet.'' Shards of information turn up
in the Chinese press. A report in June 1980 that two solar-powered lighthouses
and an aircraft-guidance beacon had been constructed on reefs suggested how
thoroughly the Chinese were consolidating their claim to the Paracels.

Last June, the New China News Agency disclosed that naval engineers had built a
''vast harbor,'' which Western military observers took to mean a naval base.

Now that Vietnam has opened the former United States bases at Danang and Camranh
Bay to Soviet naval vessels patrolling from Vladivostok to the Indian Ocean, the
Paracels have become strategically more important to China in protecting its
southern flank. The Spratlys, lying southeast of Ho Chi Minh City, offer
outposts to monitor the major commercial sea lanes of the South China Sea.

But oil remains the overriding reason for holding onto the otherwise bleak
islands.  The Atlantic Richfield Company has begun exploratory drilling in an
assigned 3,500-square-mile block between Hainan and the Paracels, with Sanya as
a base. The French oil company Total is drilling in the Gulf of Tonkin northeast
of Hainan.

The Chinese have told the companies not to worry about Vietnamese interference
and plan shortly to award more offshore acreage near Hainan to other Western
concerns.

Chinese Officials Visit Paracels

Senior Chinese officials have visited the Paracels to boost local morale. A few
weeks ago, the first party secretary of Guangdong Province, Ren Zhongyi, another
high-ranking official, Liu Tianfu, and one of Guangdong's political commissars,
Wang Meng, flew from Hainan to review the military garrison.

Last year, the armed forces chief of staff, Yang Dezhi, showed up with some palm
trees from the mainland to replant in the Paracels.  Mr. Lei said, ''No
comment,'' when asked how many incidents between China and Vietnam had developed
over the disputed islands.  Several clashes were reported last year between
Chinese fishing junks, some presumably sailing from Hainan, and Vietnamese
gunboats.  Last March, there were reports that Chinese ''frontier guards'' in
the Paracels seized a Vietnamese ''reconnaisance boat'' a day after Vietnamese
naval boats set three Chinese junks afire and captured their crews.

Vietnam and China have also traded rhetorical broadsides over the Paracels and
Spratlys. The Chinese cite historical chronicles to show that Chinese sailors
were exploring the islands during the Eastern Han Dynasty, nearly 2,000 years
ago, and mention pottery and porcelain from the Tang Dynasty, 618 to 907, and
the Song Dynasty, 960 to 1279, as evidence of subsequent habitation.

Soviet Maps Back Peking's Claim

The Vietnamese go back to the beginning of the 19th century, when the Emperor
Gia Long formed a company to exploit the meager resources of the Paracels.

The Nationalist Chinese took over the Paracels from the defeated Japanese after
World War II, only to pull out when their Government retreated to Taiwan. Later,
the South Vietnamese moved in, but were overwhelmed by Communist Chinese forces
in January 1974 in a minor but heated battle. The Hanoi regime subequently sent
troops to occupy six islands in the Spratlys, which are logistically too far
away for the Chinese to control.

The Soviet Union has been an embarrassment to the Vietnamese in advancing their
claim because Soviet maps for years clearly marked the islands as Chinese.

China's strategy appears to be to consolidate its position in the Paracels
before moving into the more distant Spratlys. The Peking radio in August 1980
gave details of Yongxing Island, which already had government offices, banks,
hospitals, a post office, department stores and nearly 200,000 square feet of
new housing. It reported that work was under way on a desalinization system that
could process 200 tons of sea water a day.

Consequently, the Chinese see no need to bargain over what they contend is just
a far-flung part of Hainan Island.  ''Our military forces in Hainan will keep
vigilance and retaliate against any invasion,'' Mr. Lei said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of Indo-China photo of cigarette vendors

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FRINGE GROUP FORCES OUSTER VOTE ON COAST MAYOR

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 681 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 8


To the consternation of City Hall, a small group of radicals from the street
wars of a decade ago has collected petitions forcing Mayor Dianne Feinstein into
a special election April 26 on whether she should be ousted from office.

''We are people who support the Constitution,'' said Thomas W.  Stevens, 38
years old, speaking for the White Panthers, whose petitions ask that the Mayor
be voted out of office because she sponsored a gun-control ordinance they
believe to be unconstitutional.

''Also, we're Communists,'' he said. ''We're on the Marxist, Leninist, Maoist,
Castroist side of most questions.'' The conditions that produced the White
Panthers here were the demonstrations against the Vietnam War and the atmosphere
of rebellion against authority that has swept this area over the last 15 years.
The White Panthers are a communal group of fewer than 20 whose members say they
are interested in the political process and the plight of the poor.

Mayor Feinstein called the attempt to oust her ''little more than a guerrilla
attack.'' She said the White Panthers were ''an eccentric fringe group whose
only interest is to harass government and embarrass the city.''

''It is not going to work,'' she said. But she added, ''I take it seriously.''
Both of San Francisco's major daily newspapers have attacked the recall election
as a misuse of the political process. On Jan. 31 the San Francisco Board of
Supervisors voted, 11 to 1, to support the Mayor. Quentin Kopp cast the lone
negative vote.

Mr. Kopp, a lawyer defeated by Mrs. Feinstein in the mayoral election in 1979,
objected that the resolution stated, ''Nothing the Mayor has done amounts to
grounds for recall.''

''The law is quite clear that the voters are to be free to set the standards by
which any recall is to be judged,'' he said.  The petition, signed by 35,000 San
Franciscans, charged that Mayor Feinstein, ''by conspiring to impose a ruthless,
reckless fiat against handguns,'' was mounting ''a tyrannical attack'' on the
right to bear arms.

Mr. Stevens said the White Panthers attacked the ordinance, which called for a
30-day jail term for violation of a ban on the possession of pistols, because it
would hurt poor people who could not get police protection when they needed it.
The State Court of Appeal held the ordinance invalid, ruling that the state had
preempted the field of gun control. The California Supreme Court refused to
review that ruling.

Officials forced into recall elections in California can have their statements
printed on the petition. Mayor Feinstein's statement accused members of the
White Panthers of trying ''to harass and intimidate public officials by misuse
of the recall process.'' She said the organization was in frequent trouble with
the police in ''a persistent battle against established authority.'' She pointed
out that several White Panthers had been in jail.

One of these is Mr. Stevens, who served three years in San Quentin for firing
what he said were warning shots at a police officer in 1974. Mr. Stevens and
Terry Phillips, 33, fired the shots in a confrontation with San Francisco police
officers who were trying to enter an apartment occupied by members of the group.

Several months after the incident, with a White Panther civil damage suit
pending against the city over the fire, Mr. Stevens and Mr. Phillips were
charged with armed assault against police officers who were performing their
duty. The two rejected a plea bargain offer of probation and were convicted
after a trial. Each received two sentences of five years to life for the
assault, plus two sentences of six months to life for use of the guns.

''We thought we could put on evidence of police harassment,'' Mr.  Stevens said,
but that was blocked. ''It was more of a railroad than we expected.''

An appeals court upset the convictions after two and a half years because the
police had had no warrant. But it allowed imposition of new convictions for
armed assault, and the two men were given the same sentences again. The parole
authorities released them six months later.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Diane Feinstein photo of White Panthers

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

STATUE AND FLAG VOTED FOR VIETNAM MEMORIAL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 401 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 8


Forced to decide between warring veterans, the Government's Fine Arts Commission
voted today to place a statue of soldiers and a flag by the side of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial rather than between its black granite walls.

Veterans who wanted the statue and flag at the center, making the wall of names
a backdrop, spoke of betrayal and vowed to continue their fight.

The commission acted unanimously after listening for three hours to emotional
appeals from both camps, each contending that it was speaking for the majority
of Americans who fought in Vietnam.

Speaking for the panel, its chairman, J. Carter Brown, made the case for
erecting the flagpole and the statue in a pathway by the side of the memorial,
near a grove of trees between the memorial and the Lincoln Monument.

Interior Secretary Rebuffed

Mr. Brown said the 8-foot statue, which will depict three weary soldiers
carrying rifles, would be lost if it was placed in the expanse of grass between
the V-shaped walls of the memorial.  Clustering the flag and statue together at
the side would create ''the front door, the major entrance, the first
impression'' to the memorial, he added.

The decision was a rebuff for Interior Secretary James G. Watt, who wanted the
flagpole placed above the apex of the 200-foot walls and the statue placed in
the center of the triangle.

The original design, the winner in a nationwide competition, called for neither
flag nor statue. But the commission agreed last October to add both elements as
a compromise with veterans who maintained that the monument, in its bleakness,
paid homage only to the the Americans who died in Vietnam rather than to the
heroism of those who fought there.

Critics said the monument was designed to be a ''black gash of shame'' and made
a political statement of distaste for America's participation in the war.

The Veterans of Foreign Wars, the American Legion, the Vietnam Veterans of
America and the the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, which raised the $7 million
to build the memorial, favored the proposal to put the new elements at the side
of the memorial.

But various individual veterans have urged that the statue be erected at the
center of the memorial. Milton Copulous, a combat veteran of the Vietnam War,
said a survey he took at the memorial dedication last November showed that
veterans overwhelmingly approved the more prominent position.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 9, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DEFENSE CUT ISSUE: 'GENERALITIES DON'T COUNT'

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 474 words


To the Editor:

Your call for defense savings in the short term by ''scrapping less-effective or
redundant weapons entirely'' and in the long term by ''procuring more sensibly
designed weapons'' is very much to the point. Congress, the Pentagon and the
Administration seem to buy weapons programs just because they are there.

Although the matter of short-term choice is now before the Congress, the
long-term solution requires some organizational reform.  Many weapons systems
cost more than they should and perform below specifications. But the major
difficulties occur when programs protect bureaucracies that have been made
obsolete by changes in technology or the Soviet threat. Neither Congress nor the
Administration has effectively reviewed and questioned such spendthrift Pentagon
priorities. Two examples are the MX missile and the F/A-18 aircraft, to which
you refer.

The MX was originally conceived of as an air-launched missile with the mobility
to overcome projected Soviet gains in targeting capability. New technology
turned the original concept for the MX into the cruise missile. The improved
accuracy of the Trident II will enable the U.S. to counter Soviet second-strike
forces.

The MX has become technologically redundant. Still, it continues as the favored
means of the Air Force's silo generals to justify their continued existence. It
is ironic that the origins of the MX were precisely those concerns which have
led all silo-basing schemes to be rejected. The generals, however, continue to
protect their turf.

The F/A-18 was conceived at a time when the Soviet surface and naval air threat
was small. The main concern of the Navy was force projection - attack missions
over North Vietnam from the Gulf of Tonkin.

Since then, the growth of Soviet naval power has led to increased U.S. emphasis
on the prime naval function of sea control. Logically, this requires a different
mix of aircraft aboard a carrier. The Navy brass, dreaming dreams of bygone
wars, has only grudgingly recognized this fact.

When I first proposed substituting the A-6 aircraft with Harpoon missile
capability for the attack mission of the F/A-18, they refused to even consider
this alternative. In 1981, they said it would cost too much. Today, Secretary
Weinberger announces that my alternative will be the subject of an experiment.
It is noteworthy that the Navy now refers to the F/A-18 as an ''experiment''
after it is committed to a $40-billion program.

Our problem is entrenched bureaucracies and the inability of Administrations and
Congresses to critically address defense-spending priorities. It is only by
structural reforms that your praiseworthy long-term goal - which amounts to a
strong but rational national defense - can be achieved.
BRUCE F. VENTO, Member of Congress, 4th Dist., Minn., Washington, Jan. 31, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 10, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ TO PURSUE TALKS ON MIDEAST DESPITE PREOCCUPATION OF ISRAELIS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Feb. 9


Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that the United States was
determined ''to keep working away'' at the various Middle East diplomatic
problems despite the internal crisis in Israel spawned by the commission of
inquiry's criticism of the Begin Government.

In a news conference winding up his 12-day trip to Asia, Mr. Shultz said
obtaining the withdrawal of foreign troops from Lebanon, the overall American
Middle East peace initiative and resolving Egyptian-Israeli issues were ''all of
great importance'' and should not be permitted to stagnate because of the
report, which recommended that Defense Minister Ariel Sharon resign or be
dismissed for his role in ordering Christian Phalangist forces into Palestinian
camps last September.

Mr. Shultz, in keeping with a Reagan Administration decision, did not comment
publicly on the report's findings about the massacre, but he did say that the
candid findings were ''another outstanding example of the way a democracy can
conduct itself and to that extent it seems to me that Israel deserves a definite
tip of the hat as a model of how democracy can work.''

When asked if the obvious preoccupation of the Israeli Government would not
create a long pause in the negotiations, Mr. Shultz said they were so important
that ''we intend to keep working away at them and I assume the other parties to
the negotiations will as well.''

He Meets U.S. Diplomats

Mr. Shultz arrived here on Tuesday from South Korea and spent most of his time
consulting with American chiefs of mission in Asian countries who had assembled
here to see him. He also found time to be fitted for some suits and do some
other shopping in the tax-free shops of this British colony.

He said he had been in touch by cable with Vice President Bush, who was ending a
trip to Western Europe today, and found that there was a convergence in Europe
and Asia behind the American ''zero-zero solution'' for the problem of nuclear
medium-range missiles in Europe.

The American plan calls for the dismantling of all 340 Soviet SS-20's in Europe
and Asia and the 260 SS-4's and SS-5's in Europe in return for the cancellation
of plans by the Atlantic alliance to deploy 572 new American missiles in Western
Europe.

He said that in his talks with Japanese, Chinese and South Korean leaders, he
found they all strongly supported the American plan because it would require the
Soviet Union to withdraw missiles pointed at them. ''It reinforces the virtues
of the zero option,'' he said. Some Europeans have been talking of an interim
approach in which the number of Soviet missiles in Europe would be reduced and
the Americans would deploy fewer new missiles than planned. But the Soviet
forces in Asia would not be affected. The Asians are not interested in a
compromise if it means the 90 SS-20's in Asia would remain.

Vietnam Is Criticized

On other Asian matters, Mr. Shultz said Vietnam had isolated itself by invading
and occupying Cambodia, and the United States had no intention of dealing with
Hanoi in any substantive way until Vietnam agreed to a plan for pulling out of
Cambodia.

Mr. Shultz said there were plans to provide Taiwan with old-model F-104's, and
this was not contrary to agreements with China to phase out sales and not to
increase the quality of arms sold to Taiwan.

(In Washington, the State Department said 66 used F-104's were being sold to
Taiwan, which it said took delivery of 23 of the planes in December, The
Associated Press reported. A department spokesman said the planes once belonged
to West Germany and were returned and refurbished by the United States before
being sold to Taiwan.)

He said White House officials were wrong in telling reporters last Saturday that
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China had agreed to visit the United States some
time this year. Mr. Shultz said he invited him on behalf of President Reagan to
come and suggested June or September as possible times. The Chinese leader said
he would like to come but made no commitment on timing, saying this should be
left to diplomatic channels, he said.

Struck by the economic dynamism of Japan, South Korea and Hong Kong, Mr. Shultz
said, ''I think a lot of the future of the world is here in Asia.''

He Attacks Protectionism

''The United States needs to pay a lot of attention to Asia, and the economic
dimension is one of the reasons it brings me here,'' he said. He said he urged
Asians to take steps to eliminate trade protectionism just as the Reagan
Administration is trying to block it in Congress. He said he was confident that
China and Britain would work out a compromise to keep Hong Kong thriving when
part of the lease from China runs out in 1997. ''They both have a good thing
going,'' he said.

Mr. Shultz has been in touch with officials in Washington and Tel Aviv since the
Israeli report was issued. The consensus was, an aide said, to keep the efforts
of Philip C. Habib, the special envoy, alive, and not to appear to accept a long
delay.

Some American experts said Prime Minister Menachem Begin might choose to deflect
attention from the report by moving more rapidly to agree to terms for
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanon, an aide said. But others, he said,
predicted that there would be no progress because the Begin Government would be
too weak to make any deals.  Some advisers warned that Mr. Begin might try to
increase his public backing by criticizing the United States for trying to put
pressure on him.

Likewise, an aide said, Mr. Sharon may try to link the United States to pressure
for his dismissal in an effort to remain in power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 10, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NON-COMMUNIST CAMBODIANS NEED OUR HELP

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 229 words


To the Editor:

I have been reading your reports on the new Vietnamese military offensive in
Cambodia, their shelling and burning down populous refugee and international aid
camps and repeated incursions into Thailand. I wonder how Americans can remain
so silent.

he Vietnamese attacks are aimed at the non-Communist resistance forces of Son
Sann and Prince Sihanouk, rather than the better-armed forces of Pol Pot. Since
Sihanouk and Son Sann are recognized as the legitimate leaders of the Cambodian
people and the resistance coalition was voted the Cambodian seat in the U.N., it
is obvious that Hanoi believes that its army can brutally conquer whatever
objectives it cannot manipulate diplomatically. This offensive also permits the
Vietnamese to build permanent military bases on the Thai border, further
destabilizing the region.

Since the potential reign of the Vietnamese or Pol Pot would be a grotesque fate
for the Cambodian people, I feel it is the moral obligation of the United States
and other free countries to immediately deliver both humanitarian and military
aid to the non-Communist forces, which have practically no means to defend
themselves and innocent refugees against Vietnamese artillery, tanks and
chemical weapons.  AL SANTOLI New York, Feb. 4, 1983

The writer is the author of ''Everything We Had, an Oral History of the Vietnam
War.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 258 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 11, 1983 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'SPEND THE NIGHT,' ROCK BY ROLLING STONES

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 767 words


HAL ASHBY'S ''Let's Spend the Night Together'' is probably the handsomest
rock-and-roll movie ever made, although few others may have aspired to that
distinction. Good looks, at least until recently, were never the point. And no
rock film with a claim to authenticity could afford to forfeit its grainy
realism. After all, the glamour grew out of roughness and ferocity, not out of
wholesome stylishness or sophistication.

But for the Rolling Stones, who with this film once again affirm their status as
rock's most durable and dynamic veterans, that raggedness is no longer either
essential or apt. So Mr. Ashby has substituted a vibrantly colorful, seamless
style in its place. And the results are as exciting and eye-catching as must
have been intended.

''Let's Spend the Night Together,'' which opens today at the Astor Plaza and
other theaters, is the classiest of concert movies, even if that sounds as if it
ought to be a contradiction in terms. As photographed by Gerald Feil and Caleb
Deschanel (of ''The Black Stallion''), it looks glorious, particularly in the
opening sequences at an outdoor arena. The Stones, photographed from a low
angle, loom monumentally large against a bright blue sky, and they project a
healthy energy. The scale is enormous, almost as though this were a western. The
band's entrance here, at Sun Devil Stadium in Tempe, Ariz., is heralded by
thousands of balloons, which look breathtaking when captured in a helicopter
shot from afar. It's the magic hour, the prettiest moment of late afternoon, on
a sunny day.

Mick Jagger works the entirety of a cleverly slanted stage, and the use of a
cordless microphone enables him to clamber into the audience. He doesn't appear
concerned about the enormous crowd, even though it was in Altamont, Calif., as
recorded in an earlier Stones film, the Maysles' 1970 documentary, ''Gimme
Shelter,'' that a rock audience turned into a sinister mob and a man was
murdered. Here, the fans are enthusiastic but essentially serene, because this
is entertainment of a less histrionic and threatening sort. It's just a concert,
a beautifully crafted record of the Stones performing style at this stage of
their career, and Mr. Ashby hasn't tried to make it anything more.

Even the touches of candor here -brief footage of the Stones backstage,
preparing for a show - serve to emphasize the enormous energy that goes into the
performance itself, rather than to distract the audience from the show. The same
can be said for a set of old Stones photographs seen during ''Time Is on My
Side,'' although the brief use of Vietnam War footage is merely puzzling.

The show itself primarily focuses on the group's recent material, songs such as
''Shattered,'' ''Beast of Burden,'' ''She's So Cold,'' ''Hang Fire'' and
''Waiting on a Friend.'' There's some novelty to the set because these songs
haven't been seen in prior Stones concert films; among those that have, ''You
Can't Always Get What You Want'' is given a different and very stirring
treatment here. The 25-song show, which later moves indoors, to the Brendan
Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., does sag somewhat midway through the set.
But it builds to a rousing finale, spurred by such new songs as ''Start Me Up''
and ''Miss You,'' and older ones like ''Brown Sugar'' and the inevitable
''Satisfaction.''

The camera chiefly lingers on Mr. Jagger, but it also captures Ron Wood and
Keith Richards as they horse around energetically (Mr. Wood, playing a cordless
guitar, has a lot of opportunity for roaming the stage). Charlie Watts and Bill
Wyman are more seldom seen, and when they catch sight of the camera both have
the habit of rolling their eyes in comically exaggerated boredom. After nearly
20 years together, they may indeed feel that way. But nobody in the audience is
apt to share that sentiment.

''Let's Spend the Night Together'' has been rated PG (''Parental Guidance
Suggested''), which has probably been earned by some of the Rolling Stones
lyrics. There are fleeting scenes of wartime violence as well.

Rock Glamour
LET'S SPEND THE NIGHT TOGETHER, directed by Hal Ashby; directors of photography,
Caleb Deschanel and Gerald Feil; edited by Lisa Day; music by Mick Jagger, Keith
Richards and other composers; produced by Ronald L. Schwary; released by Embassy
Pictures. At the Astor Plaza, Broadway, between 43d and 44th Streets; Orpheum,
86th Street and Third Avenue, and other theaters. Running time: 95 minutes. This
film has been rated PG.

THE BAND: Mick Jagger, Keith Richards, Charlie Watts, Ron Wood, Bill Wyman, Ian
Stewart, Ian McLagan, Ernie Watts, Bobby Keys.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of Mick Jagger

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

RUMOR AND BICKERING ON U.S. SALVADOR POLICY

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 628 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 10


Amid signs of increased tensions with Congress over United States policy in El
Salvador, the Reagan Administration said today that it sought ''reconciliation''
in the Central American nation while supporting the military campaign against
leftist guerrillas.

Alan D. Romberg, a State Department spokesman, said: ''Our policy is clear and
will not change. We support the Government of El Salvador in its struggle
against the armed guerrillas. We will go on supporting it with military and
economic aid.''

He added, ''At the same time we support reconciliation in El Salvador, giving
all who renounce violence the opportunity to participate in democratic
institutions. We oppose negotiations over power sharing, believing that only
through elections can legitimate governments emerge.''

At the White House, Mort Allin, a deputy press secretary, said that ''if we find
that the guerrillas wish to lay down their arms and enter into discussions with
the Government on broadening the democratic process in that country, we have
supported that consistently.'' He added that the Administration had ''never
favored'' negotiating a power-sharing role for the guerrillas.

The comments reflected frictions with Congress over policy as well as reports
that the Administration was weighing a strategy to promote talks with the
guerrillas. Beyond this, officials say privately that tensions and frustrations
have surfaced in the Administration over the uncertain military and political
situation in El Salvador.

''The question is, 'What is, in fact, going on in Salvador?' '' one official
said. '' 'What's the military situation, the political situation? What's the
likely action by Congress?' ''

The official added that reports of negotiations and Administration bickering
might undercut the American-supported government in El Salvador.

''The problem is you run the risk of breaking the morale of the Salvadorans if
they think we're going to run out from under them and leave them to the mercies
of the guerrillas,'' the official said.  ''If the sense spreads that the U.S.
will desert them, I don't know what they'll do. It's Vietnam all over again.''

The White House deflected a report in today's issue of The Washington Post that
Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, had
proposed to the National Security Council that the United States support talks
with the guerrillas - partly out of concern that Congress will insist on the
negotiations.  ''There's nothing under consideration of that type here,'' said
Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman.

A ranking State Department official said the report ''represents an
extraordinary distortion of the situation.'' He said: ''It would seek to
demonstrate that there was a move afoot to change basic policy. That's not the
case at all. There's no anticipated change in policy on the issue of
negotiations.''

Others said the issue of talks involved, essentially, one issue: whether the
guerrillas decided to participate in a free electoral process and return to the
political system.

The Administration is proposing $86.3 million in military aid to El Salvador in
the fiscal year 1984. Opposition is said to be building.  ''Having spent the
money unwillingly, people on the Hill are going along reluctantly on military
spending but you can sense the frustration,'' said a knowledgeable Senate aide.
''People are really discouraged about the Salvadoran military not using the
tactics we recommend. The Administration is frustrated. Our military is
frustrated. People are saying, 'The hell with it. Let's get out.' ''

Meantime, Administration officials say, diplomatic efforts have begun to involve
such regional powers as Venezuela, Mexico and Colombia in the negotiating
process.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'VIETNAM IS NOT OVER,' PARLEY ON WAR LEARNS

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1244 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 10


On the sun-dappled campus of the University of Southern California, the Vietnam
War issue was refought this week at an academic conference with some of the
anger and confusion that surrounded the war itself.

The four-day meeting on the lessons of Vietnam was supposed to be a
dispassionate analysis of the war, 10 years after the signing of the Paris peace
accords and the withdrawal of the last American combat forces, in January 1973.

The 65 participants included some of the best-known Vietnam journalists and
antiwar activists, with a sprinking of former generals and Government officials.
Among them were Frances FitzGerald, author of the best-selling ''Fire in the
Lake,'' and Daniel Ellsberg, who says he gave the Pentagon Papers to The New
York Times.

But instead the conference was often emotional and acrimonious, and the main
lesson that emerged was that ''Vietnam is not over,'' in the words of Daniel K.
Wagoner, a former Army Ranger who served in Vietnam in 1969.

'Will Never Be Over'

''Vietnam will never be over,'' said Mr. Wagoner, who was angry that as a
veteran he had to pay to attend the conference and so, with a group of other
veterans, used his Ranger training to crash a dinner for the participants.
''Rangers don't die, they recon the valley of death,'' Mr. Wagoner said in the
macabre argot of Vietnam.

The meetings, which were held in a densely packed campus theater and which ended
last night, provided a forum for people to bear witness to the wounds and
divisiveness of the war.

Journalists clashed with one another over how accurate their reporting of the
war was. A former general contended that Washington had hamstrung the military
by not giving it enough troops or authority to cut off North Vietnamese
sanctuaries in Laos and Cambodia. Three former agents of the Central
Intelligence Agency said they knew how the agency planted false information with
well-known journalists to mislead American opinion about the war.

Vietnamese refugees shouted at former antiwar activists sympathetic to Hanoi and
asked why they did not show as much concern for the hundreds of thousands of
people incarcerated by the Communists after the war and for the plight of the
boat people.

Above all, dozens of Vietnam veterans, some in worn Army field jackets and
others in three-piece business suits, berated the Government, the press and the
American public for ignoring them.

'Too Late to Punish Anybody'

''It's too late to punish anybody for what happened, but we have got to make the
Government do something to help these people,'' Nicholas Road, a former
paratrooper with the 101st Airborne Division, said after a panel discussion on
veterans' problems. ''I'm still trying to catch about 10 years of my life that I
lost after my 19th birthday.''

Long lines formed after each panel discussion as members of the audience took
over the microphone and delivered their own speeches, delaying some sessions
till midnight.

''For the past three days I've listened to some of the most selfrighteous
S.O.B.'s tell us about how they reported the war,'' said another veteran, Rick
Berg. ''We've been trying to talk for years. But they've been talking for us.
What is this?''

Among the scheduled speakers were David Halberstam, a former New York Times
correspondent in Vietnam and author of ''The Best and the Brightest''; Harrison
Salisbury, a former Times editor who was among the first reporters to visit
Hanoi in the war; Peter Arnett, who won two Pulitzer Prizes while reporting on
Vietnam for The Associated Press, and Morley Safer of CBS News.

Some Quiet Insights

Amid the hostility and the hisses, there were also some quiet insights and
reflective questions.  William Shawcross, a writer for The Sunday Times of
London and author of ''Sideshow: Kissinger, Nixon and the Destruction of
Cambodia,'' wondered how the Communist Government of Vietnam had gone so astray
after the war. He noted that given the damage and dislocations of the war, any
government would have had trouble in Vietnam after 1975.

But why, he asked, does Vietnam maintain the third largest army in the world,
bigger even than that of the United States, devoting 46 percent of its national
budget to the military? Why does Vietnam have 200,000 troops occupying Cambodia
and 40,000 more in Laos? Why did the North Vietnamese after the war ignore the
leaders of the National Liberation Front, the Vietcong, in the South.

John McAuliff, director of the Indochina program of the American Friends Service
Committee, contended that while most Americans blamed Hanoi for Vietnam's
postwar plight, the fault ''lies at least as much in Washington.'' He said that
if Washington had lived up to the terms of the Paris peace agreement and
provided postwar aid to Vietnam, the situation would be different.

Mr. McAuliff even suggested that American hostility toward Hanoi after the war
might have contributed to the Communists' policy of imprisoning large numbers of
former South Vietnamese soldiers and officials in ''re-education'' camps.

Recognition of Hanoi Urged

Washington should recognize Hanoi now to end what he called ''the third
Indochina war'' and stop opposing Vietnamese nationalism.  But Douglas Pike, a
retired Foreign Service officer who teaches about Vietnam at the University of
California at Berkeley, charged that Vietnam's postwar troubles were
attributable to the age, isolation and dogmatism of Vietnam's Communist Party
Politburo.

Mr. Shawcross pointed out that, with the complexity of American ties with China
and the nations of Southeast Asia, Hanoi would have to make some concession on
its occupation of Cambodia for the United States to normalize relations with
Vietnam now.

One of the most poignant moments of the conference came when Tran Quang Thuan, a
former South Vietnamese senator and Buddhist activist, questioned Nguyen Ngoc
Dung, Hanoi's deputy representative to the United Nations, about why several
leading Buddhist monks had been imprisoned by the Communists.

Mrs. Dung, speaking by a radio hookup from New York, insisted that Hanoi allowed
freedom of religion and that ''if they are in jail, it is because they are
criminals.'' She called the question slanderous.

New Political Prisoners Cited

Don Luce, an antiwar writer who had focused attention on the plight of political
prisoners held by the South Vietnamese regime of Nguyen Van Thieu, was
challenged over his silence on the condition of political prisoners held by the
Communists today.

Ginetta Sagan, a founder of Amnesty International in California who used to keep
records of prisoners held by the Thieu Government, said to Mr. Luce, ''Unless we
speak up, we are going to lose our credibility as defenders of human rights.''
Miss Sagan said she had become concerned about the Communists' detention of
political prisoners after some leftist Vietnamese who had furnished her with
information about prisoners during the war were themselves arrested after 1975.

On how America got involved in Vietnam, James C. Thomson, a member of National
Security Council staff under President Johnson, suggested that beyond the
factors usually cited, such as a belief in the need to contain Communism, there
was a ''missionary impulse,'' the ''need to go good to others.'' After the
Communist victory in China in 1949, this missionary zeal was transferred from
China to Indochina, Mr. Thomson suggested, making for a brand of ''sentimental
imperialism.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of protestors

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1983

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 860 words


International
Ariel Sharon resigned as Israel's Defense Minister after the Cabinet voted 16 to
1 to accept recommendations of a state commission that he and three senior army
generals leave their posts.  The vote, with only Mr. Sharon dissenting, came
after three days of intense political negotiations and an evening of street
violence in Jerusalem over the panel's conclusion that Israeli leaders bore
''indirect responsibility'' for the massacre of Palestinians in Beirut by
Lebanese Christian militiamen. (Page A1, Column 6.)
The violence in Jerusalem killed one man and wounded nine people, including the
son of Interior Minister Yosef Burg. They were casualties of the explosion of a
hand grenade in a crowd of anti-Government demonstrators outside the offices of
Prime Minister Begin where the Cabinet was debating the commission's report.
(A10:1.)
Pacificism was rejected at Oxford by a debating society that approved a
proposition 50 years ago, after Hitler assumed power in Germany, affirming that
its members ''will in no circumstances fight for its King and Country.'' The
Oxford Union rejected the proposition, 416-187, soon after Max Beloff, who voted
for the 1933 proposition, told the hushed group, ''I and my friends were
arrogant, and I wish to apologize.'' (A1:1-3.)
National
Unprecedented risks for the economy because of large budget deficits were cited
by the Congressional Budget Office. In a 355-page report, the agency told
Congress in unusually forceful language that it should act this year in
far-reaching ways to curtail the rise in Federal spending and to raise
additional tax revenues. (A1:1.)
Possible cuts in military spending were suggested to Congress in an analysis by
the Congressional Budget Office. The 14 possible reductions in the proposed
budget include the cancellation of the MX missile, the Navy's F/A-18
fighter-bomber and 63 Navy destroyers.  (A18:4-6.)
A split between Democratic leaders over taxes came to light. House Speaker
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., disagreeing publicly with a chief lieutenant,
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, insisted that the Democrats would press for
revisions in the third-year cuts in individual income taxes slated to take
effect July 1. (A28:1.)
Bipartisan cooperation on a jobs bill was said to be in sight after a meeting
attended by Democratic Congressional leaders and White House aides.
Congressional sources said the Reagan Administration was proposing about $4
billion for an emergency employment measure, while Democrats have suggested
spending $5 billion to $7 billion. (A1:2.)
The E.P.A. acknowledged shredding ''excess copies'' of documents it had refused
to give to a House committee that subpoenaed them. But an Environmental
Protection Agency spokesman said the original documents were being safeguarded.
(A1:4-6.)
The trucking strike was called off by leaders of the Independent Truckers
Association, who cited assurances from members of Congress that they would study
the scheduled increases in Federal fuel taxes and highway user fees. (A1:3-4.)
The Vietnam War issue was refought for four days at an academic conference at
the University of Southern California with some of the anger and confusion that
surrounded the war. The often acrimonious meeting, attended by some key
proponents and opponents of the war, was supposed to be a dispassionate analysis
of the conflict, but what emerged instead, according to a former Army Ranger in
Vietnam, was a sense that ''Vietnam will never be over.'' (A14:1-2.)
Metropolitan
A dispute over foreign subway cars was resolved in New York City. A coalition of
national unions dropped an effort to penalize the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority for buying subway cars made in Canada in return for a pledge by the
authority not to buy additional foreign-made cars for the next three years.
(B1:1.)
More money believed stolen from an armored-car company in the Bronx was turned
over to the F.B.I. by a lawyer who said he represented the father of a suspect
in the December theft. The cash, enclosed in brown wrappers, filled a 100-pound
trunk and was being counted by F.B.I. agents in Albany. (B4:6.)
Repair of a Brooklyn sewage plant was set as government officials announced that
New York City would receive $49 million in Federal funds for rehabilitating the
plant, which city officials have said is on the verge of collapse. The funds
were approved after the city agreed to delay the construction of a new sewage
treatment plant in Manhattan. (B3:5-6.)
A shift on nuclear plant safety came to light in the dispute over the generating
plant in Shoreham, L.I. An engineer for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission who
appeared before the board that licensed the plant said he no longer believes it
to be as safe as he did when he testified. (B1:2-6.)
A toxic-waste cleanup in New Jersey was announced by Governor Kean.  The state
has more toxic-waste dumps than any other state, but the Governor predicted that
every site would be cleaned up within four years. The program will cost at least
$197 million, but officials said the eventual cost might be $500 million.
(B2:1-2.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THREAT POSED BY DIOXIN SUBJECT OF GROWING FEAR

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHABECOFF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2358 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 11


Concern is growing among public health officials, environmentalists, scientists
and legislators that contamination by dioxin, one of the most toxic substances
created by man, may turn out to be a serious national problem for which they are
ill-prepared.

Recent tests have confirmed dioxin contamination at 22 places in Missouri, and
state officials fear the chemical may pollute more than 100 sites there. In
1979, the Environmental Protection Agency prepared a list of 31 cities where
chemical manufacturing was likely to produce waste contaminated with dioxin and
destined for the nation's dumps for hazardous wastes, which number in the
thousands and whose contents are largely unknown.

There is no reliable information about how much dioxin has been produced or
where it is, and there is considerable controversy over what danger it poses to
health and the environment. Nobody knows for sure.

'Of Extreme Gravity'

Representative James J. Florio, Democrat of New Jersey, co-author of some of the
key legislation regulating hazardous wastes, is worried about the scarcity of
information. ''This is something of extreme gravity and we have to treat it as
such,'' he said. ''I'm not saying we have to burn down every town in the country
that has been exposed to dioxins, but this problem deserves close scrutiny,
closer than other things.''

Richard C. Fortuna, staff toxicologist for the House Energy subcommittee headed
by Mr. Florio, said, ''We know that dioxin is a serious environmental problem,
but we don't know yet if it is a national emergency.''

Reagan Administration officials and chemical industry executives do not see any
emergency. They view the contamination in Missouri as an aberration and believe
there are few if any other areas in the country where dioxin presents a
significant health problem. In the hazardous waste dumps, they observe, dioxin
clings tightly to soil particles and is nearly insoluble in water. And in
Missouri, they contend, the dangers to exposed humans have been exaggerated in
public accounts.

'Not a National Threat'

''It gets me that some scientists are saying that dioxin is the most deadly
chemical known to man,'' said Rita M. Lavelle, assistant administrator of the
E.P.A. until she was dismissed Monday.  ''That's not true, It depends on the
concentration. In the right concentration, table salt is just as deadly.''

Miss Lavelle, who was in charge of protecting the public from hazardous waste
and responding to emergencies like the one in Missouri, belittled the
significance of dioxins as a threat to the environment and public health in an
interview before she left office.

''I am more worried about the threat of other chemicals,'' Miss Lavelle said.
''Dioxin is not a national threat.'' Dioxin is the name given to any of a family
of 75 compounds called dibenzo-para-dioxins composed of benzene and oxygen
atoms. When chlorine atoms are added, they become chlorinated dioxins, which
have been found to be toxic at low concentrations.

Human Effects Unclear

Laboratory tests on animals have linked chlorinated dioxins, even in tiny
amounts, to birth defects, skin disorders, liver ailments and other problems.
Concentrations as small as five parts per 1,000 billion have caused
statistically significant increases in cancer in rats. A single oral dose of 25
micrograms can kill a two-pound chicken. There are a million micrograms in a
gram and a thousand grams in a kilogram, and one estimate is that more than 80
kilograms of dioxin was produced in chemical manufacturing in the United States
every year from the 1950's to the mid-70's. Yet dioxin's effects on humans,
particularly long-term risks, are not clearly understood.

Representative Florio is concerned about what he views as legal loopholes that
would allow dioxin to continue to move into the environment if it was contained
in waste oils that might be recycled, as they were in Missouri, leading to the
contamination there. He says the E.P.A. should follow the recommendation of its
staff to declare dioxins a ''hazardous air pollutant,'' an action the agency has
not yet taken.

Similarly, Dr. Ellen K. Silbergeld, chief toxics scientist for the Environmental
Defense Fund, a nonprofit environmental group, said the agency had not acted on
long-pending recommendations by its staff that new rules should limit dioxin in
water supplies to fractions of a part per 1,000 billion.

William N. Hedeman Jr., director of the environmental agency's Office of
Emergency Response, said in an interview, ''To the best of my knowledge, there
are no other Russell Bliss situations around the country.'' Russell Bliss is the
contractor who sprayed the waste oils containing dioxin on horse arenas and
roads in Missouri.

'Don't Know Where It Is'

Mr. Hedeman said he was not aware of other areas where dioxin had posed a
problem except for Love Canal in Niagara Falls, N.Y., where it was found in an
abandoned chemical dump. But he acknowledged, ''We don't know how much is out
there. We don't know where it is.''

On the E.P.A.'s 1979 list were 31 cities around the country where plants
produced chlorophenols. The manufacture of these chemicals produces dioxins,
including the deadly 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzenep-dioxin, TCDD, as an unwanted
byproduct.

The cities on the agency list were Tuscaloosa, Ala.; Jacksonville, Ark.;
Fremont, Calif.; San Mateo, Calif.; Orlando, Fla.; Chicago; Chicago Heights,
Ill.; Naperville, Ill.; Sasuaget, Ill.; Shenandoah, Iowa; Kansas City, Kan.;
Wichita, Kan.; Whiteford, Md.; Midland, Mich.; St. Paul; St. Joseph, Mo.; St.
Louis; Springfield, Mo.; Verona, Mo.; Clifton, N.J.; Linden, N.J.; Rahway, N.J.;
Niagara Falls, N.Y.; Cleveland; Dover, Ohio; Portland, Ore.; Ambler, Pa.;
Philadelphia; Port Neches, Tex.; Tacoma, Wash., and Nitro, W.Va.

The National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, an arm of the
Department of Health and Human Services, is now working on an updated and more
complete ''national registry'' of producers of products that leave dioxins as a
byproduct.

Find Exposed Workers

Dr. William Halperin, chief of the institute's industrywide studies branch, said
a major purpose of the registry was to locate workers exposed to dioxin on the
job so that the effects of the chemical on their health can be studied.

Since the late 1970's, the use and production of many of the products that cause
the formation of TCDD have been restricted, although not entirely banned. But a
significant if unknown amount of dioxin was introduced earlier into various
waste streams, and it is likely that some is still escaping into the environment
through a variety of routes, including the combustion of wastes.

GET FIRST ADD DIOXIN

A rough guess at the amount of dioxin discharged into the environment was made
in a recent interview by Dr. Alvin Young, an environmental scientist for the
Veterans Administration who is a specialist in that agency's efforts to deal
with the problems resulting from Vietnam veterans' exposure to Agent Orange, a
defoliant that includes the herbicide 2,4,5-T, which is associated with TCDD.
Dr. Young said available figures showed that in 1975 about 800,000 gallons of
products associated with TCDD had been produced. From what is known about the
dioxin residues in the manufacturing process, he estimated that about 2.1
kilograms of dioxin was contained in the products themselves and about 80
kilograms was left over as waste in that year. A kilogram is about 2.2 pounds.

Thousands of Waste Dumps

Dr. Young said that at least that amount of dioxin had been produced annually
since the 1950's. While the yearly production has been sharply reduced since
1975, ''that is a hell of a lot of dioxin,'' he said. But he said he did not
think dioxin constituted a national health problem, though it might pose a
problem in specific areas of the country.

There is broad agreement that a substantial proportion of dioxincontaminated
wastes are now buried in dumps around the country. Anne M. Gorsuch,
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, recently said there were
12,000 of these ''ticking time bombs''; other experts have put the number of
toxic dumps at 50,000 or more. There is little if any information on the content
of most of these sites. The E.P.A. has just issued a list of 418 ''priority''
sites, but it has just begun to act on some of these areas.

Administration officials and chemical companies contend that the dioxins in the
waste dumps do not constitute a serious threat because they adsorb strongly to
soil and are not water-soluble; therefore, the officials say, they are unlikely
to seep into water tables.

But some environmentalists contend that other solvents in the dumps could flush
the dioxin into the water.

Some Use Continues

Relatively high levels of dioxin have been found in gulls' eggs and fish taken
from the Great Lakes and in waterfowl in the North Central states. Dr. Young
noted that dioxins tend to collect in silt and are ingested by bottom-dwelling
animals like crayfish and turtles.

The spraying of Agent Orange and other pesticides and herbicides introduced
dioxin directly into the environment. Some of these uses have been suspended by
Government order, but other applications continue. Industry officials and some
Administration authorities argue that dioxin breaks down rapidly in sunlight and
therefore disappears quickly from the surface.

But surface contamination found in Missouri after many years has led other
scientists to question whether sunlight does cause the deadly substance to
disappear. And the manufacturing of some other products still in use forms
dioxins as byproducts.

Another route by which dioxin can enter the environment is through fires
involving transformers or other electrical equipment containing polychlorinated
biphenyls, or PCB's. When burned at low temperatures, these release substances
called ''furans,'' which are closely related to dioxins, according to scientists
at the E.P.A.

One of the scientists said that such a fire several years ago in a Government
office building in Binghamton, N.Y., produced ''maybe the only building in the
country where you can't find a single cockroach.'' The building has stood empty
since.

Released From Combustion

Fires or explosions at plants that produce pesticides, herbicides and other
products that involve dioxin, like the explosion at the Hoffmann-LaRoche plant
in Seveso, Italy, on July 10, 1976, can also provide a path through which dioxin
enters the environment.

In 1980 a study by scientists of the Dow Chemical Company suggested that dioxin
could be released from the combustion of organic materials. They found dioxins
in car mufflers, fireplace soot, charcoal-grilled steaks, cigarette smoke and a
variety of other sources.

Etcyl Blair and Perry J. Gehring, Dow scientists and officers, said in a
telephone interview that while it was true that dioxin was present in the
environment and was highly toxic, it did not constitute a serious problem.
''There is a difference between toxicity and hazard,'' Dr. Blair said. ''Just
because it is a risk doesn't mean you are in danger.'' He asserted that there
were no cases where exposure levels had proved to be a hazard to humans and
added, ''Statements about how much of the stuff can kill so many people are just
not productive.''

No Serious Illnesses

The Dow officials said that employees working with dioxin in the 1960's had
developed chloracne, a skin disease but that surveillance of the workers had
turned up no pattern of serious illness.

There appears to be no agreement in among scientists on the health effects of
dioxin where it is known to have entered the environment in substantial
quantity: Missouri, Love Canal, Vietnam and Seveso.

But Dr. Henry Falk, chief of the special studies branch of the Federal Centers
for Disease Control, remarked that dioxin contamination was ''very much regarded
as a significant public health problem that needs to be handled with extreme
care.''

More Russell Blisses

''There undoubtedly are other Russell Blisses around the country,'' Dr. Falk
said. ''We haven't systematically approached all of the past producers to
identify where their products are. That would really be an extensive job.''

He also said that the acute effects were not the only problem created by dioxin
in the environment. ''There is a lot of uncertainty about the long-term effects
on people,'' he said.

Dr. Halperin of the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health said,
''In an occupational setting, exposure to dioxins is clearly a problem.'' He
explained that data collected by Swedish epidemiologists as well as his own
studies suggested that exposed workers faced a substantial risk of soft-tissue
sarcoma, a malignant growth.

''What we can say about dioxin,'' Dr. Halperin said, ''is that it is an
extremely toxic agent whose long-term consequences are only beginning to be
understood.''

Regulation Called Faulty

Mr. Fortuna, of the Subcommittee on Commerce, Transportation and Tourism,
asserted, ''The regulatory structure protecting people from dioxins is full of
gaps.'' He noted that dioxin was not covered under the Resources Conservation
and Recovery Act, which requires producers, transporters and disposers of
hazardous wastes to leave a ''paper trail'' of reports and manifests so that the
materials can be traced and the laws on safe handling and disposal can be
enforced.

Miss Lavelle and Mr. Hedeman of the E.P.A. said the rules were being changed to
include dioxin in the coverage of the hazardous waste law. Meanwhile, they said,
dioxin is controlled under the Toxic Substances Control Act, which requires that
the agency be given 60 days' notice before the substance is moved.

Mr. Fortuna and other critics said current controls were completely inadequate,
an assertion the agency disputes. But, even within the agency, some officials
say the Reagan Administration has been slow to respond to the dioxin problem and
did so only in response to the public outcry that followed the publicity given
to the contamination in Missouri.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Representative James J. Florio

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NEW VIETNAM SCHOLARSHIP

BYLINE: By Fox Butterfield; Fox Butterfield, who is The Times's Boston bureau
chief, was a Times correspondent in Vietnam between 1971 and 1973. He was one of
the contributors to the series of Times articles based on the Pentagon Papers
when they were first released to the public, and he covered the fall of Saigon.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 12857 words


Ten years ago today, I stood on the floodlit tarmac of Tan Son Nhut air base and
watched as a group of 27 American prisoners of war were delivered to freedom by
United States Army helicopters. The men had been picked up from a
Communistcontrolled rubber plantation near the Cambodian border, and their
arrival was the first tangible benefit for Americans of the Paris peace accords,
signed in late January.

It was an emotional moment. Gen. Frederick C. Weyand, the last commander of
United States forces in Vietnam, draped his arm around an Air Force colleague
and confided, in tones just loud enough for me to hear, ''It's the greatest day
we've ever had in Vietnam.''

There was a kind of resignation and finality about the remark, like a losing
football team salvaging a share of its pride with a meaningless touchdown in the
final moments of the game. So it was with Vietnam. With the signing of the Paris
agreement and the return of our P.O.W.'s, we withdrew not only the last American
combat forces from Vietnam, but also our slender remaining interest in the
country.

The war itself, of course, sputtered on for another two years, until Saigon's
stunning collapse in April 1975. But Americans went into a trance of collective
amnesia. The Vietnam War was such an agonizing, divisive and baffling experience
that we somehow resolved simply to forget it. Unlike the fall of Nationalist
China to Mao Zedong in 1949, there were no postwar recriminations, no blame for
who lost Vietnam. The shock had been so great that nobody wanted to know. As a
result, Vietnam became not only the longest war in our history and the first war
the United States had lost - it was also the most misunderstood war.

The big questions went unasked and unanswered: How did we get involved in
Vietnam? Why did 57,939 Americans die there? Why did the Communists win? What
were the lessons of the war?

But now, a decade after the last American troops left Saigon, Vietnam is
sparking renewed interest - though without the explosive rancor of the 1960's
and early 70's. The hottest star on television is Tom Selleck, who plays Magnum,
an amiable private eye and Vietnam veteran whose exploits often involve
flashbacks to his combat days in ''Nam.'' Public Television is planning an
ambitious 13-hour series on the war, which it will show within a year. The
dedication of the polished black granite Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington
last November finally gave Vietnam veterans a respected if ambiguous place
alongside the monuments to Jefferson, Lincoln and Washington.

Ultimately, the most important development may be the emergence of a small group
of scholars, journalists and military specialists who have started to look
afresh at the war. Drawing on new disclosures from Hanoi, the opening of
documents in the Presidential libraries, the Pentagon Papers (which are still
the best published source material on the war) and memoirs of some of the
participants in the war, these writers have worked quietly, with the general
public largely unaware of their research. For most of these scholars, their
re-examination is not to prove whether Vietnam was or was not a ''noble cause,''
in President Reagan's phrase, but to find out what really happened and why. In
the process, they are challenging some of the most cherished beliefs of both the
right and the left.

Among the new findings are the following: As opposed to the public caricature of
him as a warmonger, Lyndon Johnson was actually reluctant to become more deeply
involved in Vietnam. He sent American troops to Vietnam not out of machismo, but
out of fear that if he ''lost'' South Vietnam, Congress would not pass his Great
Society programs.

Contrary to the American popular assumption that we could easily win, American
Presidents from John Kennedy to Richard Nixon were never confident about our
chances and, in fact, never had a plan to win in Vietnam. Instead, they did only
the minimum necessary not to lose Vietnam during their own tenure in the White
House. They tried to fight a war on the cheap against a foe, North Vietnam,
whose commitment was total. Under the restrictions imposed by the Presidents,
some American generals knew almost from the start that they could not win the
war. Without permission to cut off Hanoi's use of Laos and Cambodia, they
realized, the critical strategic initiative remained in Hanoi's hands. Many
officers now believe the Joint Chiefs of Staff should have resigned in protest.
Both hawks and liberals were wrong about the Communists in Vietnam. While
successive Administrations did not understand that the Communists' appeal had
its roots in centuries of Vietnamese xenophobia, many antiwar critics - like
Frances FitzGerald in her bestselling ''Fire in the Lake'' - over-glamorized the
Vietcong, the Southern insurgents, and underestimated the role that North
Vietnam played in leading the war in the South. The 1968 Tet offensive was a
disastrous military defeat for the Communists, as Gen. William C. Westmoreland
claimed, though most Americans regarded it as a setback for the United States.
It was particularly brutal for the Vietcong, who bore the brunt of the fighting
and who suffered such losses that thereafter they had to be replaced by North
Vietnamese regulars, turning the conflict into a war between North and South.

After Tet - though most Americans at home had given up on the war -the
cumulative weight of American firepower and spending in Vietnam dramatically
undercut support for the Communists. As a result, the United States was probably
in a stronger position in Vietnam in 1972, just before the Paris peace accords,
than at any previous point in the war. The antiwar movement did not have as much
impact on American policy as is popularly thought. Lyndon Johnson's decision in
March 1968 to de-escalate the war was not so much a response to the peace
movement as a result of disaffection within his Administration over the
disastrous costs of the war. The protesters' main contribution, in fact, may
have been to help elect Richard Nixon twice - in 1968 over Hubert Humphrey and
in 1972 over George McGovern.

A NEW GENERATION DECRIES SCHOLARLY ARROGANCE

The picture of the Vietnam conflict that is emerging from the new research shows
a war that was more complex, more morally ambiguous, than either the doves or
the hawks had maintained. Of the war's many ironical twists, few match the
postwar predicament of Communist Vietnam.

''It was a war nobody won,'' says Stanley Karnow, a syndicated columnist, who
covered Vietnam for several national publications. ''North Vietnam won, of
course, but it also lost.'' Mr. Karnow - who is chief correspondent for Public
Television's series on Vietnam and who is writing a book to accompany it - was
in Hanoi in 1981 to film some interviews for the series. He remembers asking
Prime Minister Pham Van Dong what Vietnam's main problem now is. ''He laughed,''
recalls Mr. Karnow. '' 'That's a stupid question. Look around, you can see for
yourself what problems we're having.' ''

Hanoi's grim postwar record has raised a serious problem for scholars. How much
should it be taken into account when the war is analyzed? Can events during the
war be interpreted in the light of the Communists' postwar detention of 50,000
to 100,000 former supporters of the Saigon regime in ''re-education'' camps, the
corruption and economic mismanagement by Communist officials, the invasion of
Cambodia, the persecution of Vietnam's large Chinese ethnic minority and the
flight of the boat people?

David W.P. Elliott, an assistant professor of political science at Pomona
College in California, believes that Vietnam's postwar record is irrelevant to
understanding the war. ''We shouldn't commit the historicist fallacy of reading
the present into the past,'' says Mr. Elliott. ''In 1975, the people wanted
peace.'' Like many of the new scholars, Mr. Elliott's interest in Vietnam goes
back to the 1960's. He learned Vietnamese in the Army and later did research on
the Vietcong for the Rand Corporation, a private research organization working
mostly for the Defense Department.

One of the few Vietnamese now teaching in the United States, Hue-Tam Ho Tai, an
assistant professor of history at Harvard, agrees that the Communists' postwar
failures ''do not vindicate America's crusade in Vietnam.'' For a part of
Vietnam's troubles today were caused by the dislocations of the war. But Mrs.
Tai, who came to the United States as a student at Brandeis, maintains that what
has happened since 1975 offers an important perspective.

''During the war,'' she says, ''people looked at the Communists and said they
were dedicated, driven and omnicompetent. Now we see them as corrupt and
incompetent.'' Did the Communists change so much after 1975 or were Americans
grossly mistaken in their earlier impressions?

Mrs. Tai believes that many Americans allowed their political passions to cloud
their intellect. At the time of the war, she says, ''it was fashionable to think
that a guerrilla movement needed popular support to succeed, and that if the
Vietcong survived, therefore they must have popular support.'' But that, Mrs.
Tai contends, was a fallacious argument. ''You can see how wrong it was now,
because the Communists certainly aren't popular in the South.'' Or, she
suggests, look at Cambodia. ''Pol Pot came to power as a guerrilla, but looking
at what he did to his country, you'd think twice before saying he was popular.''

Mrs. Tai herself cannot be accused of being an inveterate anti-Communist. Her
father was a founder of the Trotskyite party in Vietnam; an aunt was a senior
official in the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government. But she has
long had reservations about those antiwar protesters who were too ready to turn
the Vietnamese Communists into paragons of virtue and who refused to accept a
view of the war that was not black and white.

At Brandeis, she remembers, a professor asked her in class what the Vietnamese
thought of the war. When she said that it was a difficult question to answer,
since the view of an intellectual was probably very different from that of a
peasant, the professor became angry. ''Later,'' she says, ''a student told me
that my views didn't count because I was a bourgeois. I said, 'I'm sorry; I'm a
human being. There are several hundred thousand members of the middle class in
Vietnam.'

''

This kind of academic narrow-mindedness, in Mrs. Tai's view, contributed to
American misunderstanding of Vietnam just as much as ignorance in the White
House and the State Department.

Until quite recently, Vietnam has been a giant black hole in American academia.
A survey by The New York Times in 1970 found that there was no scholar in the
United States who devoted most of his or her time to studying North Vietnam;
there was no American university with a tenured professorship in Vietnamese
studies, and there were fewer than 30 students in the country studying the
Vietnamese language. By comparison, there were three times that many studying
Thai. According to the Social Science Research Council in New York, from 1951 to
1981 a total of 820 Americans applied to it for financial aid to work on Ph.D.
dissertations in Southeast Asia. Of these, only 33 were for Vietnam, almost the
same number as for Burma.

John K. Fairbank, professor emeritus of history at Harvard and the man generally
recognized as the founder of modern Chinese studies in the United States, refers
to this lack of expertise on Vietnam as an academic Pearl Harbor. One reason for
this blind spot, he suggests, was that the French excluded American missionaries
and businessmen from Vietnam, and Americans therefore did not have a personal
stake in Vietnam.

However, by the time the United States became militarily involved, many
academics considered the war so immoral that dispassionate analysis of the
conflict became almost impossible. Only a handful of scholars actually went to
Vietnam to do research there.

One of them was Samuel L. Popkin, now an associate professor of political
science at the University of California at San Diego. After he spent time in
1966 conducting interviews in Vietnamese villages, he was treated as a pariah
when he returned to Harvard, where he was then an assistant professor.

His problem: He had returned from Vietnam with a complex view. He did not
approve of the way the Americans were fighting the war - ''this crazy chasing
around in the villages with our massive firepower looking for body counts'' -
but he did not find that the Communists were the popular good guys of American
antiwar mythology.

Mr. Popkin's friends in Cambridge didn't want to hear about this. He got back in
his colleagues' good graces only after he was jailed in 1972 for refusing to
testify before a special grand jury set up by the White House to find out who
leaked the Pentagon Papers - the Pentagon's massive top-secret study of American
involvement in Indochina from World War II to May 1968 - to The New York Times.

Douglas Pike, who throughout the war years was the resident expert in the United
States Embassy in Saigon on the Vietnamese Communists, remembers a similar
encounter with academic close-mindedness when he was on leave in Cambridge,
Mass., in 1964 to write a book about the Vietcong. He had been invited to take
part in an antiwar teach-in and found himself debating with a professor from the
Harvard Dental School. ''The professor really didn't have his facts straight, so
I asked him if he had ever been to Vietnam,'' Mr. Pike recalls.

'' 'No, that's not necessary,' the professor replied. ''So I said, 'I've never
been to dental school, but suppose I give you a root canal.' '' 'That's
different,' he said. ''I replied, 'How at Harvard, of all places, can you say
knowledge is not important?' '' Mr. Pike has now retired from the Government and
is the first director of the Indochina studies program at the University of
California at Berkeley -an appointment that would have been unthinkable a decade
ago at a campus that was in the vanguard of the antiwar movement. Mr. Pike has
just completed a book on the North Vietnamese Army, which he wrote after
discovering to his amazement that there was no comparable study. ''We never even
knew the names of North Vietnam's generals or what their strategic thinking
was,'' he says. ''It shows how ignorant and arrogant we were. We just assumed we
would win.'' Mr. Pike's presence at Berkeley, where he is setting up a
two-million-page archive on Indochina, is testament to Vietnam's having quietly
made the transition from controversial public issue to history. Was victory by
the Communists inevitable? Since the end of the war, some of the best new
scholarship has focused on the origins of the Communist movement in Vietnam and
its reasons for success. According to one school of thought, the Communists'
early capture of the nationalist issue made their eventual victory a foregone
conclusion. David G. Marr - a visiting professor at Cornell last fall who is now
teaching at the Australian National University in Canberra - has shown how the
Communists under Ho Chi Minh were able to build their strength in the 1930's and
40's by appealing to the centuriesold tradition of Vietnamese nationalism. Mr.
Marr's two books, ''Vietnamese Anti-Colonialism, 1885-1925'' (1971) and
''Vietnamese Tradition on Trial, 1920-1945'' (1981), are widely regarded as
models of scholarly research.

In his view, ''the most important development of the entire conflict was the
August 1945 revolution,'' when the Vietminh (the Communist-led guerrillas who
had fought against the French) under Ho Chi Minh seized Hanoi and proclaimed an
independent Vietnam before the French could re-establish their presence at the
end of World War II.

''Everything done after that by the French and the Americans was an attempt to
turn back the clock, but they couldn't succeed,'' adds Mr. Marr, a former
leading antiwar activist who is one of the few professors with military
experience in Vietnam; he learned Vietnamese in the Marines. ''The outcome was
predetermined. For the Communists were able to gain and hold legitimacy as a
patriotic front.''

Says Professor Elliott of Pomona College, ''In 1945, the Vietminh clearly had
overwhelming popular support - even the United States at first recognized this''
(an O.S.S. team had worked with Ho at the time). ''The Vietminh,'' he continues,
''won the war again in 1954 at Dien Bien Phu, and the Communists won it a third
time in early 1965, before Johnson's commitment of U.S. ground forces.''

Mr. Popkin, among others, disagrees with this kind of deterministic
interpretation. ''It's anti-intellectual; it doesn't allow for the normal
process of change which occurs in history,'' he counters. ''If you argue that
the Communists should have won the war in 1975 because they were the most
popular group in 1945, does that mean that we should have a Democratic President
today because Roosevelt was elected in 1944?'' Mr. Popkin himself is a liberal
Democrat.

A very different view of the relations between Peking and Hanoi is also
emerging. Early in the war, some Administration officials, like then Secretary
of State Dean Rusk, contended that American commitment was necessary because
North Vietnam was acting as an agent of Chinese Communist aggression. But if
American diplomacy was able to salvage anything of value from the war, it was
improved relations with China. The split between Hanoi and Peking grew out of
centuries of enmity between the two countries and China's growing concern that
the Vietnamese Communists were aligning themselves with the Soviet Union,
China's erstwhile ally.

The break between North Vietnam and China has produced intriguing new evidence
about another long-disputed topic: Who was responsible for failing to hold the
1956 elections, which, under the terms of the 1954 Geneva Conference that ended
the French Indochina war, would have reunified North and South Vietnam?

In the past, many liberal antiwar critics blamed the Eisenhower Administration
for encouraging President Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam to ignore the
elections. They argued that it was only because of the provision for the
elections that Ho Chi Minh had agreed to the temporary division of Vietnam at
Geneva, and that when the elections were not held, the Communists had little
choice but to resume the war. But Vietnam's leaders now claim that the Chinese
actually cut off military aid to them in 1954 to compel them to negotiate with
the French and accept the division of the country. Pham Van Dong, Vietnam's
Prime Minister, told Mr. Karnow that he had said at the time: ''The Chinese have
betrayed us.'' And several scholars have found records indicating that Zhou
Enlai, China's Prime Minister, expected the separation of Vietnam to be long
lasting and turned down Ho's request in 1956 for help in arranging the
elections. This does not exonerate Washington for its role in discouraging the
elections, says Professor Tai, but it shows that the United States was not
alone.

Disclosures from Hanoi since 1975 are also making possible a reexamination of
the Vietcong's growth. During the war, the most influential academic account of
the origins of the National Liberation Front (N.L.F.), the formal name for the
Vietcong, was in a book by two Cornell professors, George McT. Kahin and John W.
Lewis, ''The United States in Vietnam.'' The authors argued forcefully that the
Vietcong was ''Southern rooted.''

After the Geneva settlement, the authors contended, the Communists withdrew all
their armed troops to the newly created North Vietnam, leaving behind only
political cadres. Hanoi favored only political, not armed, resistance to Ngo
Dinh Diem. But given the ''harshness and heavy-handedness of Diem's Government''
these Southerners ''lost patience with the Communist North'' and organized an
insurgency led by the N.L.F. ''Hanoi, despite its reluctance, was then obliged
to sanction the Southerners' actions.''

Professors Kahin and Lewis also asserted that there was no evidence that Hanoi
encouraged ''militant tactics by the Southerners'' until as late as September
1960, or, contrary to United States Government claims, that Hanoi directed the
formation of the N.L.F., which was a broad united front of Communist and
non-Communist organizations.

Scholars still agree that most of the early Vietcong were Southerners and that
there were factional disputes in Hanoi over how to pursue the insurgency during
the 1950's. But a history published by the People's Army of Vietnam in 1980,
titled ''The Anti-U.S. Resistance War for National Salvation, 1954-1975:
Military Events,'' contends that Hanoi played a large role in the development of
the Vietcong. The history records, for example, that as early as 1957 ''cadres
and men who remained behind'' in the South were able to form ''37 armed
companies.''

Moreover, the history also admits that in a secret directive by the North
Vietnamese Politburo in May 1959, Hanoi ordered its Southern supporters to
switch from political action to armed struggle. To provide help for the new
fighting, Hanoi established a special task force, code named Group 559, which
set up infiltration routes and moved ''people, weapons and supplies'' through
Laos into South Vietnam.

When the N.L.F. was proclaimed in December 1960, this official Communist history
goes on, it was done at the order of the party in Hanoi, and the Front's program
''followed the line delineated by our party.'' These actions marked a critical
turning point in the war, leading to the formation of bigger Vietcong units and
an increase in attacks on South Vietnamese Government posts. It was this
stepped-up activity that confronted President Kennedy when he took office in
1961 and led him to increase the number of American advisers in South Vietnam.

On another critical question, too, the Communists have been more candid since
the end of the war: When did they begin sending regular North Vietnamese troops
into the South?

Washington had long maintained that Hanoi started infiltrating its regular army
units in the fall of 1964, prompting President Johnson's decision to begin
bombing North Vietnam and then to dispatch American ground forces to South
Vietnam a few months later. Hanoi denied it had troops in the South until
virtually the end of the war. When I visited North Vietnam in 1969, Prime
Minister Pham Van Dong said with a straight face that there were no Northern
troops in the South. And antiwar activists dismissed State Department white
papers on Northern infiltration. But when Mr. Karnow interviewed officials in
Hanoi in 1981, they talked about enlarging the Ho Chi Minh Trail as early as
1964.

All this leads to another question raised by the new scholarship: Were
Americans, grown suspicious of their own Government, too eager to accept as
truth whatever the Vietnamese Communists said? Throughout the war, there was
heated debate over the degree of autonomy the N.L.F. enjoyed. Was it merely a
puppet of North Vietnam, as many American officials insisted, or was it an
independent organization, as the Communists claimed? The argument was important,
because if the N.L.F. was independent, there might had been a chance for a
negotiated settlement in the South.

Harrison E. Salisbury, who was among the first correspondents allowed to visit
Hanoi in late 1966, made a strong case for the independence of the N.L.F. in his
book ''Behind the Lines - Hanoi.'' The N.L.F., Mr. Salisbury wrote, ''had a
government. It had a cabinet ... its own troops, its own generals, its own petty
officials ... .''

From talks with an N.L.F. official in Hanoi, Mr. Salisbury said, he learned that
the Front got its weapons directly from the Soviet Union and China and did not
''utilize Hanoi as a middleman.'' ''All military decisions in the South were the
responsibility of the South.'' When Mr. Salisbury quizzed Prime Minister Dong on
what would happen when the war was over, the Prime Minister assured him that the
North would not annex the South: ''Reunification would only be by mutual
agreement.'' Mr. Salisbury came away convinced that American officials who
derided the N.L.F. were missing ''genuine possibilities'' for peace.

Asked recently if he might have been misled by the Communists, Mr. Salisbury
said, ''I'll stand by my reporting of the time.'' But, he added, he had been in
Hanoi in early 1967 and ''by the time the war finally ended the situation was so
vastly different that whatever had been said by myself, or Hanoi, or L.B.J. or
anybody in the N.L.F. really had very little validity.''

Since the war, some members of the N.L.F. have contended they themselves had
been deceived by Hanoi. Writing last fall in The New York Review of Books,
Truong Nhu Tang, the former Minister of Justice in the N.L.F.'s government and a
French-educated ''independent socialist,'' indicated that he joined the Vietcong
because he believed the Communists' promises that they would work for an
autonomous, democratic South. At the end of the war, Hanoi annexed the South and
the N.L.F. was disbanded.

At ''the simple farewell dinner'' held to disband the N.L.F. in 1976, Mr. Tang
recalled, neither the party nor the Government bothered to send a
representative. ''I was tragically wrong'' about the Communists, he wrote. ''The
North Vietnamese Communists, survivors of protracted, blood-drenched campaigns
against colonialism, interventionism and human oppression, became in their turn
colonialists, interventionists and architects of one of the world's most rigid
re-gimes.'' For the first time in Vietnam's history, Mr. Tang went on, people
risked their lives to flee the country -something they had not done under the
French or the Americans. Mr. Tang himself escaped by boat in 1979 and now lives
in Paris.

American antiwar writers had envisioned a far happier future for Vietnam. One
such writer was Frances FitzGerald, who wrote ''Fire in the Lake,'' a book that
was both the most widely read and most highly acclaimed volume to come out of
the war. (It won the Pulitzer Prize, the National Book Award and the Bancroft
Prize in history in 1973.) In the lyrical closing passage, Miss FitzGerald
prophesied: ''Pressure is building towards one of those sudden historical shifts
when 'individualism' and its attendant corruption gives way to the discipline of
the revolutionary community. When this shift takes place ... it will simply mean
that the moment has arrived for the narrow flame of revolution to cleanse the
lake of Vietnamese society from the corruption and disorder of the American
war.''

''Fire in the Lake'' had its critics from the start. Mr. Marr, the authority on
Vietnamese nationalism, pointed out in a scholarly review at the time of the
book's publication that Miss FitzGerald did not know Vietnamese and charged that
her depiction of Vietnamese national character was ''little short of
disastrous.'' Mr. Popkin at San Diego suspects she was ''swept away by a love
affair with the N.L.F.'' and that her belief that the Vietnamese would be
happier under the Communists was ''racist and condescending.''

Miss FitzGerald rejects the charge that she was too romantic about the
Communists. ''I'd stick with it,'' she says. ''I think it's written in a rather
romantic style; one chooses rhetorical modes to make people understand certain
things.'' As for Vietnam's terrible postwar troubles, she insists they are the
result of the damage caused by the war, though she concedes the Communists have
proved inept at running the economy.

POLITICAL COMPROMISES

What went wrong on the American side? Today, the one common note sounded by
virtually all scholars is the need to start searching for the answer with
President Truman's decision in 1945 to reverse Washington's earlier support for
Ho Chi Minh. It was a choice made out of concern for bolstering France in Europe
against the looming Soviet menace.

''In class,'' says Robert A. Scalapino, director of the Institute of East Asian
Studies at the University of California at Berkeley, ''I always stress that the
history of American involvement in Vietnam was a series of decisions which
cumulatively narrowed the choices for each succeeding President. No President
was able to begin afresh with Vietnam.''

Professor Scalapino had a reputation as a conservative during the war, but
Professor George Kahin, who was an outspoken critic of the war, and was until
recently director of Cornell's Southeast Asia program, shares his view. In a new
study of American involvement in Vietnam from 1945 to 1967 -which he says is
based on trips to Vietnam in the 60's and extensive original research in
Government files - Professor Kahin claims he will prove that Washington actually
began giving secret military aid to the French for Vietnam in the late 1940's.

''This aid was officially shown in the records as going to Europe, but it was
subverted to Vietnam by the French with U.S. understanding,'' says Professor
Kahin. Most history books date the origin of American involvement in Vietnam
from a decision by President Truman's National Security Council in 1950 to
provide military aid for the French war in Indochina.

Another key turning point whose significance was not appreciated at the time,
historians now believe, was the 1963 coup against President Diem. Because the
Kennedy Administration sanctioned the coup, Washington became morally and
politically responsible for all the regimes that succeeded it, wrote Larry
Berman in a new book, ''Planning a Tragedy: The Americanization of the War in
Vietnam'' (1982).

Mr. Berman, an associate professor of political science at the University of
California at Davis, is one of several writers now offering a more sympathetic
portrait of Lyndon Johnson's role in the war. His book focuses on the
decision-making process that led up to President Johnson's announcement on July
28, 1965, that he was increasing the number of American troops in Vietnam from
75,000 to 125,000, with additional forces to be deployed as necessary. This move
is generally regarded as the critical decision that led to open-ended
escalation.

Like a number of the new scholars, Mr. Berman was not trained in Vietnamese
studies but is a specialist on the American Presidency. His book is based on
recently declassified White House documents he found while doing other research
in the Johnson Library in Austin, Tex.

Nowhere in the documents was there evidence that President Johnson had a plan
either for winning the war or for getting out. The reason for the absence of any
coherent strategic plan is that President Johnson was trying to save his Great
Society, not Vietnam. By an accident of history, in July 1965 both Medicare and
the Civil Rights Act of 1965 were at crucial stages in Congressional committees;
the Model Cities Act and the Higher Education Act were soon to follow. Lyndon
Johnson was caught in a dilemma. ''He didn't want to do anything to jeopardize
them,'' Mr. Berman wrote. ''He really wanted to be the next face on Mount
Rushmore.'' But the Communists were close to victory in Vietnam in early 1965,
and President Johnson could not leave himself open to a charge by conservatives
that he lost the war. On the other hand, if he took the steps the Pentagon urged
- mobilizing the Reserves, for instance - Congressional liberals might have
retaliated by withdrawing support for his Great Society programs.

''So Johnson chose a middle course, to fight the war at the lowest possible
cost, on the cheap,'' Mr. Berman went on. ''And he lied about what he was doing.
He staged a debate to create a war climate, so that when he announced the number
of troops was only going up from 75,000 to 125,000, he looked like a moderate.
But he knew there would be 300,000 troops in Vietnam in 1966.''

''We get a tragic historical figure who had to choose between guns and butter
and couldn't,'' Mr. Berman continued. ''In the end, he neither settled the war
nor got his Great Society, since as he fought in Vietnam, it drained the money
needed for his domestic programs.''

Mr. Berman's thesis is similar to that in a book widely regarded by scholars as
a seminal study of America's role in Vietnam - ''The Irony of Vietnam: The
System Worked'' (1979), by Leslie H. Gelb, now a correspondent for The New York
Times, and Richard K. Betts, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. For
this work, the authors drew heavily on the Pentagon Papers, which provided
critical new groundwork for analyzing Washington's decision-making process. Mr.
Gelb himself was director of the Pentagon Papers project within the Defense
Department.

Mr. Gelb and Mr. Betts challenge the old liberal view put forward in books, such
as David Halberstam's best seller ''The Best and the Brightest,'' that the
United States stumbled into a quagmire in Vietnam through hubris and
miscalculation.

Instead, they argue, Washington's planning machinery worked well, providing
facts and options for the President. Rarely were the policy makers deluded that
the odds for success in Vietnam were high. The trouble was that the Presidents,
from Harry Truman to Richard Nixon, were afraid both to risk losing Vietnam to
the Communists and to accept the decisive recommendations of their military
advisers, which could lead to war with China or a domestic backlash. So they
chose the in-between option, doing only what was necessary to stave off a
Communist takeover at the time. This prevented a Communist victory till 1975.
But their policies of gradual escalation played into the hands of the North
Vietnamese, whose strategy was to drag out the war and make it increasingly
costly to the United States.

In effect, the Presidents chose to ''nibble the bullet rather than bite it,''
Mr. Betts said at a conference on ''The U.S. Experience in Vietnam'' held last
month at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington.

Another factor in Washington's decision making, scholars now say, was that in
the 1960's American political scientists were fascinated by theories of how the
United States could effectively fight limited wars, as opposed to all-out
conventional or nuclear wars. Theorists explored the question of how a nation
could use force or the threat of force to compel its adversary to back down.
Implicit in their theories was the idea that it was possible to signal your
opponent by gradually increasing threats.

In another new study, ''When Governments Collide: Coercion and Diplomacy in the
Vietnam Conflict, 1964-1968'' (1980), Wallace J. Thies has shown how President
Johnson and his advisers believed they could ''fine-tune'' the bombing and their
peace offers to ''signal'' Hanoi to abandon its support for the Vietcong. But
President Johnson's program suffered from two serious flaws, argues Mr. Thies, a
professor of political science at Berkeley.

First of all, in a bureaucracy as large as the American Government, it proved
impossible to ''orchestrate'' our bombing and diplomacy. For example, the
selection and timing of bombing targets often depended on extraneous factors
like the weather; coordination between the Air Force and diplomats was
difficult. As a result, what Washington intended to be a show of firmness often
appeared to Hanoi to be vacillation or weakness.

Second, Mr. Thies contends, Washington had little understanding of politics in
Hanoi and did not realize that the dominant group in the leadership, headed by
Le Duan, the party First Secretary, had staked their careers on victory in the
South after prolonged factional debate. By 1965, these men had already worked at
infiltration and organizing the war in the South for many years. Like their
American counterparts, they could not afford to be charged with losing South
Vietnam.

Compared with the numerous new studies on the origins of American involvement in
Vietnam, there has been little written on the war after 1966, and especially
after the Tet offensive in 1968, largely because of the unavailability of
materials. At the Johnson Library, relatively few documents have been
declassified for the period after 1965, and given Federal budget cutbacks and
the Reagan Administration's tightened procedures for declassification, library
officials say further progress will be slow.

The situation is even worse for the Nixon years. There is no equivalent of the
Pentagon Papers for Mr. Nixon's Presidency and there is no Nixon Presidential
library yet. So scholars are heavily dependent on the memoirs of Mr. Nixon and
his Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.

One of the best accounts, however, has been pieced together by George C.
Herring, a professor of American history at the University of Kentucky and
author of ''America's Longest War: The United States and Vietnam, 1950-1975''
(1979). Mr. Herring believes that President Nixon, like his predecessors, early
on rejected calls for withdrawal - which he saw as dishonorable - and appeals
for sharply increased escalation, feeling that he could solve a riddle that had
baffled earlier Presidents.

Mr. Nixon's eventual strategy - Vietnamization -emerged on an improvised basis
without a thorough policy review, Mr. Herring contends. In a paper written for
the recent conference on Vietnam in Washington, Mr. Herring charged that during
the first year of his Administration Mr. Nixon's policy may have been ''a
classic case of the President appeasing various bureaucratic constituencies by
giving them a bit of what they wanted.'' The military got to bomb North
Vietnam's sanctuaries in Cambodia; Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird got a
speeded-up pull-out of American troops from Vietnam to appease American opinion
(with Vietnamization, the war was turned over to the South Vietnamese Army -
ARVN -which was given new training and improved weapons) and the State
Department got negotiations with Hanoi. But Mr. Herring concludes that President
Nixon's plan did not provide either enough force to compel North Vietnam to
negotiate or sufficient concessions to entice Hanoi to the table. Like the
improvised strategies of the Johnson era, ''it offered only extended
stalemate.''

That there could be a negotiated end to the fighting was, throughout the war,
one of the most consistent beliefs of both policy makers in Washington and their
critics. But Allan E. Goodman, a professor at Georgetown University, believes
this was naive. In another of the new books, ''The Lost Peace: America's Search
for a Negotiated Settlement of the Vietnam War'' (1978), he argues that ''The
real obstacle to a negotiated settlement was probably not Washington's
diplomacy,'' but ''as Hanoi maintained ever since its first direct conversation
with Washington in 1962, the liberation of South Vietnam was an absolutely
indispensable prerequisite'' for a settlement.

In other words, North Vietnam was not prepared to compromise. Hanoi was further
encouraged when American spokesmen assured it that American bombing of North
Vietnam was not intended to destroy the country. The North Vietnamese were aware
that the longer the war went on the more painful it was for the United States.
So Hanoi waited for Washington to make the concessions.

In the end, this was what happened. ''Nearly every time Washington made a
negotiating offer to Hanoi, the U.S. terms softened,'' Mr. Goodman wrote, until
finally, in the Paris talks in 1972, Mr. Kissinger agreed that the United States
would withdraw from Vietnam without obtaining a comparable pledge from Hanoi.

Without access to more documents from the period, it is impossible to judge if
President Nixon and Mr. Kissinger believed the Paris accords gave South Vietnam
a real chance to survive or whether they felt the agreement was merely a
face-saving ''decent interval'' during which the United States could disentangle
itself from Vietnam. Either way, America's exit from Vietnam proved as stumbling
as its entry.

THE MILITARY CONFUSION

A conundrum that has baffled a generation of American military officers is this:
The Army won every battle it fought against the Vietcong and the North
Vietnamese, inflicting terrible losses on them. Yet Hanoi emerged the victor.
When Col. Harry G. Summers Jr. was in Hanoi in 1975 as part of the American
military delegation overseeing the Peace Accords, he mentioned to a North
Vietnamese officer that the Communists had never defeated the Americans on the
battlefield. The North Vietnamese colonel replied: ''That may be so, but it is
also irrelevant.''

In the years since, Colonel Summers, an instructor at the Army War College at
Carlisle, Pa., has found that, despite the welter of writing about Vietnam, few
scholars have re-examined the military side of the war. To try to fill this
void, Colonel Summers, who fought in Korea and served two tours in Vietnam, has
turned out one of the most thoughtful and provocative military studies of the
war, titled ''On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War'' (1982).

Unlike some senior American commanders, Colonel Summers does not blame the
politicians, the protesters or the press for America's defeat. Instead, he finds
flaws in the military's own approach. Most important, the Army simply lacked a
strategy - an unforgivable sin for a soldier.

Instead of having a strategy, Colonel Summers argues, military and policy
planners got carried away by the mystique of fighting a counterinsurgency war.
In Colonel Summers's view, North Vietnam was the real opponent, but because
Hanoi hid its involvement behind a smokescreen of guerrillas, the United States
got tied down in fighting those insurgents. ''We were like a bull charging the
toreador's cape,'' he comments.

The result was that the Army got caught up in General Westmoreland's
search-and-destroy operations, which cost the lives of many American soldiers,
outraged public opinion and did not deal with the real source of Communist
strength - North Vietnam. Because of their helicopters and firepower, American
forces may have had the tactical initiative, but they confused that with the
strategic initiative, which Hanoi had all along.

Operating from their sanctuaries in Laos and Cambodia, the Communists controlled
the tempo of the fighting, and no matter how many Communists the Americans
killed, success depended on the number of men Hanoi started down the Ho Chi Minh
Trail. In this war of attrition, North Vietnam could not be beaten as long as it
was willing to pay the price.

Where most critics of American military policy in Vietnam have argued that the
United States tried to fight a guerrilla war using conventional tactics, Colonel
Summers contends - in one of his most controversial points -that it had always
been a conventional war. The French in Indochina fought against a guerrilla
army, he admits, but Hanoi's use of the Vietcong as proxies obfuscated the
issue.

The United States could have had a strategy, Colonel Summers maintains. Since
our goal was much the same as it had been in Korea, he believes, to stop the
expansion of a Communist state, we could have pursued a Korean solution -
cutting off North Vietnam from the South.

Quoting a plan first advanced by retired Gen. Bruce Palmer Jr., a former deputy
commander of the American Army in Vietnam, Colonel Summers suggests that, with
an expanded naval blockade, the army should have driven across the Demilitarized
Zone between the two Vietnams and then cut through Laos to the Thai border,
setting up defensive positions.

''This would have had a number of advantages,'' says Colonel Summers. It would
have required far fewer American troops. We could have fought on the defensive,
making maximum use of our best asset, our firepower, and reducing our
casualties. And it would have left rooting out the guerrillas to the South
Vietnamese Army, which was best equipped to do it, and would have kept Americans
out of the villages.

Colonel Summers rejects the argument that this strategy would have violated the
neutrality of Laos and Cambodia, which he thinks was a fiction. ''The North
Vietnamese never made a secret they were fighting an Indochina war,'' he says,
and, in fact, the new North Vietnamese history of the war admits that Hanoi had
''volunteers'' in Laos as early as 1959. ''Neutrality was a myth we inflicted on
ourselves,'' says Colonel Summers. He also quotes from the Hague Convention of
1907: ''A neutral country has the obligation not to allow its territory to be
used by a belligerent. If the neutral country is unwilling or unable to prevent
this, the other belligerent has the right to take appropriate counteraction.''

Colonel Summers also contends that the generals should have insisted that
President Johnson get a Congressional declaration of war before committing
American troops to Vietnam. President Johnson's attempt to fight the war on the
cheap, without telling the public about its real costs, led to the credibility
gap and helped spread the antiwar movement.

It was this lack of popular support for the war which also fostered the idea
that the Vietnam War was more immoral than other wars, Colonel Summers believes.
''People talk about the picture of the little girl running down the road who got
napalmed,'' he says. ''But tens of thousands of little girls got incinerated in
the fire-bomb raids on Dresden and Tokyo in World War II and we don't remember.
The difference is we believed World War II was legitimate.''

To underscore this point, Colonel Summers quotes from an article by General
Weyand, the last American commander in Vietnam: ''As military professionals we
must speak out, we must counsel our political leaders and alert the American
public that there is no such thing as a 'splendid little war.' ... War is death
and destruction. The American way of war is particularly violent, deadly and
dreadful. We believe in using 'things' - artillery, bombs, massive firepower -in
order to conserve our soldiers' lives. ... The Army must make the price of
involvement clear before we get involved, so that America can weigh the probable
costs of involvement against the dangers of noninvolvement. For there are worse
things than war.'' Like a number of officers, Colonel Summers raises the
question of why some members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff did not resign in
protest when they sensed the lack of a coherent strategy and President Johnson's
attempt to fight the war with limited means.

At the recent conference on Vietnam in Washington, retired Brig. Gen. Edwin H.
Simmons, the director of Marine Corps History and Museums, said that he had
asked some of the Chiefs the question himself. ''The inevitable answer is: They
could work better from within,'' said General Simmons, who served two tours in
Vietnam with the Marines. It was one of the distortions of the Vietnam War, he
said, that some officers allowed the honored principle of civilian control of
the military to come to mean civilian leadership and management of the military
on the combat level in the field. Officers at all levels of command ''used
civilian control as an exoneration from moral responsibility,'' he charged.

General Simmons is currently supervising a 10-volume official history of the
Marines in Vietnam, one of a series of such projects by each of the armed
services. Taken together, they consti-tute the most ambitious and detailed work
now being done on the war. The largest in scope is a planned 20-volume series by
the Army's Center of Military History in Washington.

The Army's earlier 80-volume history of World War II has received high marks
from scholars for its integrity. But Vincent H. Demma -one of 10 historians
selected to help write the Vietnam volumes and who has been working on the
project since the mid-1960's - admits that victory is easier to record than
defeat. Moreover, the writers face another problem, a wealth of documentation
left over from a conflict that was not only the first television war, but also
the first Xerox and computer war. In Suitland, Md., outside Washington, in a
warehouse the size of three football fields, repose more than 60,000 cubic feet
of records shipped home by the Army, mostly uncatalogued.

Mr. Demma hopes this material and other archives, including taperecorded
interviews with officers as they left Vietnam, will someday furnish what is now
missing - ''an understanding of the war from the foxhole up rather than from the
policy makers down.'' Aside from some novels by ex-soldiers, very little has
been written on the actual conduct of the war, says Mr. Demma. But he feels that
the special access he and his fellow authors have to still-classified material,
including that in the Presidential libraries and other Government organizations
like the Central Intelligence Agency, should eventually provide a more accurate
picture of Vietnam.

THE VIETNAM IGNORANCE

Despite all the blunders, a number of historians and military specialists are
coming to conclude that the American military effort in Vietnam was more
successful than was recognized at the time. When Mr. Popkin, for instance,
returned to Vietnam in 1969 and 1970 to check on the villages he had studied in
1966, he was surprised to find that the balance of power in the countryside had
shifted dramatically in the South Vietnamese Government's favor.

This was, in part, the result of the huge Communist mistake in the 1968 Tet
offensive, when the best Vietcong units, which had long preserved their strength
by operating clandestinely, exposed themselves in open attacks. They were
decimated by American and South Vietnamese counterat-tacks. American officials
estimated the Communists lost 40,000 killed in the Tet fighting, the bulk of
them Southern guerrillas rather than North Vietnamese.

Mr. Tang, the former N.L.F. Minister of Justice, has described Tet as
''catastrophic''; he calculated the Vietcong lost half their forces and new
recruits could not be found lo-cally to replace them. As a result, by the early
70's, 90 percent of the fighting was being done by North Vietnamese troops and
the war turned more and more into a conventional conflict between North and
South. (Mr. Pike and some other specialists have speculated that Hanoi may have
deliberately allowed the Vietcong to be massacred at Tet to assure North
Vietnam's control over the Communist movement in the South, much as the
advancing Russian Army stood by during the Warsaw uprising in 1944.) But at the
time, most Americans, shocked by the daring Vietcong attack on the United States
Embassy in Saigon and the weeks of street fighting in Hue, felt Tet was a defeat
for the United States. It led to President Johnson's announcement that he would
not run again, his proclamation of a bombing halt over North Vietnam and his
decision to stop the escalation of American ground forces. For most Americans,
Tet was the beginning of the end of our involvement.

Even those American officials and journalists who claimed in 1968 that Tet was a
military defeat for the Communists still tended to credit Hanoi with a masterful
strategy -sacrificing troops to deal Washington a psychological blow. But that
view, too, was wrong.

When he was in Vietnam for his television series, Mr. Karnow interviewed Tran
Do, one of the Communist generals in charge of the Tet attacks. The general
denied that Tet was designed to have a political impact in the United States;
instead, he said, the Communists fully believed there would be popular uprisings
and that they could ''annihilate the U.S. and Saigon troops.'' The political
impact ''was an accidental byproduct,'' the general said. Major popular
uprisings never took place.

Tet, in fact, ''totally destroyed the idea of the inevitability of an N.L.F.
victory in the villages,'' says Mr. Popkin. ''When the villagers saw the stacks
of Vietcong bodies in Saigon on their local TV sets, they rushed to get their
sons into local defense forces'' so that they would not be drafted by the
Vietcong.

At the same time, the sheer weight of American military spending and aid
programs began to be felt. Many peasants rushed to work for the Americans,
building roads, bridges, runways and schools. Typically, Mr. Popkin found, in
the 18 villages he studied, the peasants used their earnings to buy a baby
piglet, raised it, sold it, and with the profits invested in a diesel water pump
to irrigate their rice fields. With these mechanized pumps the farmers in the
Mekong Delta could at last get two rice crops a year, and the standard of living
in the countryside started to take off.

In the early and mid-1960's, the peasants had had an economic incentive to live
in a ''liberated'' or Communist village, Mr. Popkin found, because the Vietcong
taxes were lower than the rent peasants had to pay landlords in Government-held
areas. But by the time of Tet, the incentive was reversed. As the Vietcong's
military situation grew more desperate, their taxes increased. And now that the
peasants had pigs, chickens and rice they could sell in Government markets, they
got angry when the Communists cut a road. ''The Vietcong may have been more
honest than the Government, but they couldn't compete with water pumps, chemical
fertilizer and Hondas,'' says Mr. Popkin. He has developed some of his ideas
about the farmers' material interests in a book widely used in college courses,
titled ''The Rational Peasant: The Political Economy of Rural Society in
Vietnam'' (1979).

In the light of Hanoi's postwar revelations, specialists are revising even their
views of the Phoenix program, the scheme sponsored by the C.I.A. to destroy the
Vietcong apparatus in the villages by arresting or killing local Communist
cadres. ''The conven tional liberal wisdom at the time was that it was a
terrible thing,'' says Mr. Karnow. ''It killed people indiscriminately and was
subject to corruption by the South Vietnamese who turned in people for the
reward money. But the people I talked to on my trip in Vietnam said it had wiped
out many Southern cadres and helped cripple the N.L.F.''

Overall, by 1970 nearly 90 percent of the countryside was officially
''pacified,'' compared with only 33 percent in 1965, a crude though significant
index of change.

Professor Herring at the University of Kentucky has suggested that ''the
ultimate irony'' of the war may be that the American position in South Vietnam
was stronger at the end of 1972, just before the Paris peace agreement, than at
any previous point in the war. Mr. Popkin concurs and adds, ''There's no doubt
that if Nixon had kept up U.S. aid after 1973, South Vietnam might have
survived.'' But that is one of the great historical ifs. American patience had
run out.

What, then, went wrong after the Paris accords? Why did South Vietnam collapse
in 1975 under a North Vietnamese attack that was designed only to prepare for a
bigger, final offensive in 1976? (According to Douglas Pike, Gen. Vo Nguyen
Giap, the North Vietnamese commander, was so startled by the rapidity of the
South Vietnamese retreat that he cautioned his officers in the field by radio
against falling into a trap.) Clearly one problem was the poor leadership and
corruption that bedeviled the Saigon Government throughout the war. But
Professor Tai believes that in fairness we should recognize that Saigon faced
problems Hanoi did not have. North Vietnam could forge a more disciplined state
because its society was more homogeneous than that of the South. Most
anti-Communists in the North moved to the South in 1954, and the North never had
to deal with the South's fractious babble of sects like the Buddhists, the Hoa
Hao and the Cao Dai.

Mrs. Tai also believes that the American peace movement misunderstood how the
South Vietnamese people felt. ''There were many people like me who did not
support Thieu but who didn't like the Communists either,'' she says. Indeed, she
represented the kind of third force that American officials in Saigon hoped
would somehow emerge. ''I didn't think a Communist victory would lead to any
improvement for the middle class, or even for the peasants, in whose name the
revolution was fought,'' she says. In 1977, her father, despite his Communist
background, was arrested for protesting the human-rights situation in Vietnam;
he died of starvation in a ''reeducation'' camp in 1981.

On the basis of his village interviews, Mr. Popkin also came to a conclusion
that the American left overrated the popularity of the Communists. With his
training in polling, Mr. Popkin noticed a number of ''unobtrusive indicators.''
''When you want to know what radio stations people are listening to,'' he says,
''you don't ask them. You just look in their cars at a parking lot to see where
the dials are set.''

One sign was that while many South Vietnamese soldiers deserted to go home -just
as Union troops did in the American Civil War - they did not defect in large
units to the Communists. This was in sharp contrast to China, where during the
1940's whole Nationalist divisions defected to Mao Zedong's Communist
guerrillas. Mr. Popkin noted, too, that in the Tet offensive, when the
Communists' surprise attacks trapped many Americans in Vietnamese residential
areas, very few were betrayed to the Communists.

''It tells you,'' says Mr. Popkin, ''that the problem in Vietnam was not too
much support for the Communists, or lack of support for the Saigon Government.
It was just a rotten government. You can't fight something with nothing.''

Another reason for Saigon's collapse in 1975, South Vietnamese and American
officials have long insisted, was the cutback in American aid mandated by a
Congress which lost interest in the war after the G.I.'s had left in 1973.

American military aid to South Vietnam and Laos dropped from about $2.5 billion
in 1973 to $1.6 billion in 1974 and then plunged further to a projected $700
million in 1975, half of it covering shipping costs. When Hanoi's attack came,
South Vietnam's armed forces were receiving only 2 percent of the funds and
supplies American soldiers had gotten in 1968 or 1969, according to retired Maj.
Gen. John E. Murray, the chief American military administrator in Saigon in
1974. In other words, said Gen. Van Tien Dung, North Vietnam's field commander,
in his memoir on the final offensive, the Thieu regime was compelled ''to fight
a poor man's war,'' a fact that Hanoi took carefully into account.

''You know what Napoleon said,'' General Murray pointed out at the conference on
Vietnam in Washington. ''God is on the side of the biggest battalions. And right
about then, God was on the side of the Communists. They were bigger, they were
stronger. That's why ARVN lost the war.''

But there was something else at work. The huge American investment in Vietnam,
Mr. Karnow points out, had ''lulled the South Vietnamese into believing that the
United States would never leave. Nobody in his right mind would spend billions
to build the complex at Cam Ranh Bay and then depart. The Americans must be
crazy. They were crazy. The South Vietnamese were left holding the bag.''

Professor Elliott at Pomona College thinks this dependence is the key to
understanding the war. ''It seems to me,'' he says, ''that the Communists had an
appeal that prevented the South Vietnamese from coalescing around a
non-Communist government. Because the Saigon regimes were always dependent on
the United States, in the eyes of the nationalistic Vietnamese, this created a
moral paralysis.'' Mr. Elliott says he could see this in interviews he conducted
with Vietcong defectors in the Mekong Delta during the war. ''However much they
had come to dislike the Communists, they acknowledged the Front had a moral
appeal which undermined the Government.'' So the South Vietnamese faced an
insoluble contradiction. ''They couldn't win without us, but they couldn't win
with us either.''

THE ANTI WAR MOVEMENT

One group whose influence on Vietnam has been downgraded by the new scholars is
the antiwar movement. From studying public-opinion polls, John E. Mueller, a
professor of political science at the University of Rochester, has found that
the Vietnam War was no more unpopular than the Korean War - until American
casualties in Vietnam surpassed those in Korea. That line was crossed,
coincidentally, during the Tet offensive. Professor Mueller believes that the
tactics of some of the protesters, with flag burnings and anti-American slogans,
actually undercut their credibility with the public. ''The antiwar movement
picked up negative popularity ratings in an almost unprecedented degree,'' he
says.

Washington was certainly aware of the protests, says Mr. Mueller, who has
written about the subject in ''War, Presidents and Public Opinion'' (1973). But
the Johnson Administration's about-faces in 1968 - stopping the bombing of North
Vietnam and ending our troop escalation -had more to do with disaffection within
the Government itself over how badly the war was going and its high costs, he
asserts.

Another little-known reason for the Government's shift in 1968, Mr. Mueller has
found, is that within the Government ''the value of saving Vietnam from
Communism had gone down since we got committed in 1965.'' China, formerly seen
as a threat, had become engulfed in the Cultural Revolution, and Indonesia,
which had appeared on the brink of a Communist takeover, massacred its Communist
Party.

Mr. Mueller also points out that President Johnson's near defeat by Senator
Eugene McCarthy in the New Hampshire Democratic primary, which influenced
President Johnson's decision not to run again, was caused more by angry hawks
than by doves. At the ballot box, anti-Johnson hawks outnumbered anti-Johnson
doves by 3 to 2.

The protesters did have an effect on the Presidential elections. Their attacks
on Vice President Humphrey ''probably gave Nixon the slim margin of votes
necessary to win in 1968,'' says Mr. Mueller. Then, in 1972, with the Democratic
convention controlled by opponents of the war, ''they picked George McGovern,
arguably the worst choice as a Democratic candidate in modern times.''

But Mr. Mueller discounts the charge by hawks that the protest movement
strengthened Hanoi's resolve and helped the United States lose Vietnam. ''Hanoi
may have been encouraged by the peace movement,'' he says, ''but the North
Vietnamese were fanatics who would have continued the war for as long as
necessary to win.'' In another of his studies, Mr. Mueller estimated that the
North Vietnamese and Vietcong suffered 500,000 to 600,000 battle deaths - about
2.5 percent to 3 percent of their prewar population. By comparison, the United
States lost only three-tenths of 1 percent of its population in battle during
World War II, and the Japanese, whom Americans regarded as true fanatics, 1.4
percent. ''The crucial mistake the U.S. made was to underestimate how much
punishment North Vietnam would take,'' he says.

THE LESSON OF VIETNAM

Are there lessons Americans can learn from Vietnam? The question is important,
because it was one of the supposed lessons of World War II -not to appease
aggression - that helped get the United States into Vietnam. There is little
consensus, however, on what can be gleaned from Vietnam. James C. Thomson Jr.,
curator at the Nieman Foundation at Harvard, who was a member of President
Johnson's National Security Council staff and who opposed American involvement
in Vietnam, has proposed that the ''central lesson'' is that we should never
again ''take on the job of trying to defeat a nationalist anticolonial movement
under indigenous Communist control in former French Indochina.'' This is, notes
Mr. Thomson wryly, ''a lesson of less than universal significance.''

But Robert E. Osgood, a professor of American foreign policy at the Johns
Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, believes Americans have
learned the danger of intervening in a revolutionary war where the local
government is weak. In such cases, the United States must commit so many troops
to compensate for the regime's shortcomings that it ends up only undermining the
government. El Salvador is an example, says Professor Osgood, who was one of the
most important theorists on limited war in the 1960's.

''But this is not necessarily a lesson you can apply in every revolutionary
war,'' he adds. In the Philippines after World War II, American aid provided a
critical ''missing component'' that stopped a Communist insurgency. So to
exclude American intervention in every contingency ''is probably overdrawing the
lesson,'' he says.

The problem, in Professor Osgood's view, is that there are many variables for
Washington to ponder: the strength of the local regime, the resolve of its
adversary, the possibilities for getting out if American intervention proves
unsuccessful.

The real issue is the magnitude of American interests and the threat to them.
''That was a mistake in Vietnam -our greatly inflated rhetoric about falling
dominoes turned out to be wrong,'' Professor Osgood points out. But American
foreign policy is still wedded to containment, and questions may arise again
about combating a Communist-led revolution or takeover in the Middle East or
Central America, he notes.

If that prospect arises, says Mr. Betts, we have not really learned what to do
except that the United States can fight only if the war is kept short. ''We know
more now,'' he believes, but we do not know how to avoid a disastrous war except
at the possible price that Presidents Kennedy and Johnson foresaw -disastrous
acceptance of defeat.

Another lesson is the need for better leadership, says Ernest R. May, a
professor of history at Harvard. At the Washington conference on Vietnam, he
recalled that in 1948 George C. Marshall, then Secretary of State, opposed a
military proposal to send 10,000 American advisers to aid the Chinese
Nationalists because it involved a commitment of uncertain magnitude and
indefinite duration. ''What we did not have in 1965 was an individual of
Marshall's stature and independent judgment,'' Mr. May said.

There are also lessons for small states that might look to the United States for
help. At the Washington meeting, Bui Diem, who served as South Vietnam's
Ambassador to the United States, issued a warning. ''My advice to small nations
considering U.S. aid is that they should be wary of the United States,'' he
said. ''They should pay very close attention to the American domestic political
system, because U.S. policies can change quickly. We small nations can end up
losing higher stakes than the United States itself because, for the American,
you can turn the page and say, 'Well, it is an unhappy chapter for U.S.
history.' But that is not the same now for the South Vietnamese.''

And there are lessons for the military. The most important, Colonel Summers
believes, is that ''we must relearn that public support is critical to American
military strategy.'' To make his point, Colonel Summers quotes from General
Weyand, the man who welcomed the P.O.W.'s to Saigon in 1973. ''The American Army
really is a people's army in the sense that it belongs to the American people,''
the general said. ''When the American people lose their commitment, it is futile
to try to keep the Army committed. In the final analysis, the American Army is
not so much an arm of the executive branch as it is an arm of the American
people.''

TEACHING THE WAR

UP at the blackboard, a teaching assistant had chalked in the Names to be
discussed in the day's lecture at the University of Iowa. There, in large
letters, were Robert McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy, and Ngo Dinh Diem and the
Green Berets.

Fifteen years ago, when Vietnam first invaded the American campus, they would
all have been household words, objects of heated debate and perhaps derision.
But to the 300 students in the large classroom, they were like something from an
arcane novel, to be carefully copied down.

''For the students, history begins about 1980,'' says Stephen Vlastos, a
professor of history at the University of Iowa who is in charge of the course,
''The Vietnam War in Historical Perspective.'' Indeed, most of them were not
even born at the time of the Americansupported coup against President Diem.
Katharyn Bine, a freshman from Beaman, Iowa, a farming town of 209 people, was
only 1 year old when Lyndon Johnson dispatched the first American ground forces
to Vietnam in 1965. Before taking the course, she had heard the name Ho Chi
Minh, but she had not known who Diem or McNamara or Bundy was.

Yet Miss Bine and the course at Iowa represent another development - a quiet
revival of interest in Vietnam on campus 10 years after the last American troops
were withdrawn. More than two dozen colleges this year are offering courses on
the war or Vietnamese history, ranging from Harvard to Thomas More College in
northern Kentucky. Almost all the classes have drawn more students than their
professors expected.

What are the students learning? It seems to depend on the professor, his own
view of Vietnam and the books he assigns. Not surprisingly, a majority of the
professors were strongly influenced by the antiwar movement. Mr. Vlastos, for
instance, helped organize a demonstration against President Johnson while he was
an undergraduate at Princeton in 1966. He is candid about his antiwar
sentiments. ''It's the reason I'm teaching the course,'' he says. ''At the
beginning of the course, I told the students I believe the war was a terrible
mistake.''

Professor Vlastos is also an example of another heritage of academic feeling
about the war. Distaste for the war was so widespread that few academics
specialized in Vietnam, and so today most of the new courses on Vietnam are
being taught by professors who were trained in subjects like American history or
Chinese studies. Mr. Vlastos got his Ph.D. from Berkeley in Japanese history.

Even more striking, though nearly three million Americans served in Vietnam,
very few of the professors teaching about Vietnam were ever there. At a
conference last fall on ''Vietnam and the Classroom'' in Kentucky, sponsored by
the Kentucky Association of Teachers of History, only one of the 11 speakers and
only three of the 75 participating teachers had been in Vietnam.

''If we were talking about World War II, this room would be full of veterans,''
observed T. Wayne Beasley, a professor at Murray State University in western
Kentucky. But, Mr. Beasley complained, ''with Vietnam you people who are
teaching about it are the same people who were protesting it as students in the
1960's.''

At the Newark campus of Rutgers University, H. Bruce Franklin is worried about a
different problem. Mr. Franklin, a professor of English, says he was distressed
when he polled the students in his course, ''America and Vietnam,'' and found
the majority believed the United States lost the war because ''we didn't try
hard enough.'' ''This illusion has to be dispelled immediately,'' Mr. Franklin
adds. So he stresses the damage the United States did to Vietnam, like bombing
it between 1964 and 1969 with more than nine times the tonnage of high
explosives dropped in the entire Pacific theater during World War II. Mr.
Franklin rejects a suggestion that such figures may be misleading because many
of the bombs dropped on Vietnam landed in the jungle, not on civilian villages.

Despite the prevalence of antiwar views among most professors, some teachers
have begun to incorporate the more complex and dispassionate new scholarship
into their curriculum. One of the most imaginative new classes is at the
University of Louisville, taught by an unlikely duo: a hawkish former artillery
officer in Vietnam, Richard N. Pfeiffer, and a confirmed antiwar activist with a
Ph.D. in East Asian history, Andrea McElderry. Miss McElderry is an associate
professor of history; Mr. Pfeiffer is a vice president of an industrial-supply
company who teaches in his spare time.

''The idea of the class is to give the students as many different points of view
as we can about the war, because we don't think anyone has solved Vietnam,''
says Miss McElderry. ''We don't let our students say things like 'This side won
the war.' ''

To broaden the course, the two teachers invite guest speakers from the
Louisville area, including a former Green Beret, a retired Army general, a
one-time high official in the Saigon Government, a peacemovement activist and a
psychiatrist from a Veterans' Administration hospital who treats troubled
veterans. Miss McElderry feels the unusual chemistry between her and Mr.
Pfeiffer has been beneficial. ''Until I met Richard, I was sure of my views
about Vietnam. He has made me rethink them, and I have influenced him, too. I
couldn't have taught the course the same way with my Asian specialist
colleagues, because all of them were getting 2-S student deferments during
Vietnam.'' - F.B.

A BRIEF BIBLIOGRAPHY

Perhaps no event in American history has inspired such a torrent of writing as
the Vietnam War. Among the more than 200 books already written, the following
include some of those most widely used in college courses or most respected by
specialists. GENERAL George C. Herring, ''America's Longest War,'' John Wiley &
Sons, 1979. The most balanced overview of the war, though sketchy in parts, by a
liberal antiwar critic.

ORIGINS OF THE CONFLICT

William J. Duiker, ''The Communist Road to Power in Vietnam,'' Westview Press,
1981. The best concise account of the growth and tactics of the Communist
movement.

David G. Marr, ''Vietnamese Anti-Colonialism,'' University of California Press,
1971. A brilliant study of the origins of nationalism in Vietnam that shows how
the Communists emerged from a traditional context.

Frances FitzGerald, ''Fire in the Lake,'' Little, Brown & Co., 1972. A best
seller that attributed American failure to cultural shortsightedness. Its
findings are now disputed by some scholars.

Jeffrey Race, ''War Comes to Long An,'' University of California Press, 1972. A
perceptive analysis of Vietcong success in one province that suggests the
Communists were shrewder about political power and economic grievances than were
South Vietnamese officials. Many of the conclusions have been invalidated by the
events after Tet. THE AMERICAN SIDE David Halberstam, ''The Best and the
Brightest,'' Random House, 1972. This wartime best seller traced our descent
into the Vietnam quagmire to the cold-war mentality shared by our superachiever
Presidents and their advisers.

Leslie H. Gelb and Richard K. Betts, ''The Irony of Vietnam: The System
Worked,'' The Brookings Institution, 1979. A challenge to Mr. Halberstam's
thesis. The authors argue that Washington's policy machinery worked well, but
that the Presidents erred in seeking only to do the minimal necessary not to
lose during their own terms.

Larry Berman, ''Planning a Tragedy: The Americanization of the War in Vietnam,''
W.W. Norton, 1982. A detailed look at President Johnson's fateful decision to
begin the buildup of American troops in Vietnam; it suggests that L.B.J. was
more concerned with preserving his Great Society than with a careful
consideration of the war.

Wallace J. Thies, ''When Governments Collide: Coercion and Diplomacy in the
Vietnam Conflict, 1964-68,'' University of California Press, 1980. A study of
why L.B.J.'s bombing campaign against North Vietnam failed. It indicates that
Washington had scant understanding of politics in Hanoi and that American
bureaucracy was incapable of orchestrating bombing and diplomacy simultaneously.

The Pentagon Papers. Now in several editions, with the longclassified segment -
''The Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War: The Negotiating Volumes of the
Pentagon Papers,'' edited by George C. Herring - to be published in July by the
University of Texas Press.

THE MILITARY SIDE

Don Oberdorfer, ''Tet!'' Doubleday & Co., 1971. A first-rate dramatic account of
the war's biggest battle.

Col. Harry G. Summers Jr., ''On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam
War,'' Presidio Press, 1982. A thoughtful look at why the American Army won
every battle in Vietnam but lost the war.

Stuart A. Herrington, ''Silence Was a Weapon: The Vietnam War in the Villages,''
Presidio Press, 1982. A poignant, personal account by an Army district adviser
who discovered the Vietcong to be a formidable opponent.

Gen. Van Tien Dung, ''Our Great Spring Victory: An Account of the Liberation of
South Vietnam,'' translated by John Spragens Jr., Monthly Review, 1977. How
North Vietnam planned and won the final offensive in 1975, by the Chief of Staff
of North Vietnam's People's Army. VIETNAM IN LITERATURE Graham Greene, ''The
Quiet American,'' Viking, 1956. The quintessential story of the liberal American
whose anti-Communist idealism leads him astray in the tropical, complex world of
Vietnam.

Philip Caputo,''A Rumor of War,'' Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1977. A Marine
lieutenant's sad, angry memoir of a year in combat. Michael Herr,
''Dispatches,'' Knopf, 1977. Compelling, sympathetic sketches of grunts, written
in their lingo of fear, camaraderie and bitterness. - F.B.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of victory celebration in Saigon; Photo of South Vietnamese
trying to leave country; Photo of protesters at Berkeley campus; Photo of Prof.
Samuel Popkin; Photo of Gen. William Westmoreland; Photo of Col Harry Summers
Jr.; Photo of Paris peace talks; Photo of demonstrators at Berkeley campus;
Photo of Stephen Vlastos with his students

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S NEW IN THE TOY INDUSTRY;
NEW MARCH OF TOY SOLDIERS

BYLINE: By Philip Shenon

SECTION: Section 3; Page 27, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 579 words


Toy buyers from across the country converged on New York last week to wade
through acres of dolls, games, popguns, construction kits, swing sets and model
cars at the 80th annual American Toy Fair. The buyers' goal: deciding what will
be big in 1983. Executives from video-games companies were all smiles at the
show. The retail market for video toys nearly doubled last year, reaching about
$3.1 billion, and it is expected to climb to $4 billion this year. The folks who
make toys that are not electronic had less to be happy about. Their overall

1982 sales fell to $6.3 billion, down 7 percent from the year earlier. Yet they
worked diligently to prove their more traditional products deserve a rebound.
Asked to pick the hot sellers among nonelectronic playthings in 1983, industry
spokesmen point to dolls and almost anything related to the military or popular
television personalities.

Here's a sampling of the most unusual and popular toys displayed last week.
''WAR IS SELL,'' blares the Adica Pongo Inc. ad now running in toy industry
trade journals.  Like other big toy makers, Adica Pongo, which makes clay
figurines for children and last week introduced its first line of toy soldiers,
has discovered the newly reborn war-toy market.

Sales of make-believe weapons and military gear have tripled since 1980 and
totaled nearly $100 million in 1983, according to Tom Manufacturers of America,
a trade group.

''Five years ago you couldn't give away toy guns or army stuff,'' said Dick
Mayer, vice president of Aurora Sales, a Connecticut toy company. ''Now they're
the hottest products around.'' Aurora unveiled its $25 ''Big Ryder Military
Truck Set'' in 1982.

Industry executives freely credit the renaissance in shoot-em-up products to the
fading of Vietnam War memories; that unpopular war nearly killed off the market
for toy guns and the like in the 1970's.

''It was a real depression'' for toy-weapon makers, said Ronald Aaront,
president of Edison Toys U.S.A. Inc., which makes dozens of different types of
toy armaments. But as Vietnam memories fade, ''sales are up,'' he said. The
Reagan Administration's arms build-up also was a help in returning military
playthings to respectability, he said.

Though Edison, like most toy makers, will not reveal specific sales figures, it
said company revenues rose 35 percent in 1982, thanks to the toy-weapons boom.
Company estimates say sales of one of Edison's most popular products - the Matic
45, a two-foot long replica of a .45-caliber rifle - should double in 1983.

Other toy companies are doing even better. Hasbro Industries sold 8.5 million
G.I. Joe dolls last year at $2.99 each. After a five-year retirement that
resulted from sluggish sales, G.I. Joe returned to toy-store shelves last year,
and according to the trade press, it was the most popular toy in America last
Christmas. Stephen Hassenfeld, Hasbro's president, said sales of the doll and
its accessories should reach $150 million in 1983.

Not to be outdone, Revell Inc. will begin shipping a 1/144-scale plastic model
of the Presidential Airborne Command Post, the socalled ''doomsday'' plane, in
the spring.

The model of the modified Boeing 747 that the President and his staff would use
to flee Washington in the event of nuclear war could be a big seller for Revell
this year, said Fehra S. Davis, manager of sales and marketing administration.
And will kids use the plane to play Armageddon? ''I suppose some will,'' she
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
Human Rights, Such as They Are

BYLINE: By Henry Giniger and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 353 words


On the whole, Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams said last week,
Vietnam may be ''the worse country to live in'' for people who value human
rights. Some 60,000 Vietnamese are political prisoners, according to the
Administration's annual survey of what countries around the world have been
doing to the lives and liberties of their citizens.

The report presented by Mr. Abrams was harsh on Communist countries, although it
didn't completely spare regimes friendlier to Washington. The Soviet Union was
accused of stepping up ''repression of dissent,'' notably by committing
dissidents to cruel and degrading psychiatric treatment with painful drugs.
Jumping before they could be pushed, the Russians last week withdrew from the
World Psychiatric Association where British and American psychiatrists were
discussing suspension or expulsion proceedings against them (Details, page 18).
Rights violations also reportedly increased last year in Czechoslovakia, Iran,
Lebanon and Nicaragua.

Brazil, Uruguay and El Salvador were among the countries said to be making
progress. Disputing some of the upbeat conclusions, Michael Posner, representing
private rights groups accused the report of showing biases in countries such as
El Salvador, Turkey, Zaire and Yugoslavia ''where the Administration has a
strong political stake.''

''With friendly countries,'' the official report said, ''we prefer to use
diplomacy, not public pronouncements.'' However, it cited examples of torture,
brutality or violence in such friendlies as Pakistan and the Philippines. And
Israel was criticized for expanding Jewish settlements in occupied Arab
territories, for ''roughing up'' Arabs in the West Bank and Gaza, and
imprisoning Arabs for months without formal charges or trial.

The situation in South Africa went ''up and down,'' Mr. Abrams said. While
acknowledging Pretoria's proposals for limited political representation for
nonwhites, the report cited a ''vicious cycle of violence'' -stepped-up South
African attacks on neighboring countries in reprisal for damaging raids by
African National Congress guerrillas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Elliot Abrams

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
MONEYMAKERS;
Reruns

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 196 words


Among the Government Printing Office's new publications is a pamphlet called
''Mountain Home. Recounts the story of John and Margaret Jane Walker of the
Great Smoky Mountains and describes how they instilled 11 children with honor,
pride and love in the absence of electricity and indoor plumbing.''

If you want to find out how the Walkers did it, you can send $4.50 to the
Superintendent of Documents, Department 33, Washington, D. C.  20402. If you
want to find out how the Waltons did it, you can tune in New York's Channel 5 on
Saturday mornings.

And if you'd like to see more of this kind of message from the G.P.O., here are
suggestions for a series...  ''Queens House. How Archie, a blue-collar worker,
is taught tolerance and understanding by his warm-hearted wife, his fiery '
Vietnam generation' son-in-law and the black couple next door.''

''Minneapolis Apartment. How Mary, who is Protestant, and Rhoda, who is Jewish,
learn to have rich, full, productive lives even though they are single and
living in a very cold climate.''

''Texas Ranch. How the Ewings, a large, rich, family, prove that oil is thicker
than blood and that money can't buy happiness.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New York Times Magazine February 13, 1983

SECTION: Section 6; Page 4, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 186 words


William Safire 16 On Language

Rose Were a Rose Were a Rose
Russell Baker 20 Sunday Observer

Operating in Space
Fox Butterfield 26 The New Vietnam Scholarship
James M. Markham 36 Germany's Volatile Greens

A coalition of environmentalists and antinuclear pacifists is not only upsetting
politics in West Germany, but challenging the Western alliance.
Tom Goldstein 38 D'Amato: At Home in the Senate

During the 1980 campaign, many critics viewed Alfonse D'Amato as a hard-line
conservative, lacking appropriate credentials for the Senate. But by most
accounts, New York's new junior Senator has done an effective job, proving to be
more pragmatist than ideologue.
Craig Claiborne 62 Food with Pierre Franey Tripe: The Homage Vice Pays to Virtue

Deborah Blumenthal 64 Beauty

The Problems of Pregnancy
June Weir 66 Fashion

Stylish Individualism
78 Puzzles

Answers, Page 77
94 Letters Cover: Douglas Pike, director of Indochina studies at the University
of California at Berkeley, conducts a graduate seminar. Photograph by John
McDermott.
Copyright 1980, The New York Times

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NEW VIETNAM SCHOLARSHIP

BYLINE: By Fox Butterfield; Fox Butterfield, who is The Times's Boston bureau
chief, was a Times correspondent in Vietnam between 1971 and 1973. He was one of
the contributors to the series of Times articles based on the Pentagon Papers
when they were first released to the public, and he covered the fall of Saigon.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 12832 words


Ten years ago today, I stood on the floodlit tarmac of Tan Son Nhut air base and
watched as a group of 27 American prisoners of war were delivered to freedom by
United States Army helicopters. The men had been picked up from a
Communistcontrolled rubber plantation near the Cambodian border, and their
arrival was the first tangible benefit for Americans of the Paris peace accords,
signed in late January.

It was an emotional moment. Gen. Frederick C. Weyand, the last commander of
United States forces in Vietnam, draped his arm around an Air Force colleague
and confided, in tones just loud enough for me to hear, ''It's the greatest day
we've ever had in Vietnam.''

There was a kind of resignation and finality about the remark, like a losing
football team salvaging a share of its pride with a meaningless touchdown in the
final moments of the game. So it was with Vietnam. With the signing of the Paris
agreement and the return of our P.O.W.'s, we withdrew not only the last American
combat forces from Vietnam, but also our slender remaining interest in the
country.

The war itself, of course, sputtered on for another two years, until Saigon's
stunning collapse in April 1975. But Americans went into a trance of collective
amnesia. The Vietnam War was such an agonizing, divisive and baffling experience
that we somehow resolved simply to forget it. Unlike the fall of Nationalist
China to Mao Zedong in 1949, there were no postwar recriminations, no blame for
who lost Vietnam. The shock had been so great that nobody wanted to know. As a
result, Vietnam became not only the longest war in our history and the first war
the United States had lost - it was also the most misunderstood war.

The big questions went unasked and unanswered: How did we get involved in
Vietnam? Why did 57,939 Americans die there? Why did the Communists win? What
were the lessons of the war?

But now, a decade after the last American troops left Saigon, Vietnam is
sparking renewed interest - though without the explosive rancor of the 1960's
and early 70's. The hottest star on television is Tom Selleck, who plays Magnum,
an amiable private eye and Vietnam veteran whose exploits often involve
flashbacks to his combat days in ''Nam.'' Public Television is planning an
ambitious 13-hour series on the war, which it will show within a year. The
dedication of the polished black granite Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington
last November finally gave Vietnam veterans a respected if ambiguous place
alongside the monuments to Jefferson, Lincoln and Washington.

Ultimately, the most important development may be the emergence of a small group
of scholars, journalists and military specialists who have started to look
afresh at the war. Drawing on new disclosures from Hanoi, the opening of
documents in the Presidential libraries, the Pentagon Papers (which are still
the best published source material on the war) and memoirs of some of the
participants in the war, these writers have worked quietly, with the general
public largely unaware of their research. For most of these scholars, their
re-examination is not to prove whether Vietnam was or was not a ''noble cause,''
in President Reagan's phrase, but to find out what really happened and why. In
the process, they are challenging some of the most cherished beliefs of both the
right and the left.

Among the new findings are the following: As opposed to the public caricature of
him as a warmonger, Lyndon Johnson was actually reluctant to become more deeply
involved in Vietnam. He sent American troops to Vietnam not out of machismo, but
out of fear that if he ''lost'' South Vietnam, Congress would not pass his Great
Society programs.

Contrary to the American popular assumption that we could easily win, American
Presidents from John Kennedy to Richard Nixon were never confident about our
chances and, in fact, never had a plan to win in Vietnam. Instead, they did only
the minimum necessary not to lose Vietnam during their own tenure in the White
House. They tried to fight a war on the cheap against a foe, North Vietnam,
whose commitment was total.  Under the restrictions imposed by the Presidents,
some American generals knew almost from the start that they could not win the
war.  Without permission to cut off Hanoi's use of Laos and Cambodia, they
realized, the critical strategic initiative remained in Hanoi's hands. Many
officers now believe the Joint Chiefs of Staff should have resigned in protest.
Both hawks and liberals were wrong about the Communists in Vietnam.  While
successive Administrations did not understand that the Communists' appeal had
its roots in centuries of Vietnamese xenophobia, many antiwar critics - like
Frances FitzGerald in her bestselling ''Fire in the Lake'' - over-glamorized the
Vietcong, the Southern insurgents, and underestimated the role that North
Vietnam played in leading the war in the South.  The 1968 Tet offensive was a
disastrous military defeat for the Communists, as Gen. William C. Westmoreland
claimed, though most Americans regarded it as a setback for the United States.
It was particularly brutal for the Vietcong, who bore the brunt of the fighting
and who suffered such losses that thereafter they had to be replaced by North
Vietnamese regulars, turning the conflict into a war between North and South.

After Tet - though most Americans at home had given up on the war - the
cumulative weight of American firepower and spending in Vietnam dramatically
undercut support for the Communists. As a result, the United States was probably
in a stronger position in Vietnam in 1972, just before the Paris peace accords,
than at any previous point in the war.  The antiwar movement did not have as
much impact on American policy as is popularly thought. Lyndon Johnson's
decision in March 1968 to de-escalate the war was not so much a response to the
peace movement as a result of disaffection within his Administration over the
disastrous costs of the war. The protesters' main contribution, in fact, may
have been to help elect Richard Nixon twice - in 1968 over Hubert Humphrey and
in 1972 over George McGovern.

The picture of the Vietnam conflict that is emerging from the new research shows
a war that was more complex, more morally ambiguous, than either the doves or
the hawks had maintained. Of the war's many ironical twists, few match the
postwar predicament of Communist Vietnam.

''It was a war nobody won,'' says Stanley Karnow, a syndicated columnist, who
covered Vietnam for several national publications.  ''North Vietnam won, of
course, but it also lost.'' Mr. Karnow - who is chief correspondent for Public
Television's series on Vietnam and who is writing a book to accompany it - was
in Hanoi in 1981 to film some interviews for the series. He remembers asking
Prime Minister Pham Van Dong what Vietnam's main problem now is. ''He laughed,''
recalls Mr. Karnow. '' 'That's a stupid question. Look around, you can see for
yourself what problems we're having.' ''

Hanoi's grim postwar record has raised a serious problem for scholars. How much
should it be taken into account when the war is analyzed? Can events during the
war be interpreted in the light of the Communists' postwar detention of 50,000
to 100,000 former supporters of the Saigon regime in ''re-education'' camps, the
corruption and economic mismanagement by Communist officials, the invasion of
Cambodia, the persecution of Vietnam's large Chinese ethnic minority and the
flight of the boat people?

David W.P. Elliott, an assistant professor of political science at Pomona
College in California, believes that Vietnam's postwar record is irrelevant to
understanding the war. ''We shouldn't commit the historicist fallacy of reading
the present into the past,'' says Mr.  Elliott. ''In 1975, the people wanted
peace.'' Like many of the new scholars, Mr. Elliott's interest in Vietnam goes
back to the 1960's.  He learned Vietnamese in the Army and later did research on
the Vietcong for the Rand Corporation, a private research organization working
mostly for the Defense Department.

One of the few Vietnamese now teaching in the United States, Hue-Tam Ho Tai, an
assistant professor of history at Harvard, agrees that the Communists' postwar
failures ''do not vindicate America's crusade in Vietnam.'' For a part of
Vietnam's troubles today were caused by the dislocations of the war. But Mrs.
Tai, who came to the United States as a student at Brandeis, maintains that what
has happened since 1975 offers an important perspective.

''During the war,'' she says, ''people looked at the Communists and said they
were dedicated, driven and omnicompetent. Now we see them as corrupt and
incompetent.'' Did the Communists change so much after 1975 or were Americans
grossly mistaken in their earlier impressions?

Mrs. Tai believes that many Americans allowed their political passions to cloud
their intellect. At the time of the war, she says, ''it was fashionable to think
that a guerrilla movement needed popular support to succeed, and that if the
Vietcong survived, therefore they must have popular support.'' But that, Mrs.
Tai contends, was a fallacious argument. ''You can see how wrong it was now,
because the Communists certainly aren't popular in the South.'' Or, she
suggests, look at Cambodia. ''Pol Pot came to power as a guerrilla, but looking
at what he did to his country, you'd think twice before saying he was popular.''

Mrs. Tai herself cannot be accused of being an inveterate anti-Communist. Her
father was a founder of the Trotskyite party in Vietnam; an aunt was a senior
official in the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government. But she has
long had reservations about those antiwar protesters who were too ready to turn
the Vietnamese Communists into paragons of virtue and who refused to accept a
view of the war that was not black and white.

At Brandeis, she remembers, a professor asked her in class what the Vietnamese
thought of the war. When she said that it was a difficult question to answer,
since the view of an intellectual was probably very different from that of a
peasant, the professor became angry. ''Later,'' she says, ''a student told me
that my views didn't count because I was a bourgeois. I said, 'I'm sorry; I'm a
human being. There are several hundred thousand members of the middle class in
Vietnam.' ''

This kind of academic narrow-mindedness, in Mrs. Tai's view, contributed to
American misunderstanding of Vietnam just as much as ignorance in the White
House and the State Department.

Until quite recently, Vietnam has been a giant black hole in American academia.
A survey by The New York Times in 1970 found that there was no scholar in the
United States who devoted most of his or her time to studying North Vietnam;
there was no American university with a tenured professorship in Vietnamese
studies, and there were fewer than 30 students in the country studying the
Vietnamese language. By comparison, there were three times that many studying
Thai. According to the Social Science Research Council in New York, from 1951 to
1981 a total of 820 Americans applied to it for financial aid to work on Ph.D.
dissertations in Southeast Asia. Of these, only 33 were for Vietnam, almost the
same number as for Burma.

John K. Fairbank, professor emeritus of history at Harvard and the man generally
recognized as the founder of modern Chinese studies in the United States, refers
to this lack of expertise on Vietnam as an academic Pearl Harbor. One reason for
this blind spot, he suggests, was that the French excluded American missionaries
and businessmen from Vietnam, and Americans therefore did not have a personal
stake in Vietnam.

However, by the time the United States became militarily involved, many
academics considered the war so immoral that dispassionate analysis of the
conflict became almost impossible. Only a handful of scholars actually went to
Vietnam to do research there.

One of them was Samuel L. Popkin, now an associate professor of political
science at the University of California at San Diego. After he spent time in
1966 conducting interviews in Vietnamese villages, he was treated as a pariah
when he returned to Harvard, where he was then an assistant professor.

His problem: He had returned from Vietnam with a complex view. He did not
approve of the way the Americans were fighting the war - ''this crazy chasing
around in the villages with our massive firepower looking for body counts'' -
but he did not find that the Communists were the popular good guys of American
antiwar mythology.

Mr. Popkin's friends in Cambridge didn't want to hear about this.  He got back
in his colleagues' good graces only after he was jailed in 1972 for refusing to
testify before a special grand jury set up by the White House to find out who
leaked the Pentagon Papers - the Pentagon's massive top-secret study of American
involvement in Indochina from World War II to May 1968 - to The New York Times.

Douglas Pike, who throughout the war years was the resident expert in the United
States Embassy in Saigon on the Vietnamese Communists, remembers a similar
encounter with academic close-mindedness when he was on leave in Cambridge,
Mass., in 1964 to write a book about the Vietcong. He had been invited to take
part in an antiwar teach-in and found himself debating with a professor from the
Harvard Dental School. ''The professor really didn't have his facts straight, so
I asked him if he had ever been to Vietnam,'' Mr. Pike recalls.

'' 'No, that's not necessary,' the professor replied.  ''So I said, 'I've never
been to dental school, but suppose I give you a root canal.' '' 'That's
different,' he said.  ''I replied, 'How at Harvard, of all places, can you say
knowledge is not important?' '' Mr. Pike has now retired from the Government and
is the first director of the Indochina studies program at the University of
California at Berkeley -an appointment that would have been unthinkable a decade
ago at a campus that was in the vanguard of the antiwar movement. Mr. Pike has
just completed a book on the North Vietnamese Army, which he wrote after
discovering to his amazement that there was no comparable study. ''We never even
knew the names of North Vietnam's generals or what their strategic thinking
was,'' he says. ''It shows how ignorant and arrogant we were. We just assumed we
would win.'' Mr. Pike's presence at Berkeley, where he is setting up a
two-million-page archive on Indochina, is testament to Vietnam's having quietly
made the transition from controversial public issue to history. as victory by
the Communists inevitable? Since the end of the war, some of the best new
scholarship has focused on the origins of the Communist movement in Vietnam and
its reasons for success.  According to one school of thought, the Communists'
early capture of the nationalist issue made their eventual victory a foregone
conclusion. David G. Marr - a visiting professor at Cornell last fall who is now
teaching at the Australian National University in Canberra - has shown how the
Communists under Ho Chi Minh were able to build their strength in the 1930's and
40's by appealing to the centuriesold tradition of Vietnamese nationalism. Mr.
Marr's two books, ''Vietnamese Anti-Colonialism, 1885-1925'' (1971) and
''Vietnamese Tradition on Trial, 1920-1945'' (1981), are widely regarded as
models of scholarly research.

In his view, ''the most important development of the entire conflict was the
August 1945 revolution,'' when the Vietminh (the Communist-led guerrillas who
had fought against the French) under Ho Chi Minh seized Hanoi and proclaimed an
independent Vietnam before the French could re-establish their presence at the
end of World War II.

''Everything done after that by the French and the Americans was an attempt to
turn back the clock, but they couldn't succeed,'' adds Mr. Marr, a former
leading antiwar activist who is one of the few professors with military
experience in Vietnam; he learned Vietnamese in the Marines. ''The outcome was
predetermined. For the Communists were able to gain and hold legitimacy as a
patriotic front.''

Says Professor Elliott of Pomona College, ''In 1945, the Vietminh clearly had
overwhelming popular support - even the United States at first recognized this''
(an O.S.S. team had worked with Ho at the time). ''The Vietminh,'' he continues,
''won the war again in 1954 at Dien Bien Phu, and the Communists won it a third
time in early 1965, before Johnson's commitment of U.S. ground forces.''

Mr. Popkin, among others, disagrees with this kind of deterministic
interpretation. ''It's anti-intellectual; it doesn't allow for the normal
process of change which occurs in history,'' he counters. ''If you argue that
the Communists should have won the war in 1975 because they were the most
popular group in 1945, does that mean that we should have a Democratic President
today because Roosevelt was elected in 1944?'' Mr. Popkin himself is a liberal
Democrat.

A very different view of the relations between Peking and Hanoi is also
emerging. Early in the war, some Administration officials, like then Secretary
of State Dean Rusk, contended that American commitment was necessary because
North Vietnam was acting as an agent of Chinese Communist aggression. But if
American diplomacy was able to salvage anything of value from the war, it was
improved relations with China. The split between Hanoi and Peking grew out of
centuries of enmity between the two countries and China's growing concern that
the Vietnamese Communists were aligning themselves with the Soviet Union,
China's erstwhile ally.

The break between North Vietnam and China has produced intriguing new evidence
about another long-disputed topic: Who was responsible for failing to hold the
1956 elections, which, under the terms of the 1954 Geneva Conference that ended
the French Indochina war, would have reunified North and South Vietnam?

In the past, many liberal antiwar critics blamed the Eisenhower Administration
for encouraging President Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam to ignore the
elections. They argued that it was only because of the provision for the
elections that Ho Chi Minh had agreed to the temporary division of Vietnam at
Geneva, and that when the elections were not held, the Communists had little
choice but to resume the war. But Vietnam's leaders now claim that the Chinese
actually cut off military aid to them in 1954 to compel them to negotiate with
the French and accept the division of the country. Pham Van Dong, Vietnam's
Prime Minister, told Mr. Karnow that he had said at the time: ''The Chinese have
betrayed us.'' And several scholars have found records indicating that Zhou
Enlai, China's Prime Minister, expected the separation of Vietnam to be long
lasting and turned down Ho's request in 1956 for help in arranging the
elections. This does not exonerate Washington for its role in discouraging the
elections, says Professor Tai, but it shows that the United States was not
alone.

Disclosures from Hanoi since 1975 are also making possible a reexamination of
the Vietcong's growth. During the war, the most influential academic account of
the origins of the National Liberation Front (N.L.F.), the formal name for the
Vietcong, was in a book by two Cornell professors, George McT. Kahin and John W.
Lewis, ''The United States in Vietnam.'' The authors argued forcefully that the
Vietcong was ''Southern rooted.''

After the Geneva settlement, the authors contended, the Communists withdrew all
their armed troops to the newly created North Vietnam, leaving behind only
political cadres. Hanoi favored only political, not armed, resistance to Ngo
Dinh Diem. But given the ''harshness and heavy-handedness of Diem's Government''
these Southerners ''lost patience with the Communist North'' and organized an
insurgency led by the N.L.F. ''Hanoi, despite its reluctance, was then obliged
to sanction the Southerners' actions.''

Professors Kahin and Lewis also asserted that there was no evidence that Hanoi
encouraged ''militant tactics by the Southerners'' until as late as September
1960, or, contrary to United States Government claims, that Hanoi directed the
formation of the N.L.F., which was a broad united front of Communist and
non-Communist organizations.

Scholars still agree that most of the early Vietcong were Southerners and that
there were factional disputes in Hanoi over how to pursue the insurgency during
the 1950's. But a history published by the People's Army of Vietnam in 1980,
titled ''The Anti-U.S.  Resistance War for National Salvation, 1954-1975:
Military Events,'' contends that Hanoi played a large role in the development of
the Vietcong. The history records, for example, that as early as 1957 ''cadres
and men who remained behind'' in the South were able to form ''37 armed
companies.''

Moreover, the history also admits that in a secret directive by the North
Vietnamese Politburo in May 1959, Hanoi ordered its Southern supporters to
switch from political action to armed struggle. To provide help for the new
fighting, Hanoi established a special task force, code named Group 559, which
set up infiltration routes and moved ''people, weapons and supplies'' through
Laos into South Vietnam.

When the N.L.F. was proclaimed in December 1960, this official Communist history
goes on, it was done at the order of the party in Hanoi, and the Front's program
''followed the line delineated by our party.'' These actions marked a critical
turning point in the war, leading to the formation of bigger Vietcong units and
an increase in attacks on South Vietnamese Government posts. It was this
stepped-up activity that confronted President Kennedy when he took office in
1961 and led him to increase the number of American advisers in South Vietnam.

On another critical question, too, the Communists have been more candid since
the end of the war: When did they begin sending regular North Vietnamese troops
into the South?

Washington had long maintained that Hanoi started infiltrating its regular army
units in the fall of 1964, prompting President Johnson's decision to begin
bombing North Vietnam and then to dispatch American ground forces to South
Vietnam a few months later.  Hanoi denied it had troops in the South until
virtually the end of the war. When I visited North Vietnam in 1969, Prime
Minister Pham Van Dong said with a straight face that there were no Northern
troops in the South. And antiwar activists dismissed State Department white
papers on Northern infiltration. But when Mr. Karnow interviewed officials in
Hanoi in 1981, they talked about enlarging the Ho Chi Minh Trail as early as
1964.

All this leads to another question raised by the new scholarship: Were
Americans, grown suspicious of their own Government, too eager to accept as
truth whatever the Vietnamese Communists said?  Throughout the war, there was
heated debate over the degree of autonomy the N.L.F. enjoyed. Was it merely a
puppet of North Vietnam, as many American officials insisted, or was it an
independent organization, as the Communists claimed? The argument was important,
because if the N.L.F. was independent, there might had been a chance for a
negotiated settlement in the South.

Harrison E. Salisbury, who was among the first correspondents allowed to visit
Hanoi in late 1966, made a strong case for the independence of the N.L.F. in his
book ''Behind the Lines - Hanoi.'' The N.L.F., Mr. Salisbury wrote, ''had a
government. It had a cabinet ... its own troops, its own generals, its own petty
officials ... .''

From talks with an N.L.F. official in Hanoi, Mr. Salisbury said, he learned that
the Front got its weapons directly from the Soviet Union and China and did not
''utilize Hanoi as a middleman.'' ''All military decisions in the South were the
responsibility of the South.'' When Mr. Salisbury quizzed Prime Minister Dong on
what would happen when the war was over, the Prime Minister assured him that the
North would not annex the South: ''Reunification would only be by mutual
agreement.'' Mr. Salisbury came away convinced that American officials who
derided the N.L.F. were missing ''genuine possibilities'' for peace.

Asked recently if he might have been misled by the Communists, Mr.  Salisbury
said, ''I'll stand by my reporting of the time.'' But, he added, he had been in
Hanoi in early 1967 and ''by the time the war finally ended the situation was so
vastly different that whatever had been said by myself, or Hanoi, or L.B.J. or
anybody in the N.L.F.  really had very little validity.''

Since the war, some members of the N.L.F. have contended they themselves had
been deceived by Hanoi. Writing last fall in The New York Review of Books,
Truong Nhu Tang, the former Minister of Justice in the N.L.F.'s government and a
French-educated ''independent socialist,'' indicated that he joined the Vietcong
because he believed the Communists' promises that they would work for an
autonomous, democratic South. At the end of the war, Hanoi annexed the South and
the N.L.F. was disbanded.

At ''the simple farewell dinner'' held to disband the N.L.F. in 1976, Mr. Tang
recalled, neither the party nor the Government bothered to send a
representative. ''I was tragically wrong'' about the Communists, he wrote. ''The
North Vietnamese Communists, survivors of protracted, blood-drenched campaigns
against colonialism, interventionism and human oppression, became in their turn
colonialists, interventionists and architects of one of the world's most rigid
re-gimes.'' For the first time in Vietnam's history, Mr. Tang went on, people
risked their lives to flee the country -something they had not done under the
French or the Americans. Mr. Tang himself escaped by boat in 1979 and now lives
in Paris.

American antiwar writers had envisioned a far happier future for Vietnam. One
such writer was Frances FitzGerald, who wrote ''Fire in the Lake,'' a book that
was both the most widely read and most highly acclaimed volume to come out of
the war. (It won the Pulitzer Prize, the National Book Award and the Bancroft
Prize in history in 1973.) In the lyrical closing passage, Miss FitzGerald
prophesied: ''Pressure is building towards one of those sudden historical shifts
when 'individualism' and its attendant corruption gives way to the discipline of
the revolutionary community. When this shift takes place ... it will simply mean
that the moment has arrived for the narrow flame of revolution to cleanse the
lake of Vietnamese society from the corruption and disorder of the American
war.''

''Fire in the Lake'' had its critics from the start. Mr. Marr, the authority on
Vietnamese nationalism, pointed out in a scholarly review at the time of the
book's publication that Miss FitzGerald did not know Vietnamese and charged that
her depiction of Vietnamese national character was ''little short of
disastrous.'' Mr. Popkin at San Diego suspects she was ''swept away by a love
affair with the N.L.F.'' and that her belief that the Vietnamese would be
happier under the Communists was ''racist and condescending.''

Miss FitzGerald rejects the charge that she was too romantic about the
Communists. ''I'd stick with it,'' she says. ''I think it's written in a rather
romantic style; one chooses rhetorical modes to make people understand certain
things.'' As for Vietnam's terrible postwar troubles, she insists they are the
result of the damage caused by the war, though she concedes the Communists have
proved inept at running the economy.  What went wrong on the American side?
Today, the one common note sounded by virtually all scholars is the need to
start searching for the answer with President Truman's decision in 1945 to
reverse Washington's earlier support for Ho Chi Minh. It was a choice made out
of concern for bolstering France in Europe against the looming Soviet menace.

''In class,'' says Robert A. Scalapino, director of the Institute of East Asian
Studies at the University of California at Berkeley, ''I always stress that the
history of American involvement in Vietnam was a series of decisions which
cumulatively narrowed the choices for each succeeding President. No President
was able to begin afresh with Vietnam.''

Professor Scalapino had a reputation as a conservative during the war, but
Professor George Kahin, who was an outspoken critic of the war, and was until
recently director of Cornell's Southeast Asia program, shares his view. In a new
study of American involvement in Vietnam from 1945 to 1967 -which he says is
based on trips to Vietnam in the 60's and extensive original research in
Government files - Professor Kahin claims he will prove that Washington actually
began giving secret military aid to the French for Vietnam in the late 1940's.

''This aid was officially shown in the records as going to Europe, but it was
subverted to Vietnam by the French with U.S.  understanding,'' says Professor
Kahin. Most history books date the origin of American involvement in Vietnam
from a decision by President Truman's National Security Council in 1950 to
provide military aid for the French war in Indochina.

Another key turning point whose significance was not appreciated at the time,
historians now believe, was the 1963 coup against President Diem. Because the
Kennedy Administration sanctioned the coup, Washington became morally and
politically responsible for all the regimes that succeeded it, wrote Larry
Berman in a new book, ''Planning a Tragedy: The Americanization of the War in
Vietnam'' (1982).

Mr. Berman, an associate professor of political science at the University of
California at Davis, is one of several writers now offering a more sympathetic
portrait of Lyndon Johnson's role in the war. His book focuses on the
decision-making process that led up to President Johnson's announcement on July
28, 1965, that he was increasing the number of American troops in Vietnam from
75,000 to 125,000, with additional forces to be deployed as necessary. This move
is generally regarded as the critical decision that led to open-ended
escalation.

Like a number of the new scholars, Mr. Berman was not trained in Vietnamese
studies but is a specialist on the American Presidency.  His book is based on
recently declassified White House documents he found while doing other research
in the Johnson Library in Austin, Tex.

Nowhere in the documents was there evidence that President Johnson had a plan
either for winning the war or for getting out. The reason for the absence of any
coherent strategic plan is that President Johnson was trying to save his Great
Society, not Vietnam. By an accident of history, in July 1965 both Medicare and
the Civil Rights Act of 1965 were at crucial stages in Congressional committees;
the Model Cities Act and the Higher Education Act were soon to follow. Lyndon
Johnson was caught in a dilemma.

''He didn't want to do anything to jeopardize them,'' Mr. Berman wrote. ''He
really wanted to be the next face on Mount Rushmore.'' But the Communists were
close to victory in Vietnam in early 1965, and President Johnson could not leave
himself open to a charge by conservatives that he lost the war. On the other
hand, if he took the steps the Pentagon urged - mobilizing the Reserves, for
instance - Congressional liberals might have retaliated by withdrawing support
for his Great Society programs.

''So Johnson chose a middle course, to fight the war at the lowest possible
cost, on the cheap,'' Mr. Berman went on. ''And he lied about what he was doing.
He staged a debate to create a war climate, so that when he announced the number
of troops was only going up from 75,000 to 125,000, he looked like a moderate.
But he knew there would be 300,000 troops in Vietnam in 1966.''

''We get a tragic historical figure who had to choose between guns and butter
and couldn't,'' Mr. Berman continued. ''In the end, he neither settled the war
nor got his Great Society, since as he fought in Vietnam, it drained the money
needed for his domestic programs.''

Mr. Berman's thesis is similar to that in a book widely regarded by scholars as
a seminal study of America's role in Vietnam - ''The Irony of Vietnam: The
System Worked'' (1979), by Leslie H. Gelb, now a correspondent for The New York
Times, and Richard K. Betts, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. For
this work, the authors drew heavily on the Pentagon Papers, which provided
critical new groundwork for analyzing Washington's decision-making process.  Mr.
Gelb himself was director of the Pentagon Papers project within the Defense
Department.

Mr. Gelb and Mr. Betts challenge the old liberal view put forward in books, such
as David Halberstam's best seller ''The Best and the Brightest,'' that the
United States stumbled into a quagmire in Vietnam through hubris and
miscalculation.

Instead, they argue, Washington's planning machinery worked well, providing
facts and options for the President. Rarely were the policy makers deluded that
the odds for success in Vietnam were high. The trouble was that the Presidents,
from Harry Truman to Richard Nixon, were afraid both to risk losing Vietnam to
the Communists and to accept the decisive recommendations of their military
advisers, which could lead to war with China or a domestic backlash. So they
chose the in-between option, doing only what was necessary to stave off a
Communist takeover at the time. This prevented a Communist victory till 1975.
But their policies of gradual escalation played into the hands of the North
Vietnamese, whose strategy was to drag out the war and make it increasingly
costly to the United States.

In effect, the Presidents chose to ''nibble the bullet rather than bite it,''
Mr. Betts said at a conference on ''The U.S. Experience in Vietnam'' held last
month at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington.

Another factor in Washington's decision making, scholars now say, was that in
the 1960's American political scientists were fascinated by theories of how the
United States could effectively fight limited wars, as opposed to all-out
conventional or nuclear wars. Theorists explored the question of how a nation
could use force or the threat of force to compel its adversary to back down.
Implicit in their theories was the idea that it was possible to signal your
opponent by gradually increasing threats.

In another new study, ''When Governments Collide: Coercion and Diplomacy in the
Vietnam Conflict, 1964-1968'' (1980), Wallace J.  Thies has shown how President
Johnson and his advisers believed they could ''fine-tune'' the bombing and their
peace offers to ''signal'' Hanoi to abandon its support for the Vietcong. But
President Johnson's program suffered from two serious flaws, argues Mr. Thies, a
professor of political science at Berkeley.

First of all, in a bureaucracy as large as the American Government, it proved
impossible to ''orchestrate'' our bombing and diplomacy.  For example, the
selection and timing of bombing targets often depended on extraneous factors
like the weather; coordination between the Air Force and diplomats was
difficult. As a result, what Washington intended to be a show of firmness often
appeared to Hanoi to be vacillation or weakness.

Second, Mr. Thies contends, Washington had little understanding of politics in
Hanoi and did not realize that the dominant group in the leadership, headed by
Le Duan, the party First Secretary, had staked their careers on victory in the
South after prolonged factional debate. By 1965, these men had already worked at
infiltration and organizing the war in the South for many years. Like their
American counterparts, they could not afford to be charged with losing South
Vietnam.

Compared with the numerous new studies on the origins of American involvement in
Vietnam, there has been little written on the war after 1966, and especially
after the Tet offensive in 1968, largely because of the unavailability of
materials. At the Johnson Library, relatively few documents have been
declassified for the period after 1965, and given Federal budget cutbacks and
the Reagan Administration's tightened procedures for declassification, library
officials say further progress will be slow.

The situation is even worse for the Nixon years. There is no equivalent of the
Pentagon Papers for Mr. Nixon's Presidency and there is no Nixon Presidential
library yet. So scholars are heavily dependent on the memoirs of Mr. Nixon and
his Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.

One of the best accounts, however, has been pieced together by George C.
Herring, a professor of American history at the University of Kentucky and
author of ''America's Longest War: The United States and Vietnam, 1950-1975''
(1979). Mr. Herring believes that President Nixon, like his predecessors, early
on rejected calls for withdrawal - which he saw as dishonorable - and appeals
for sharply increased escalation, feeling that he could solve a riddle that had
baffled earlier Presidents.

Mr. Nixon's eventual strategy - Vietnamization -emerged on an improvised basis
without a thorough policy review, Mr. Herring contends. In a paper written for
the recent conference on Vietnam in Washington, Mr. Herring charged that during
the first year of his Administration Mr. Nixon's policy may have been ''a
classic case of the President appeasing various bureaucratic constituencies by
giving them a bit of what they wanted.'' The military got to bomb North
Vietnam's sanctuaries in Cambodia; Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird got a
speeded-up pull-out of American troops from Vietnam to appease American opinion
(with Vietnamization, the war was turned over to the South Vietnamese Army -
ARVN -which was given new training and improved weapons) and the State
Department got negotiations with Hanoi. But Mr. Herring concludes that President
Nixon's plan did not provide either enough force to compel North Vietnam to
negotiate or sufficient concessions to entice Hanoi to the table. Like the
improvised strategies of the Johnson era, ''it offered only extended
stalemate.''

That there could be a negotiated end to the fighting was, throughout the war,
one of the most consistent beliefs of both policy makers in Washington and their
critics. But Allan E. Goodman, a professor at Georgetown University, believes
this was naive. In another of the new books, ''The Lost Peace: America's Search
for a Negotiated Settlement of the Vietnam War'' (1978), he argues that ''The
real obstacle to a negotiated settlement was probably not Washington's
diplomacy,'' but ''as Hanoi maintained ever since its first direct conversation
with Washington in 1962, the liberation of South Vietnam was an absolutely
indispensable prerequisite'' for a settlement.

In other words, North Vietnam was not prepared to compromise.  Hanoi was further
encouraged when American spokesmen assured it that American bombing of North
Vietnam was not intended to destroy the country. The North Vietnamese were aware
that the longer the war went on the more painful it was for the United States.
So Hanoi waited for Washington to make the concessions.

In the end, this was what happened. ''Nearly every time Washington made a
negotiating offer to Hanoi, the U.S. terms softened,'' Mr.  Goodman wrote, until
finally, in the Paris talks in 1972, Mr.  Kissinger agreed that the United
States would withdraw from Vietnam without obtaining a comparable pledge from
Hanoi.

Without access to more documents from the period, it is impossible to judge if
President Nixon and Mr. Kissinger believed the Paris accords gave South Vietnam
a real chance to survive or whether they felt the agreement was merely a
face-saving ''decent interval'' during which the United States could disentangle
itself from Vietnam. Either way, America's exit from Vietnam proved as stumbling
as its entry.  A conundrum that has baffled a generation of American military
officers is this: The Army won every battle it fought against the Vietcong and
the North Vietnamese, inflicting terrible losses on them. Yet Hanoi emerged the
victor. When Col. Harry G. Summers Jr.  was in Hanoi in 1975 as part of the
American military delegation overseeing the Peace Accords, he mentioned to a
North Vietnamese officer that the Communists had never defeated the Americans on
the battlefield. The North Vietnamese colonel replied: ''That may be so, but it
is also irrelevant.''

In the years since, Colonel Summers, an instructor at the Army War College at
Carlisle, Pa., has found that, despite the welter of writing about Vietnam, few
scholars have re-examined the military side of the war. To try to fill this
void, Colonel Summers, who fought in Korea and served two tours in Vietnam, has
turned out one of the most thoughtful and provocative military studies of the
war, titled ''On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War'' (1982).

Unlike some senior American commanders, Colonel Summers does not blame the
politicians, the protesters or the press for America's defeat. Instead, he finds
flaws in the military's own approach. Most important, the Army simply lacked a
strategy - an unforgivable sin for a soldier.

Instead of having a strategy, Colonel Summers argues, military and policy
planners got carried away by the mystique of fighting a counterinsurgency war.
In Colonel Summers's view, North Vietnam was the real opponent, but because
Hanoi hid its involvement behind a smokescreen of guerrillas, the United States
got tied down in fighting those insurgents. ''We were like a bull charging the
toreador's cape,'' he comments.

The result was that the Army got caught up in General Westmoreland's
search-and-destroy operations, which cost the lives of many American soldiers,
outraged public opinion and did not deal with the real source of Communist
strength - North Vietnam. Because of their helicopters and firepower, American
forces may have had the tactical initiative, but they confused that with the
strategic initiative, which Hanoi had all along.

Operating from their sanctuaries in Laos and Cambodia, the Communists controlled
the tempo of the fighting, and no matter how many Communists the Americans
killed, success depended on the number of men Hanoi started down the Ho Chi Minh
Trail. In this war of attrition, North Vietnam could not be beaten as long as it
was willing to pay the price.

Where most critics of American military policy in Vietnam have argued that the
United States tried to fight a guerrilla war using conventional tactics, Colonel
Summers contends - in one of his most controversial points -that it had always
been a conventional war. The French in Indochina fought against a guerrilla
army, he admits, but Hanoi's use of the Vietcong as proxies obfuscated the
issue.

The United States could have had a strategy, Colonel Summers maintains. Since
our goal was much the same as it had been in Korea, he believes, to stop the
expansion of a Communist state, we could have pursued a Korean solution -
cutting off North Vietnam from the South.

Quoting a plan first advanced by retired Gen. Bruce Palmer Jr., a former deputy
commander of the American Army in Vietnam, Colonel Summers suggests that, with
an expanded naval blockade, the army should have driven across the Demilitarized
Zone between the two Vietnams and then cut through Laos to the Thai border,
setting up defensive positions.

''This would have had a number of advantages,'' says Colonel Summers. It would
have required far fewer American troops. We could have fought on the defensive,
making maximum use of our best asset, our firepower, and reducing our
casualties. And it would have left rooting out the guerrillas to the South
Vietnamese Army, which was best equipped to do it, and would have kept Americans
out of the villages.

Colonel Summers rejects the argument that this strategy would have violated the
neutrality of Laos and Cambodia, which he thinks was a fiction. ''The North
Vietnamese never made a secret they were fighting an Indochina war,'' he says,
and, in fact, the new North Vietnamese history of the war admits that Hanoi had
''volunteers'' in Laos as early as 1959. ''Neutrality was a myth we inflicted on
ourselves,'' says Colonel Summers. He also quotes from the Hague Convention of
1907: ''A neutral country has the obligation not to allow its territory to be
used by a belligerent. If the neutral country is unwilling or unable to prevent
this, the other belligerent has the right to take appropriate counteraction.''

Colonel Summers also contends that the generals should have insisted that
President Johnson get a Congressional declaration of war before committing
American troops to Vietnam. President Johnson's attempt to fight the war on the
cheap, without telling the public about its real costs, led to the credibility
gap and helped spread the antiwar movement.

It was this lack of popular support for the war which also fostered the idea
that the Vietnam War was more immoral than other wars, Colonel Summers believes.
''People talk about the picture of the little girl running down the road who got
napalmed,'' he says. ''But tens of thousands of little girls got incinerated in
the fire-bomb raids on Dresden and Tokyo in World War II and we don't remember.
The difference is we believed World War II was legitimate.''

To underscore this point, Colonel Summers quotes from an article by General
Weyand, the last American commander in Vietnam: ''As military professionals we
must speak out, we must counsel our political leaders and alert the American
public that there is no such thing as a 'splendid little war.' ... War is death
and destruction. The American way of war is particularly violent, deadly and
dreadful. We believe in using 'things' - artillery, bombs, massive firepower -in
order to conserve our soldiers' lives. ... The Army must make the price of
involvement clear before we get involved, so that America can weigh the probable
costs of involvement against the dangers of noninvolvement. For there are worse
things than war.''

Like a number of officers, Colonel Summers raises the question of why some
members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff did not resign in protest when they sensed
the lack of a coherent strategy and President Johnson's attempt to fight the war
with limited means.

At the recent conference on Vietnam in Washington, retired Brig.  Gen. Edwin H.
Simmons, the director of Marine Corps History and Museums, said that he had
asked some of the Chiefs the question himself. ''The inevitable answer is: They
could work better from within,'' said General Simmons, who served two tours in
Vietnam with the Marines. It was one of the distortions of the Vietnam War, he
said, that some officers allowed the honored principle of civilian control of
the military to come to mean civilian leadership and management of the military
on the combat level in the field. Officers at all levels of command ''used
civilian control as an exoneration from moral responsibility,'' he charged.

General Simmons is currently supervising a 10-volume official history of the
Marines in Vietnam, one of a series of such projects by each of the armed
services. Taken together, they consti-tute the most ambitious and detailed work
now being done on the war. The largest in scope is a planned 20-volume series by
the Army's Center of Military History in Washington.

The Army's earlier 80-volume history of World War II has received high marks
from scholars for its integrity. But Vincent H. Demma -one of 10 historians
selected to help write the Vietnam volumes and who has been working on the
project since the mid-1960's - admits that victory is easier to record than
defeat. Moreover, the writers face another problem, a wealth of documentation
left over from a conflict that was not only the first television war, but also
the first Xerox and computer war. In Suitland, Md., outside Washington, in a
warehouse the size of three football fields, repose more than 60,000 cubic feet
of records shipped home by the Army, mostly uncatalogued.

Mr. Demma hopes this material and other archives, including taperecorded
interviews with officers as they left Vietnam, will someday furnish what is now
missing - ''an understanding of the war from the foxhole up rather than from the
policy makers down.'' Aside from some novels by ex-soldiers, very little has
been written on the actual conduct of the war, says Mr. Demma. But he feels that
the special access he and his fellow authors have to still-classified material,
including that in the Presidential libraries and other Government organizations
like the Central Intelligence Agency, should eventually provide a more accurate
picture of Vietnam.  Despite all the blunders, a number of historians and
military specialists are coming to conclude that the American military effort in
Vietnam was more successful than was recognized at the time. When Mr. Popkin,
for instance, returned to Vietnam in 1969 and 1970 to check on the villages he
had studied in 1966, he was surprised to find that the balance of power in the
countryside had shifted dramatically in the South Vietnamese Government's favor.
This was, in part, the result of the huge Communist mistake in the 1968 Tet
offensive, when the best Vietcong units, which had long preserved their strength
by operating clandestinely, exposed themselves in open attacks. They were
decimated by American and South Vietnamese counterat-tacks. American officials
estimated the Communists lost 40,000 killed in the Tet fighting, the bulk of
them Southern guerrillas rather than North Vietnamese.

Mr. Tang, the former N.L.F. Minister of Justice, has described Tet as
''catastrophic''; he calculated the Vietcong lost half their forces and new
recruits could not be found lo-cally to replace them.  As a result, by the early
70's, 90 percent of the fighting was being done by North Vietnamese troops and
the war turned more and more into a conventional conflict between North and
South. (Mr. Pike and some other specialists have speculated that Hanoi may have
deliberately allowed the Vietcong to be massacred at Tet to assure North
Vietnam's control over the Communist movement in the South, much as the
advancing Russian Army stood by during the Warsaw uprising in 1944.)

But at the time, most Americans, shocked by the daring Vietcong attack on the
United States Embassy in Saigon and the weeks of street fighting in Hue, felt
Tet was a defeat for the United States. It led to President Johnson's
announcement that he would not run again, his proclamation of a bombing halt
over North Vietnam and his decision to stop the escalation of American ground
forces. For most Americans, Tet was the beginning of the end of our involvement.

Even those American officials and journalists who claimed in 1968 that Tet was a
military defeat for the Communists still tended to credit Hanoi with a masterful
strategy -sacrificing troops to deal Washington a psychological blow. But that
view, too, was wrong.

When he was in Vietnam for his television series, Mr. Karnow interviewed Tran
Do, one of the Communist generals in charge of the Tet attacks. The general
denied that Tet was designed to have a political impact in the United States;
instead, he said, the Communists fully believed there would be popular uprisings
and that they could ''annihilate the U.S. and Saigon troops.'' The political
impact ''was an accidental byproduct,'' the general said. Major popular
uprisings never took place.

Tet, in fact, ''totally destroyed the idea of the inevitability of an N.L.F.
victory in the villages,'' says Mr. Popkin. ''When the villagers saw the stacks
of Vietcong bodies in Saigon on their local TV sets, they rushed to get their
sons into local defense forces'' so that they would not be drafted by the
Vietcong.

At the same time, the sheer weight of American military spending and aid
programs began to be felt. Many peasants rushed to work for the Americans,
building roads, bridges, runways and schools.  Typically, Mr. Popkin found, in
the 18 villages he studied, the peasants used their earnings to buy a baby
piglet, raised it, sold it, and with the profits invested in a diesel water pump
to irrigate their rice fields. With these mechanized pumps the farmers in the
Mekong Delta could at last get two rice crops a year, and the standard of living
in the countryside started to take off.

In the early and mid-1960's, the peasants had had an economic incentive to live
in a ''liberated'' or Communist village, Mr.  Popkin found, because the Vietcong
taxes were lower than the rent peasants had to pay landlords in Government-held
areas. But by the time of Tet, the incentive was reversed. As the Vietcong's
military situation grew more desperate, their taxes increased. And now that the
peasants had pigs, chickens and rice they could sell in Government markets, they
got angry when the Communists cut a road.  ''The Vietcong may have been more
honest than the Government, but they couldn't compete with water pumps, chemical
fertilizer and Hondas,'' says Mr. Popkin. He has developed some of his ideas
about the farmers' material interests in a book widely used in college courses,
titled ''The Rational Peasant: The Political Economy of Rural Society in
Vietnam'' (1979).

In the light of Hanoi's postwar revelations, specialists are revising even their
views of the Phoenix program, the scheme sponsored by the C.I.A. to destroy the
Vietcong apparatus in the villages by arresting or killing local Communist
cadres. ''The conven tional liberal wisdom at the time was that it was a
terrible thing,'' says Mr. Karnow. ''It killed people indiscriminately and was
subject to corruption by the South Vietnamese who turned in people for the
reward money. But the people I talked to on my trip in Vietnam said it had wiped
out many Southern cadres and helped cripple the N.L.F.''

Overall, by 1970 nearly 90 percent of the countryside was officially
''pacified,'' compared with only 33 percent in 1965, a crude though significant
index of change.

Professor Herring at the University of Kentucky has suggested that ''the
ultimate irony'' of the war may be that the American position in South Vietnam
was stronger at the end of 1972, just before the Paris peace agreement, than at
any previous point in the war. Mr.  Popkin concurs and adds, ''There's no doubt
that if Nixon had kept up U.S. aid after 1973, South Vietnam might have
survived.'' But that is one of the great historical ifs. American patience had
run out.

What, then, went wrong after the Paris accords? Why did South Vietnam collapse
in 1975 under a North Vietnamese attack that was designed only to prepare for a
bigger, final offensive in 1976?  (According to Douglas Pike, Gen. Vo Nguyen
Giap, the North Vietnamese commander, was so startled by the rapidity of the
South Vietnamese retreat that he cautioned his officers in the field by radio
against falling into a trap.)

Clearly one problem was the poor leadership and corruption that bedeviled the
Saigon Government throughout the war. But Professor Tai believes that in
fairness we should recognize that Saigon faced problems Hanoi did not have.
North Vietnam could forge a more disciplined state because its society was more
homogeneous than that of the South. Most anti-Communists in the North moved to
the South in 1954, and the North never had to deal with the South's fractious
babble of sects like the Buddhists, the Hoa Hao and the Cao Dai.

Mrs. Tai also believes that the American peace movement misunderstood how the
South Vietnamese people felt. ''There were many people like me who did not
support Thieu but who didn't like the Communists either,'' she says. Indeed, she
represented the kind of third force that American officials in Saigon hoped
would somehow emerge. ''I didn't think a Communist victory would lead to any
improvement for the middle class, or even for the peasants, in whose name the
revolution was fought,'' she says. In 1977, her father, despite his Communist
background, was arrested for protesting the human-rights situation in Vietnam;
he died of starvation in a ''reeducation'' camp in 1981.

On the basis of his village interviews, Mr. Popkin also came to a conclusion
that the American left overrated the popularity of the Communists. With his
training in polling, Mr. Popkin noticed a number of ''unobtrusive indicators.''
''When you want to know what radio stations people are listening to,'' he says,
''you don't ask them. You just look in their cars at a parking lot to see where
the dials are set.''

One sign was that while many South Vietnamese soldiers deserted to go home -just
as Union troops did in the American Civil War - they did not defect in large
units to the Communists. This was in sharp contrast to China, where during the
1940's whole Nationalist divisions defected to Mao Zedong's Communist
guerrillas. Mr. Popkin noted, too, that in the Tet offensive, when the
Communists' surprise attacks trapped many Americans in Vietnamese residential
areas, very few were betrayed to the Communists.

''It tells you,'' says Mr. Popkin, ''that the problem in Vietnam was not too
much support for the Communists, or lack of support for the Saigon Government.
It was just a rotten government. You can't fight something with nothing.''

Another reason for Saigon's collapse in 1975, South Vietnamese and American
officials have long insisted, was the cutback in American aid mandated by a
Congress which lost interest in the war after the G.I.'s had left in 1973.

American military aid to South Vietnam and Laos dropped from about $2.5 billion
in 1973 to $1.6 billion in 1974 and then plunged further to a projected $700
million in 1975, half of it covering shipping costs. When Hanoi's attack came,
South Vietnam's armed forces were receiving only 2 percent of the funds and
supplies American soldiers had gotten in 1968 or 1969, according to retired Maj.
Gen. John E.  Murray, the chief American military administrator in Saigon in
1974.  In other words, said Gen. Van Tien Dung, North Vietnam's field commander,
in his memoir on the final offensive, the Thieu regime was compelled ''to fight
a poor man's war,'' a fact that Hanoi took carefully into account.

''You know what Napoleon said,'' General Murray pointed out at the conference on
Vietnam in Washington. ''God is on the side of the biggest battalions. And right
about then, God was on the side of the Communists. They were bigger, they were
stronger. That's why ARVN lost the war.''

But there was something else at work. The huge American investment in Vietnam,
Mr. Karnow points out, had ''lulled the South Vietnamese into believing that the
United States would never leave. Nobody in his right mind would spend billions
to build the complex at Cam Ranh Bay and then depart. The Americans must be
crazy. They were crazy.  The South Vietnamese were left holding the bag.''

Professor Elliott at Pomona College thinks this dependence is the key to
understanding the war. ''It seems to me,'' he says, ''that the Communists had an
appeal that prevented the South Vietnamese from coalescing around a
non-Communist government. Because the Saigon regimes were always dependent on
the United States, in the eyes of the nationalistic Vietnamese, this created a
moral paralysis.'' Mr.  Elliott says he could see this in interviews he
conducted with Vietcong defectors in the Mekong Delta during the war. ''However
much they had come to dislike the Communists, they acknowledged the Front had a
moral appeal which undermined the Government.'' So the South Vietnamese faced an
insoluble contradiction. ''They couldn't win without us, but they couldn't win
with us either.'' One group whose influence on Vietnam has been downgraded by
the new scholars is the antiwar movement. From studying public-opinion polls,
John E. Mueller, a professor of political science at the University of
Rochester, has found that the Vietnam War was no more unpopular than the Korean
War - until American casualties in Vietnam surpassed those in Korea. That line
was crossed, coincidentally, during the Tet offensive. Professor Mueller
believes that the tactics of some of the protesters, with flag burnings and
anti-American slogans, actually undercut their credibility with the public.
''The antiwar movement picked up negative popularity ratings in an almost
unprecedented degree,'' he says.

Washington was certainly aware of the protests, says Mr. Mueller, who has
written about the subject in ''War, Presidents and Public Opinion'' (1973). But
the Johnson Administration's about-faces in 1968 - stopping the bombing of North
Vietnam and ending our troop escalation -had more to do with disaffection within
the Government itself over how badly the war was going and its high costs, he
asserts.

Another little-known reason for the Government's shift in 1968, Mr. Mueller has
found, is that within the Government ''the value of saving Vietnam from
Communism had gone down since we got committed in 1965.'' China, formerly seen
as a threat, had become engulfed in the Cultural Revolution, and Indonesia,
which had appeared on the brink of a Communist takeover, massacred its Communist
Party.

Mr. Mueller also points out that President Johnson's near defeat by Senator
Eugene McCarthy in the New Hampshire Democratic primary, which influenced
President Johnson's decision not to run again, was caused more by angry hawks
than by doves. At the ballot box, anti-Johnson hawks outnumbered anti-Johnson
doves by 3 to 2.

The protesters did have an effect on the Presidential elections.  Their attacks
on Vice President Humphrey ''probably gave Nixon the slim margin of votes
necessary to win in 1968,'' says Mr. Mueller.  Then, in 1972, with the
Democratic convention controlled by opponents of the war, ''they picked George
McGovern, arguably the worst choice as a Democratic candidate in modern times.''

But Mr. Mueller discounts the charge by hawks that the protest movement
strengthened Hanoi's resolve and helped the United States lose Vietnam. ''Hanoi
may have been encouraged by the peace movement,'' he says, ''but the North
Vietnamese were fanatics who would have continued the war for as long as
necessary to win.'' In another of his studies, Mr. Mueller estimated that the
North Vietnamese and Vietcong suffered 500,000 to 600,000 battle deaths - about
2.5 percent to 3 percent of their prewar population. By comparison, the United
States lost only three-tenths of 1 percent of its population in battle during
World War II, and the Japanese, whom Americans regarded as true fanatics, 1.4
percent. ''The crucial mistake the U.S. made was to underestimate how much
punishment North Vietnam would take,'' he says.  Are there lessons Americans can
learn from Vietnam? The question is important, because it was one of the
supposed lessons of World War II - not to appease aggression - that helped get
the United States into Vietnam. There is little consensus, however, on what can
be gleaned from Vietnam. James C. Thomson Jr., curator at the Nieman Foundation
at Harvard, who was a member of President Johnson's National Security Council
staff and who opposed American involvement in Vietnam, has proposed that the
''central lesson'' is that we should never again ''take on the job of trying to
defeat a nationalist anticolonial movement under indigenous Communist control in
former French Indochina.'' This is, notes Mr. Thomson wryly, ''a lesson of less
than universal significance.''

But Robert E. Osgood, a professor of American foreign policy at the Johns
Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, believes Americans have
learned the danger of intervening in a revolutionary war where the local
government is weak. In such cases, the United States must commit so many troops
to compensate for the regime's shortcomings that it ends up only undermining the
government. El Salvador is an example, says Professor Osgood, who was one of the
most important theorists on limited war in the 1960's.

''But this is not necessarily a lesson you can apply in every revolutionary
war,'' he adds. In the Philippines after World War II, American aid provided a
critical ''missing component'' that stopped a Communist insurgency. So to
exclude American intervention in every contingency ''is probably overdrawing the
lesson,'' he says.

The problem, in Professor Osgood's view, is that there are many variables for
Washington to ponder: the strength of the local regime, the resolve of its
adversary, the possibilities for getting out if American intervention proves
unsuccessful.

The real issue is the magnitude of American interests and the threat to them.
''That was a mistake in Vietnam -our greatly inflated rhetoric about falling
dominoes turned out to be wrong,'' Professor Osgood points out. But American
foreign policy is still wedded to containment, and questions may arise again
about combating a Communist-led revolution or takeover in the Middle East or
Central America, he notes.

If that prospect arises, says Mr. Betts, we have not really learned what to do
except that the United States can fight only if the war is kept short. ''We know
more now,'' he believes, but we do not know how to avoid a disastrous war except
at the possible price that Presidents Kennedy and Johnson foresaw -disastrous
acceptance of defeat.

Another lesson is the need for better leadership, says Ernest R.  May, a
professor of history at Harvard. At the Washington conference on Vietnam, he
recalled that in 1948 George C. Marshall, then Secretary of State, opposed a
military proposal to send 10,000 American advisers to aid the Chinese
Nationalists because it involved a commitment of uncertain magnitude and
indefinite duration. ''What we did not have in 1965 was an individual of
Marshall's stature and independent judgment,'' Mr. May said.

There are also lessons for small states that might look to the United States for
help. At the Washington meeting, Bui Diem, who served as South Vietnam's
Ambassador to the United States, issued a warning. ''My advice to small nations
considering U.S. aid is that they should be wary of the United States,'' he
said. ''They should pay very close attention to the American domestic political
system, because U.S. policies can change quickly. We small nations can end up
losing higher stakes than the United States itself because, for the American,
you can turn the page and say, 'Well, it is an unhappy chapter for U.S.
history.' But that is not the same now for the South Vietnamese.''

And there are lessons for the military. The most important, Colonel Summers
believes, is that ''we must relearn that public support is critical to American
military strategy.'' To make his point, Colonel Summers quotes from General
Weyand, the man who welcomed the P.O.W.'s to Saigon in 1973. ''The American Army
really is a people's army in the sense that it belongs to the American people,''
the general said. ''When the American people lose their commitment, it is futile
to try to keep the Army committed. In the final analysis, the American Army is
not so much an arm of the executive branch as it is an arm of the American
people.'' Up at the blackboard, a teaching assistant had chalked in the names to
be discussed in the day's lecture at the University of Iowa. There, in large
letters, were Robert McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy, and Ngo Dinh Diem and the
Green Berets.

Fifteen years ago, when Vietnam first invaded the American campus, they would
all have been household words, objects of heated debate and perhaps derision.
But to the 300 students in the large classroom, they were like something from an
arcane novel, to be carefully copied down.

''For the students, history begins about 1980,'' says Stephen Vlastos, a
professor of history at the University of Iowa who is in charge of the course,
''The Vietnam War in Historical Perspective.'' Indeed, most of them were not
even born at the time of the Americansupported coup against President Diem.
Katharyn Bine, a freshman from Beaman, Iowa, a farming town of 209 people, was
only 1 year old when Lyndon Johnson dispatched the first American ground forces
to Vietnam in 1965. Before taking the course, she had heard the name Ho Chi
Minh, but she had not known who Diem or McNamara or Bundy was.

Yet Miss Bine and the course at Iowa represent another development - a quiet
revival of interest in Vietnam on campus 10 years after the last American troops
were withdrawn. More than two dozen colleges this year are offering courses on
the war or Vietnamese history, ranging from Harvard to Thomas More College in
northern Kentucky.  Almost all the classes have drawn more students than their
professors expected.

What are the students learning? It seems to depend on the professor, his own
view of Vietnam and the books he assigns. Not surprisingly, a majority of the
professors were strongly influenced by the antiwar movement. Mr. Vlastos, for
instance, helped organize a demonstration against President Johnson while he was
an undergraduate at Princeton in 1966. He is candid about his antiwar
sentiments.  ''It's the reason I'm teaching the course,'' he says. ''At the
beginning of the course, I told the students I believe the war was a terrible
mistake.''

Professor Vlastos is also an example of another heritage of academic feeling
about the war. Distaste for the war was so widespread that few academics
specialized in Vietnam, and so today most of the new courses on Vietnam are
being taught by professors who were trained in subjects like American history or
Chinese studies.  Mr. Vlastos got his Ph.D. from Berkeley in Japanese history.

Even more striking, though nearly three million Americans served in Vietnam,
very few of the professors teaching about Vietnam were ever there. At a
conference last fall on ''Vietnam and the Classroom'' in Kentucky, sponsored by
the Kentucky Association of Teachers of History, only one of the 11 speakers and
only three of the 75 participating teachers had been in Vietnam.

''If we were talking about World War II, this room would be full of veterans,''
observed T. Wayne Beasley, a professor at Murray State University in western
Kentucky. But, Mr. Beasley complained, ''with Vietnam you people who are
teaching about it are the same people who were protesting it as students in the
1960's.''

At the Newark campus of Rutgers University, H. Bruce Franklin is worried about a
different problem. Mr. Franklin, a professor of English, says he was distressed
when he polled the students in his course, ''America and Vietnam,'' and found
the majority believed the United States lost the war because ''we didn't try
hard enough.'' ''This illusion has to be dispelled immediately,'' Mr. Franklin
adds. So he stresses the damage the United States did to Vietnam, like bombing
it between 1964 and 1969 with more than nine times the tonnage of high
explosives dropped in the entire Pacific theater during World War II. Mr.
Franklin rejects a suggestion that such figures may be misleading because many
of the bombs dropped on Vietnam landed in the jungle, not on civilian villages.

Despite the prevalence of antiwar views among most professors, some teachers
have begun to incorporate the more complex and dispassionate new scholarship
into their curriculum. One of the most imaginative new classes is at the
University of Louisville, taught by an unlikely duo: a hawkish former artillery
officer in Vietnam, Richard N.  Pfeiffer, and a confirmed antiwar activist with
a Ph.D. in East Asian history, Andrea McElderry. Miss McElderry is an associate
professor of history; Mr. Pfeiffer is a vice president of an industrial-supply
company who teaches in his spare time.

''The idea of the class is to give the students as many different points of view
as we can about the war, because we don't think anyone has solved Vietnam,''
says Miss McElderry. ''We don't let our students say things like 'This side won
the war.' ''

To broaden the course, the two teachers invite guest speakers from the
Louisville area, including a former Green Beret, a retired Army general, a
one-time high official in the Saigon Government, a peacemovement activist and a
psychiatrist from a Veterans' Administration hospital who treats troubled
veterans.

Miss McElderry feels the unusual chemistry between her and Mr.  Pfeiffer has
been beneficial. ''Until I met Richard, I was sure of my views about Vietnam. He
has made me rethink them, and I have influenced him, too. I couldn't have taught
the course the same way with my Asian specialist colleagues, because all of them
were getting 2-S student deferments during Vietnam.'' - F.B.

Perhaps no event in American history has inspired such a torrent of writing as
the Vietnam War. Among the more than 200 books already written, the following
include some of those most widely used in college courses or most respected by
specialists.

GENERAL

George C. Herring, ''America's Longest War,'' John Wiley & Sons, 1979. The most
balanced overview of the war, though sketchy in parts, by a liberal antiwar
critic.

ORIGINS OF THE CONFLICT

William J. Duiker, ''The Communist Road to Power in Vietnam,'' Westview Press,
1981. The best concise account of the growth and tactics of the Communist
movement.

David G. Marr, ''Vietnamese Anti-Colonialism,'' University of California Press,
1971. A brilliant study of the origins of nationalism in Vietnam that shows how
the Communists emerged from a traditional context.

Frances FitzGerald, ''Fire in the Lake,'' Little, Brown & Co., 1972. A best
seller that attributed American failure to cultural shortsightedness. Its
findings are now disputed by some scholars.

Jeffrey Race, ''War Comes to Long An,'' University of California Press, 1972. A
perceptive analysis of Vietcong success in one province that suggests the
Communists were shrewder about political power and economic grievances than were
South Vietnamese officials.  Many of the conclusions have been invalidated by
the events after Tet.

THE AMERICAN SIDE

David Halberstam, ''The Best and the Brightest,'' Random House, 1972. This
wartime best seller traced our descent into the Vietnam quagmire to the cold-war
mentality shared by our superachiever Presidents and their advisers.

Leslie H. Gelb and Richard K. Betts, ''The Irony of Vietnam: The System
Worked,'' The Brookings Institution, 1979. A challenge to Mr.  Halberstam's
thesis. The authors argue that Washington's policy machinery worked well, but
that the Presidents erred in seeking only to do the minimal necessary not to
lose during their own terms.

Larry Berman, ''Planning a Tragedy: The Americanization of the War in Vietnam,''
W.W. Norton, 1982. A detailed look at President Johnson's fateful decision to
begin the buildup of American troops in Vietnam; it suggests that L.B.J. was
more concerned with preserving his Great Society than with a careful
consideration of the war.

Wallace J. Thies, ''When Governments Collide: Coercion and Diplomacy in the
Vietnam Conflict, 1964-68,'' University of California Press, 1980. A study of
why L.B.J.'s bombing campaign against North Vietnam failed. It indicates that
Washington had scant understanding of politics in Hanoi and that American
bureaucracy was incapable of orchestrating bombing and diplomacy simultaneously.

The Pentagon Papers. Now in several editions, with the longclassified segment -
''The Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War: The Negotiating Volumes of the
Pentagon Papers,'' edited by George C. Herring - to be published in July by the
University of Texas Press.

THE MILITARY SIDE

Don Oberdorfer, ''Tet!'' Doubleday & Co., 1971. A first-rate dramatic account of
the war's biggest battle.

Col. Harry G. Summers Jr., ''On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam
War,'' Presidio Press, 1982. A thoughtful look at why the American Army won
every battle in Vietnam but lost the war.

Stuart A. Herrington, ''Silence Was a Weapon: The Vietnam War in the Villages,''
Presidio Press, 1982. A poignant, personal account by an Army district adviser
who discovered the Vietcong to be a formidable opponent.

Gen. Van Tien Dung, ''Our Great Spring Victory: An Account of the Liberation of
South Vietnam,'' translated by John Spragens Jr., Monthly Review, 1977. How
North Vietnam planned and won the final offensive in 1975, by the Chief of Staff
of North Vietnam's People's Army.

VIETNAM IN LITERATURE

Graham Greene, ''The Quiet American,'' Viking, 1956. The quintessential story of
the liberal American whose anti-Communist idealism leads him astray in the
tropical, complex world of Vietnam.

Philip Caputo,''A Rumor of War,'' Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1977. A Marine
lieutenant's sad, angry memoir of a year in combat.  Michael Herr,
''Dispatches,'' Knopf, 1977. Compelling, sympathetic sketches of grunts, written
in their lingo of fear, camaraderie and bitterness. - F.B.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of victory celebration in Saigon photo of South
Vietnamese trying to leave country photo of protesters at Berkeley campus photo
of Prof. Samuel Popkin photo of Gen. William Westmoreland photo of Col Harry
Summers Jr. photo of Paris peace talks photo of demonstrators at Berkeley campus
photo of Stephen Vlastos with his students

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GERMANY'S VOLATILE GREENS

BYLINE: By James M. Markham; James M. Markham is The New York Times Bonn bureau
chief.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 37, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4777 words


We want to die so that America may live!'' proclaims the Greens' grim poster,
showing a brightly colored Old Glory snapping over the ashen ruins of a nukedout
German city. ''Yes to NATO!'' continues the message. ''Yes to rearmament!'' This
bit of doomsday humor is one strand in one of the most taut, uncertain - and
possibly momentous - election campaigns in the 34-year history of West Germany.
Many West Germans think the main issue in the coming March 6 elections ought to
be the alarming condition of their once robust economy, dragging under the
weight of 2.5 million unemployed, a record 10 percent out of work.  But for the
Green Party, a mercurial coalition of young environmentalists, antinuclear
pacifists, feminists and re-treaded Marxist-Leninists, the main issue is
missiles. At almost any price, the Greens want to prevent American cruise and
Pershing 2 medium-range missiles from being stationed in West Germany at the end
of this year.

The Greens' campaign will feature an ''International Tribunal Against
First-Strike and Mass-Destructive Weapons'' in Nuremberg - where Nazi war
criminals were tried - and a touring political rock concert that will crisscross
the nation in search of votes. It is anything but a sure thing, but if these
efforts actually succeed in playing on West Germans' palpable fears of nuclear
war, it is not inconceivable that the Greens might just find themselves on March
6 holding the parliamentary balance of power between the nation's two big
parties, the left-of-center Social Democrats and the conservative Christian
Democrats. Sitting in the airy, modernistic Bundestag would be a score of Green
deputies who believe that West Germany should abandon the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization and work for a neutral Europe free of alliances with East and West.
If the Greens had their way, the defense of West Germany, which today is the
Continental cornerstone of the alliance, would be left to small-scale civilian
guerrilla units that would resort to industrial sabotage to deter a Warsaw Pact
onslaught.  Since neither the Social Democrats nor the Christian Democrats have
usually been able to count on winning an outright Bundestag majority (Konrad
Adenauer did it once, in 1957), the small, liberal Free Democrats have been an
essential swing party. Last fall, under the pressures of economic decline, the
Free Democrats ended 13 years of cooperation with the Social Democrats and
fatefully switched to the Christian Democrats -bringing the avuncular Helmut
Kohl to power as Chancellor. But the little Free Democrat Party was torn by this
move, which meant abandoning the still-popular Social Democrat Helmut Schmidt.
Since then, the Free Democrats have been fighting for their political existence,
and opinion polls show them fluttering near the 5 percent of the popular vote
needed to get into the Bundestag.

As the Free Democrats have faltered, the Greens have grown. Founded as a party
only in 1979, they now hold seats in six of West Germany's 11 state
legislatures, including West Berlin. For the March election, opinion polls show
them hovering near 5 percent of the electorate - two million of 43 million
voting-age West Germans. Some West Germans have trouble taking the long-haired,
punkish Greens seriously, and major newspapers have not assigned correspondents
to cover the party full time. Still, more orthodox politicians have not
hesitated to lash out at the Greens, as if they had come into being with the
express purpose of destabilizing West Germany, reviving unsettling memories of
the chaotic Weimar Republic.

The Greens respond that they are, after all, West Germans. In many instances,
they are turned-off political stepchildren of Willy Brandt's and Helmut
Schmidt's Social Democrats. Their fears about nuclear war, and their nostalgia
for a rural society that has been cemented over by massive industrialization,
are shared by many ordinary West Germans - as are their doubts about the quality
and reliablity of American leadership under Ronald Reagan.

In fact, Green positions sometimes are merely extreme formulations of sentiments
voiced elsewhere in muted, more respectable tones. In a country with a weak
sense of national identity, they reach haphazardly, instinctively, for the
threads of a new consensus of what West Germany should be. Their political views
happen to be profoundly dangerous to NATO. But in an up-tight, rule-bound
country, the Greens' irreverent antics are also a breath of fresh air.  The
Greens are the latest edition of youthful rebellion in West Germany. Dotted
lines connect them to the student movement of the 1960's, which in West Germany
cut its teeth on the issues of Vietnam and the rights of unorthodox
intellectuals to teach in universities.  An emblem of continuity, the
39-year-old Rudi (Red Rudi) Dutschke, guru of the 1960's, had joined the Greens
and was about to campaign for them when he died three years ago.

A violent parenthesis followed the fading of the West German student movement in
the 1970's, and a tiny minority - the Baader-Meinhof's gang - pursued its
''armed struggle'' against the state. The terrorist campaign peaked in 1977, and
has since been decimated by efficient police work. But while the Baader-Meinhof
gang was getting headlines, other counterculture movements -women's groups,
ecological organizations, homosexuals, citizens' initiatives against nuclear
power plants and a Protestant-led pacifist campaign - were sending down roots.
The isolated city of West Berlin, whose male residents are draft exempt, acted
as a magnet for many rootless young people. A squatters' culture took hold in
forcibly occupied vacant slums near the wall. In the spring of 1979, Die
Tageszeitung, a daily newspaper, was launched in Berlin to air the radical,
experimental views of this community, which saw itself in counterpoint to the
acquisitive consumer culture West Germany had become since the war. The young
Germans' yearning for a sylvan, ecologically clean land was in stark contrast to
the cramped, urban realities of everyday West German life.

This wave of resistance to the established order might have remained politically
dispersed, but several developments pulled it together. One was the
extraordinary durability of the coalition between the Social Democrats and the
Free Democrats, first forged under Willy Brandt in 1969. Until it split up last
autumn, the coalition had for 13 years pulled the Social Democrats to the center
of the political spectrum, leaving no real alternative to their left. During
those years of Social Democrat moderation and Government responsibility, the
extreme left - which in other Western European countries is accommodated within
Communist or Socialist parties - felt it had no home. The Greens became that
political home in 1979, when they took a startling 3.2 percent of the West
German vote in the elections for the largely ceremonial European Parliament in
Strasbourg, France. In the same year, NATO decided to deploy cruise and Pershing
2 missiles in Western Europe to counter Soviet SS-2O's, and the Greens' fluid
constituency finally had a unifying issue: opposition to first-strike weapons.
As it happens, their deployment is also the hottest issue facing the West German
Government in 1983.  Should Bonn renege on its commitment to deploy, the NATO
plan could well unravel in other Western European countries designated to
receive the missiles. This in turn could trigger an anti-European, go-it-alone
backlash in the United States.

It is a fine irony that a party deeply suspicious of the United States was
founded by one Petra Karin Kelly, 35, who learned politics from Robert F.
Kennedy, Hubert H. Humphrey and the American anti-Vietnam War movement. Petra
Kelly is a blend of German passion and American pragmatism; she speaks an
American English frozen somewhere in the let-it-all-hang-out 1960's, and has a
knack for transforming autobiography into political doctrine. She is,
paradoxically, the star and standard-bearer of a political party that rejects
the very idea of permanent leaders. She wants deeply to be a member of the
Bundestag.

Born to Roman Catholic parents in the southern Bavarian town of Gunzburg, Petra
Kelly was sent at an early age to a convent, and for a while thought she would
become a nun or a missionary. ''I always thought I had to do a great thing
sometime for hunger, to stop it,'' recalls the intense, frail German woman whose
gaunt eyes bespeak a way of life that has abolished sleep as a daily need. ''I
had that vision,'' she says.

When she was 7, her father abandoned her mother, who later married John E.
Kelly, an American officer stationed in West Germany. In 1960, when she was 13,
the family moved to Georgia, where the girl mastered English, ''crying every
night until I learned it.'' The Kellys shifted again, to Hampton, Va. At Hampton
High School, Petra Kelly began debating the Vietnam War: ''I started these
things - 'Was there really democracy in the United States?' ''

Petra Kelly enrolled in the School of International Service at American
University in Washington, working in the student library, provoking debates on
international affairs and, of course, joining ''the nonviolent occupation of the
university president's office.'' An engaging woman who believes in going to the
top to find an audience for her opinions, she was befriended by Hubert Humphrey
and worked in Bobby Kennedy's Presidential campaign. On the night of Martin
Luther King's assassination, her history professor, Elspeth Davies Rostow, the
wife of Walt W. Rostow, invited the young German student home, out of the
turmoil of riot-torn Washington. The guest was shocked to find herself in the
presence of President Johnson's national security adviser - ''This man who was
responsible for Vietnam,'' says Petra Kelly, speaking at her usual rapid pace.
''I couldn't figure out how Mrs. Rostow could live with a man who was a
warmonger. They are all very nice people, but so alienated from what they do.''
(In Bonn, she has gotten to know the courtly American Ambassador, Arthur F.
Burns; visiting American military officers seek her views, and she has a
standing invitation to address the Council on Foreign Relations in New York.)

As Petra Kelly depicts it, the central emotional and political moment of her
life was the slow and painful death of her 10-year-old half-sister, Grace
Patricia Kelly, from eye cancer in 1970. Petra Kelly is convinced that overdoses
of radiation treatment at a Heidelberg clinic killed the girl. Her death has
become a unifying metaphor in Kelly's eclectic political ideology, pitting her
against the triad of radiation treatment, nuclear power and nuclear weapons.
These are what the Greens call ''the life-and-death issues,'' where compromise
is unthinkable, immoral.

''I never wanted to become an American,'' says Petra Kelly, who legally never
did. ''That was clear. I had always been in exile.'' After graduating with
honors from American University, she went to the Netherlands, because her dead
sister had always wanted to visit Rotterdam. She learned Dutch, and wrote a
master's thesis for the University of Amsterdam attempting to demonstrate that
the covert aim of the Marshall Plan was to install conservative Christian
Democrats in power in postwar Europe. In 1972, Petra Kelly joined the staff of
the European Community in Brussels, swiftly irritating her bosses by digging
into archives to turn up evidence that Common Market monies were being diverted
to right-wing European political figures. Struck by Chancellor Willy Brandt's
conciliatory gesture of falling to his knees at the Polish monument to the
victims of the Warsaw ghetto uprising, she joined his Social Democrat party.

But like many young, left-wing Social Democrats, she gradually grew disenchanted
with the centrist policies of Brandt's successor, Helmut Schmidt - especially
his acceptance of nuclear power. With the bold notion of forming an alternative
political party, she met with members of the so-called B.B.U., an umbrella
organization of West German environmentalists and antinuclear groups. ''Old
leftists said,'' she remembers wryly, '' 'How can ecology take priority over the
economy?' '' At Christmas 1978, still an unknown, she fired off a letter to
Schmidt, telling him she was leaving his party. The Greens were founded the next
year.  But there are many shades of Green, and other Green voices. Last November
in Hagen, in the industrial deathscape of the recessionidled Ruhr, and again
last month in Sindelfingen in southern Germany, youthful Green delegates worked
together, chaotically at best, preparing for the critical March elections. They
rejected a practical suggestion from Petra Kelly that the incumbent Green
leadership, including herself, stay on until the election. The sacrosanct Green
principle of leadership rotation - to short-circuit the corruptions of power -
was inflexibly enforced. Procedural wrangles, impromptu speeches and some nasty
personal attacks kept the 650 delegates from completing most of their business
at Hagen. They adopted a contradictory document about West Germany's sagging
economy that called for the dismantling of nuclear plants and arms industries
and tut-tutted over unemployment, but questioned economic growth as a remedy
(''The demand for jobs at any price is not for the Greens'').

At Hagen, the Green delegates split their votes. They elected Rainer Trampert, a
36-year-old, former member of a small Marxist-Leninist group called the
Kommunistischer Bund (K.B.), to one of the party's key spokesman slots. To
assuage their ecological consciences, the delegates elected a second spokesman,
William Knabe, a gentle, ineffectual 59-year-old forester who pledged to keep
the Green Party green (and, by implication, not Marxist). The Green Marxists are
strongest in Hamburg and West Berlin, and their organizational talents give them
an edge over good-natured environmentalist amateurs like Knabe.

''Have a look at this town,'' said Trampert recently, a sad wave of his hand
indicating a stark vista of giant corporate structures and no people in north
Hamburg. ''It's deadly to see that.'' Much as he dislikes the scenery, Trampert
has been working for Texaco in Hamburg since 1963, and is now a full-time member
of its elected workers' council. As a K.B. member in the 1970's, Trampert
unsuccessfully attempted to organize Texaco workers, then participated in street
demonstrations against NATO nuclear weapons. In the fall of 1979, he and other
Hamburg radicals, wearied of sectarian, far-left politics, abandoned the K.B.
and joined the Greens.

Tactically, Trampert and other Marxist Greens constitute the ''right wing'' of
the jumbled party. They favor cultivating the working class, which to date has
not been enchanted with the Greens' small-is-beautiful message.

Trampert's quasi-Communist past does not trouble many of the Green faithful, who
seem allergic to the deep anti-Communism of their elders. Petra Kelly says,
''I'm very tolerant of Communists, but not of one-eyed Communists,'' meaning
''bourgeois'' pro-Soviet groups like the German Communist Party. What troubles
her, instead, is that leftists like Trampert and the clever Hamburg Green boss
Thomas Ebermann will steer the young party into working accords with the Social
Democrats (S.P.D.). ''I told Trampert,'' warned Petra Kelly after the Hagen
congress, '' 'If you move one centimeter toward the S.P.D., the Greens are
finished.' Trampert promised me he will not move.''

The Greens' most authentic voice may be a shy, owlish intellectual exile from
East Germany named Rudolf Bahro, who was deported from East Germany in 1979
after being jailed for two years for criticizing its ''one-eyed'' Communist
regime. At Hagen, Bahro was thunderously applauded by all factions and almost
unanimously elected to the Greens' six-member executive board. The most
prominent East German exile in West Germany, Bahro is no repentant Marxist.
Rather, he dreams of the unification of the German left through an apocalyptic
collapse of the country's industrial society and its materialist, ''have-have
ideology.'' Says the small German, picking indifferently at an expensive lunch
in Bonn: ''I am for an anti-investment strategy. I am for the demolition of
industrial civilization. The ecological crisis is the final expression of the
kaput-industrialization of the world, with the bomb as the tip of the iceberg.''

Intransigently opposed to things as they are, Bahro stretches Marxist categories
to imagine a paradise of a neutralist, weaponsfree, nonindustrial Europe. ''Who
votes for us,'' says Bahro prophetically, his voice tinny and hard, ''knows that
we are not capable of a coalition. And that is important for me. We have to make
fundamental opposition to what the established parties are doing.''

At Hagen, the delegates slid comfortably into ''fundamental opposition.'' On the
central question of whether they might support a Social Democrat minority
government after March 6, the delegates were unmovable: ''The Greens will not
elect a chancellor, or support a government, that continues with the
life-threatening atomic-energy or armaments program.'' The meaning is clear to
any Social Democrat who contemplates parliamentary cooperation with the Greens:
renunciation of NATO's medium-range missile deployment.

There are many things on which the Greens are not unanimous, such as whether
unemployment is good for revolution or bad for people without jobs. Rainer
Trampert calls Bahro's warmed-over anarchism ''a disaster.'' But just about all
the Greens' members can agree on is its bare-bones foreign policy, which casts
the United States in the role of the aggressor in the arms race and the Soviet
Union as a passive, almost benign force whose main sin is being plodding and
bureaucratic. ''My analysis,'' says Petra Kelly, ''is that Europeans probably
feel closer to the Soviet Union in a strange way because the Soviet Union has
lost 20 million people in the war. Young people, my generation, are saying, 'Who
dropped the bomb, really?' There are a lot of dead people in the cellar of the
West and a lot of dead people in the cellar of the East. We are trying to figure
out if there is a time you don't have to live with an enemy.''

A corollary of disillusion with Western industrial democracy is an infatuation
with the third world. Last summer, a group of Greens went to Tripoli to meet
with Libya's Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. ''The United States bases in Western
Europe must be dismantled as quickly as possible,'' Qaddafi informed his guests,
according to a Tageszeitung reporter who was among them. ''That can be
accomplished through the great demonstrations and protest.'' The colonel further
suggested that if the Greens' professed nonviolent methods didn't do the trick,
''military efforts'' might have to be tried. In West Germany, the political
fallout from the trip was embarrassing to the Greens, and the expedition is now
viewed as a public-relations blunder. Thrya Quensel, an adventurous peace
campaigner, was rejected at Hagen in her bid for the executive board because she
had met with Qaddafi. She remains a fan of the colonel: ''Qaddafi's right.
Parties are a waste of time. For me, there is no such thing as left and right.
It is very much this thing of yin and yang, and everything flowing together.''
It cannot be accidental that the Greens' astonishing and unsettling growth has
taken place in a West Germany that has lost its way from the once certain paths
of economic betterment and unswerving fidelity to the United States and NATO.
Prosperity - or, if you will, Bahro's ''have-have ideology'' - for a time seemed
to satisfy an older generation (if not their children) that had been reduced to
penury at the end of the war.

Now prosperity seems endangered; the welfare state has overspent.  Retrenchment
is unpopular. Out of power, Helmut Schmidt muses blackly and publicly about a
coming world depression. His successor, Helmut Kohl, counters with chipper
summonses to a ''spiritual-moral renewal'' in what he likes to call ''our
fatherland.'' Kohl's homely patriotism is a balm to many West Germans; to
others, he sounds hackneyed, embarrassing. The Social Democrats' new contender
for the chancellorship, Hans-Jochen Vogel, has a crisp, reassuring manner.  But
he is new, a little out of focus and, like his party, inclined to seek
equidistance between Washington and Moscow.

The national malaise goes still deeper. A country that has become Western
Europe's most powerful in economic and nonnuclear military terms still has to
bite its tongue in public, remember the past and not seem to throw its weight
around too much. This has become almost a reflex for Helmut Schmidt's
generation. It makes less sense to Petra Kelly's, which feels little guilt and
no responsibility for Hitler's horrors. Petra Kelly's willingness to hold her
own version of a war crimes tribunal in Nuremberg - a city evocative of Nazi
triumph and defeat - is a stunning declaration of independence from the past.

The country's conscious muffling of its own importance inevitably colors its
relations with its allies. It is imprecise to speak of anti-American feeling in
West Germany - a country that understands and follows developments in the United
States in almost obsessive detail. But there is a sense of growing estrangement
from the United States and, particularly among the young, a wish to shake off
American tutelage. The rift has been accelerated by Ronald Reagan's Presidency
and Washington's talk of fighting limited nuclear war in Europe. West Germans
interpret this as meaning the annihilation of their country.

In this climate of unease, the Green Party set off on what Dutschke called ''the
march through the institutions,'' gaining seats in local elections. ''The Green
Party grew,'' recounts Petra Kelly, ''because people streamed to it as to a
therapeutic institution. This is the strength of the Green Party - no structure
to suppress you.''

With the West German voters polarized in 1980 between Chancellor Schmidt and his
highly controversial right-wing challenger, Franz Josef Strauss, the Greens
suffered a setback in the national elections, polling only 1.5 percent of the
vote - winning no seats in the Bundestag. But the autonomous, Green-allied
Alternative List Party won nine seats in the 132-member West Berlin assembly in
1981, overtaking the Free Democrats as the third party. Then last June in the
city-state of Hamburg, the Alternative List Party pushed the Free Democrats out
of the legislature, winning 7.7 percent of the votes and a kingmaker's role
between the Social Democrats and the Christian Democrats. A similar hung
Parliament was convened in September in Hesse state, where the Greens reached an
all-time high of 8 percent of the vote. Led by the driven Petra Kelly, on leave
from her Common Market job the party failed only narrowly in October to win any
seats in her native Bavaria. But the Green vote in the highly conservative Roman
Catholic south jumped by 2.8 points to 4.6 percent. The Free Democrats, pillars
of postwar West German stability, again failed to win their 5 percent.

The Greens' steady showings set off a sharp debate within the Social Democrat
Party over how - or whether - to deal with them. In the wake of the Hesse vote
in September, Willy Brandt, the party chairman, spoke provocatively of a ''new
majority'' in West Germany, hinting that a national coalition with the Greens
was thinkable. In Hamburg, meanwhile, Klaus von Dohnanyi, the city's urbane
Social Democrat Mayor, opened discussions with the Greens' local leader, Thomas
Ebermann, to see if some sort of coalition could be struck.  But these probes
highlighted the dangers for the Social Democrats of dealing with the Greens.
Ebermann tabled a motion demanding that Hamburg be declared a
nuclear-weapons-free city, and in the ensuing debate the Social Democrats split,
with leftists supporting the idea. Dohnanyi broke off the talks, and early
elections were called.

In the December election in Hamburg, helped by Helmut Schmidt's vigorous
campaigning in his hometown, the Social Democrats unexpectedly won an outright
majority; the Greens dipped from 7.7 to 6.8 percent, losing their bargaining
leverage. The Hamburg vote also weakened the Christian Democrats' argument that
a chaotic ''Red-Green'' coalition was a danger in Bonn. Vogel, the Social
Democrats' smooth candidate for chancellor, insists that such a coalition is
''not an issue.'' Both big parties now talk a lot about protecting Mother
Nature, and both Kohl and Vogel say they hope that a breakthrough in the Geneva
Soviet-American arms talks will make the stationing of NATO missiles in West
Germany unnecessary. But for the Social Democrats, talk of a post-March national
coalition with the Greens is seen as an electoral liability. Even on the party's
left wing, there is skepticism about the Greens. ''They ask interesting
questions,'' Egon Bahr, a leftist Social Democrat, says dryly. ''But they don't
give interesting answers.''

Since the Hamburg election, the March 6 vote has become impossible to call. The
Christian Democrats have lost an initial strong lead in the opinion polls that
put them within striking distance of an absolute majority in the Bundestag. Once
written off as defunct, the Free Democrats have rallied back to the margins of
the 5-percent cutoff. But, led by the attractive Vogel, the Social Democrats
have increased their share of the opinion polls and, by taking a loud position
about missiles and questioning nuclear power, they threaten to push the Greens
under 5 percent. At Sindelfingen last month, Petra Kelly admitted privately that
she was ''pretty pessimistic'' about the Greens' chances of getting into
Parliament.  Whatever happens in March, West Germany will have to live with the
Greens, and with the mixture of hope, idealism, disillusion, rehashed Marxist
jargon and fear - a fear that this country will be a theater of nuclear war -
that has brought them to the threshold of parliamentary responsibilities. Young
in the main, the Greens are the children of the welfare state. They do not
represent the working class. They represent students, teachers, professors,
civil servants and dropouts - that is, people who have enough leisure, money and
education to worry about the destruction of the environment or the conceivable
destruction of the world. It is an ironic bit of mistiming that these offspring
of West German prosperity have peaked politically just as the economy and the
welfare state are heading into their darkest crisis since the war.

In a nation that has been known to confound intellectual disorder with
profundity, the Greens manage to live with their contradictions. They are, as
Petra Kelly insists, a movement, not a party.  ''Movement,'' in German, is
Bewegung, a word freighted with the Nazi past. Hitler, too, reached to reconcile
the opposing tensions of a troubled society in an all-embracing ''movement''
that abolished dissent and political differences. The accusation that the Greens
are crypto-Nazis is farfetched. Yet in sober West Germany, there is something in
their passion, their proclamation of ultimate values, that is disquietingly
reminiscent of another era.

Some have called the Greens closet Pan-German nationalists, craving
reunification. Many Greens reject this idea. ''Two military Germanies unified?''
asks Petra Kelly incredulously. ''Thank God never, because they would be
frightening. We want reunification only if there is demilitarization. But we
never really discuss it.'' What is more troubling among the Greens than
occasional wisps of German nationalism is their complete break with the foreign
policy consensus that has prevailed in West Germany for the last three decades.
Living in a country that cannot permit itself to identify with the horror of its
immediate past, the Greens are searching for a new way of being German. The
Greens' neutralism, their view of the United States as a dangerous force in the
world and their sense of the Soviet Union as a passive, merely clumsy imperial
state - all this is a radical departure, a leave-taking from an anchored
history.

''I'd rather take the risk of a disarmed Europe than take the risk of filling
gaps of vulnerability that are ridiculous, that don't exist,'' says Petra Kelly.
''The Americans, who had troops fighting in Europe, had always hoped that the
Germans would become pacifistic and antimilitaristic. Now that they are becoming
that, they don't like it. But Germany is becoming a country of our dreams.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of demonstrators near Cologne Cathedral

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

D'AMATO: AT HOME IN THE SENATE

BYLINE: By Tom Goldstein

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4871 words


Tom Goldstein is a writer specializing in legal and political affairs.

Day after day, night after night, the debate over legislation to raise the
gasoline tax dragged on. Conservatives filibustered against the measure, which
was intended to create a public works program. The Administration also disliked
the plan, but gradually gave ground as Christmas approached. While larger
political and economic issues were being played out around him, Alfonse M.
D'Amato, New York's junior Senator, was keeping watch over a more parochial
issue - the preservation of operating subsidies for public transportation, a
matter of paramount importance to his constituents. This was his issue, the
issue he had picked after his election two years before as a means to make his
mark in the Senate. Now the Administration was trying to eliminate the
subsidies, which helped pay the day-to-day costs of mass transit in New York
City and keep the fares down.

D'Amato seldom left the Capitol. Late one night, he pulled off his trousers to
preserve the crease, put on sweat pants and managed to get 25 minutes sleep on a
couch in his office before he was awakened for a vote on the Senate floor.
During another all-night session, aides wheeled in an upright piano they had
discovered in the hallway, and for nearly an hour the Senator broke the tension
by playing three songs - ''Heart and Soul,'' ''It's a Sin to Tell a Lie'' and
''Blue Moon'' - over and over again.

D'Amato was signing papers in his office one afternoon when the debate on the
floor, which he was monitoring on a squawk box, unexpectedly turned to mass
transit. It sounded like trouble, and D'Amato grabbed an aide and a jacket and
dashed down the long hallway to an elevator, a balding 45-year-old echo of the
high-school hurdler he had once been. Minutes later, breathing hard, he rose on
the floor to defend mass transit funds. ''I am arguing equity here,'' he said.
''For years, my state has been hurt by inequitable formulas. I cannot stand idly
by and watch this occur again.'' The speech was a turning point. An amendment to
greatly reduce funding for mass transit was narrowly defeated. Largely because
of his persistence, his horse trading with colleagues, his refusal to compromise
at a time when others were caught up in the larger drama, D'Amato emerged
victorious.

''He fought like a tiger,'' says Richard Ravitch, chairman of New York's
Metropolitan Transportation Authority. ''He was indispensable.'' The gratitude
is understandable. Under the measure D'Amato attached to the gasoline tax bill,
the M.T.A. will receive an extra $1 billion in Federal aid over the next four
years.

D'Amato did not hesitate to claim credit. ''It demonstrates to some people,'' he
said, ''that instead of being an ultraconservative philosophical demagogue, I
can be conscientious to detail, I can build coalitions that can pass important
legislation.''

When he bid for the Senate, D'Amato was presiding supervisor of Hempstead, a
Long Island ''town'' that is actually a collection of small communities. He ran
a shrill, rancorous campaign that left many voters with the image of a brash,
unpolished, knee-jerk conservative. He seemed to his critics to lack the
understanding of world and national issues displayed by his predecessors, Robert
F.  Wagner, John Foster Dulles, Herbert H. Lehman and, for 24 years, Jacob K.
Javits. During the campaign, there were published reports questioning his
integrity. His victory was widely attributed to the split of the moderate and
liberal vote between his two opponents and to Ronald Reagan's unexpectedly
strong race in New York.

Today, after two years in the job, many of the concerns about him seem wide of
the mark. Al D'Amato has not turned into a picture-book Senator. His grammar
remains imperfect, his voice high and scratchy.  He's never lost the habit of
greeting strangers, ''Hi, babes.'' But he has by most accounts done a credible
job. In part, that reflects a change in the man, in his adaptation to a new
world. In part, it reflects a public misunderstanding of who he is and of the
Senate.

There was a time when the upper house of Congress had some of the elements of an
aristocratic club. No more. The aura of collegiality has faded. When Senate
staffs were small, senators dealt directly with each other, but that changed
when the staffs grew large. Today, turnover among senators is high, and the
newcomers arrive with less experience in government than was once the case.

Political uncertainty is a particular problem for the 18 Republican senators who
were swept into office in the Reagan landslide. Like many of them, D'Amato has
been putting some distance between himself and a President whose ratings in the
polls have been sliding.

D'Amato's term is up in 1986 - a year when there is no Presidential election -
and he will have no one's coattails to hang on to. At least a dozen Democrats
have already expressed interest in challenging him. His strategy is to be a
tenacious booster for New York State - getting Federal help for subways and
senior citizens housing and small businessmen - and by letting people know just
how he's doing.  The 1980 Republican Senate primary was a most strident
campaign. In one debate, Javits told his opponent: ''You're a young man in such
a big hurry to get yourself elected that I don't know what you'd stop at.''
D'Amato questioned whether Javits, one of the last survivors of the progressive
Republican tradition in New York, would live through another six-year term.
After his victory, D'Amato went on to win the general election, defeating
Javits, who ran on the Liberal Party line, and Representative Elizabeth
Holtzman, the Brooklyn Democrat, in another bitter, personal campaign. D'Amato
relentlessly attacked her votes in Congress against defense appropriations and
in behalf of ''ineffec-tive'' social welfare programs. On the evening of his
victory, D'Amato was overheard telling supporters that Representative Holtzman
had used ''gutter tactics.'' He referred to his ''enemies,'' saying: ''We know
who they are and we're going to get them.''

The tone of the comments fed fears about D'Amato's ethics and judgment. There
already had been rumors and newspaper stories questioning his honesty. Finally,
there were three investigations.  The Nassau County District Attorney's office
explored D'Amato's role in the awarding of a cable television contract when he
was presiding supervisor. The Federal Bureau of Investigation looked into the
terms D'Amato had received on campaign loans from a bank in which he had
deposited taxpayers' funds. The Organized Crime Strike Force in the Eastern
District of New York explored charges that he had been involved in payoffs for
construction contracts at the Town of Hempstead's garbage recycling plant.

In all three investigations, the Senator has been exonerated. ''Not a single
charge stands up to any scrutiny,'' says D'Amato's lawyer, Michael F. Armstrong,
former counsel to the Knapp Commission, which investigated corruption in New
York City a decade ago. But damage had been done, and D'Amato has been trying to
build up his reputation ever since.

The most important appointments a Senator influences are Federal judgeships,
which are for life. Following Senator Daniel P.  Moynihan's example, he
appointed a judicial screening committee that recommends candidates. He has
nominated more than a dozen judges and prosecutors, and their place in the
political spectrum has ranged from conservative to moderate. ''The best'' is how
the Senator describes his picks, but the general feeling in the legal community
is that, while the candidates, as a group, approach the intellectual and legal
quality of those chosen by Javits, they are not as distinguished as those
nominated by Moynihan.

''Al wants to show he is a class act,'' says Michael Armstrong, who is a member
of the screening committee. ''To appoint good judges and prosecutors is to show
he is not a political hack.''

As expected, the Senator has become a champion of some conservative positions.
D'Amato opposed Medicaid payments for abortions for victims of rape and incest.
He has favored restrictions on the ability of Federal courts to order busing. He
supports a bill that would bar challenges to voluntary school-prayer programs.
D'Amato has also generally favored reduced Government spending, a balanced
budget and deregulation.

But, as his colleagues in the Senate have discovered, D'Amato is more pragmatic
than ideological. ''To build a record,'' D'Amato says, ''is to do little things
day by day.''

D'Amato's voting record in the first third of his term has reflected a greater
concern with satisfying his New York constituents than with distinctions of
right and left. ''People expected someone fighting on issues like busing instead
of mass transportation,'' he says. Then he adds: ''There are more important
things than busing.''

Senator Alan J. Dixon, an Illinois Democrat who has served on two committees
with D'Amato, has noticed the change. ''From the campaign,'' Dixon says, ''I got
the impression he was an extreme right winger. I have found him more moderate.''

After the 1980 election, The Rochester Times-Union editorialized: ''New York has
two U.S. Senators with brains, beliefs, class and clout. They are Sen. Jacob
Javits and Sen. Daniel P. Moynihan. Next year it will have one.'' Fourteen
months later, the paper suggested that while D'Amato needed ''a sense of
history'' about foreign affairs, he seemed ''genial, hardworking and eager to
learn.'' There was New York milk along with New York eggs, New York potatoes and
New York beets and sauerkraut. There were ducks from Long Island and wine from
upstate. Al D'Amato was the host as dozens of senators and representatives
stopped by the Senate Caucus Room reception to celebrate New York Farm Harvest
Day.

Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina arrived early and sampled egg cookies,
apples and a blend of New York milk and Kahlua, the sweet coffee liqueur.
''Hey,'' said D'Amato. ''They got a special cow in New York who does Kahlua in
his milk.'' Thurmond seemed impressed. ''I did not realize New York was a
farming state,'' he said. ''I never would have known this had not Senator
D'Amato sponsored this.'' The freshman and the 28-year veteran of the Senate
bantered and embraced, and a photograph was snapped. ''Anything he wants, I try
to give him,'' said Thurmond. ''That's right,'' responded D'Amato, ''he gives me
my judges.'' Thurmond is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, which must
approve nominations for Federal judgeships.

As the lawmakers drifted back to work, they were given a bushel of New York
agricultural products. Favored legislators, like Strom Thurmond, also received a
jug of cider or a wheel of cheese.  Al D'Amato knows how to cut a political
deal, a skill he picked up during nearly two decades as a local official, and he
sees it as essential to the performance of his new job. ''Not enough of us,'' he
told a recent Senate committee meeting, ''have been small-town mayors or
supervisors.''

The controversial Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway does not seem to be a matter of
much consequence to a New York Senator. D'Amato voted to continue funding the
project, he says, in return for Southern support for a bill he was pushing that
would provide funds to clean up a radioactive waste dump at West Valley, near
Buffalo.

In addition to his deal-making abilities, D'Amato has brought great energy and
doggedness to his new job. Paula Hawkins, Republican of Florida, another
first-term Senator who sits behind D'Amato in the Senate chamber, says: ''He's
terrific. He's a sleeper. You should see him on the floor. He won't take no.
He'll take them all on. He really cares. He's really sensitive. Maybe it's
because he's Italian.''

One of D'Amato's proudest achievements was his winning battle to preserve,
nearly intact, industrial revenue bonds. The bonds, which are used by many New
York communities, make tax-exempt financing available to small businesses as a
way of creating new local jobs.  Last summer, he introduced two amendments on
the floor, one at 3 o'clock in the morning, and shepherded them until they were
passed.  ''D'Amato really was one of the one or two key participants,'' says a
former staff member of the Small Business Committee, on which D'Amato serves.
''He was tremendously effective, and this is very important to New York.''

In his Washington office, where photographs of his wife and their four children
share space with a bust of Lincoln and some partially filled bookshelves, the
theme of helping New York is constantly heard. One afternoon, his high-pitched
voice rose even higher and his hand sliced down as though he was practicing a
karate chop on the arm of his chair as he ticked off recent accomplishments for
New York:

''We saved $37 million for senior citizen housing.'' Then he added: ''If I don't
do it, who will?'' ''There's a new instrument landing system for Chemung
Airport.'' And again, the refrain: ''If I don't do it, who will?'' ''There'll be
a bicycle trailway in Rochester.'' Pause. ''If I don't do it, who will?'' Was
that refrain an oblique reference to Senator Moynihan? ''Unfair question,''
D'Amato replied. ''I won't answer that.'' Publicly, the two men speak about each
other in platitudes. ''Oh, Patrick is an absolutely marvelous engaging person,''
says D'Amato.  And Moynihan says: ''He is a fine colleague. We work well
together.'' They have a polite but uneasy relationship. Their staffs cooperate
when necessary.  Al D'Amato was born in Newark, in 1937, and, when he was 7
years old, the family moved to Island Park, a close-knit, largely Italian
community in Nassau County near Kennedy International Airport.  D'Amato still
lives there today, around the corner from his parents.  (''It is the second
poorest in Long Island,'' he says. ''People find that incredulous.'')

Since his election, the Senator has traveled widely - to Lebanon, Tokyo, Taiwan
and Panama, as well as to the three ''I's'' that are obligatory stops for a New
York politician, Ireland, Israel and Italy. But D'Amato always returns to his
roots in Long Island, to the split-level, shrimp-pink Cape Cod with the
wrought-iron eagle on the front door. The four-bedroom house on a small lot
shows family wear and tear; the Senator apologized to a recent visitor because a
part of the door to one of the bathrooms had been scratched away by a family
dog, now dead.
1st JUMP

D'Amato earns $60,662 as a Senator, and last year he received an additional
$50,000 for speaking engagements - an amount that puts him in the top ranks of
his senatorial colleagues. Adding in his wife's salary as a teacher, income from
her inheritance and some income from investments, he estimates the total at
$140,000 - but he says he still had to borrow money last year to pay his taxes.
When the Senate is in session, he stays in a condominium he recently purchased
in Virginia.

During one of the Senator's visits to Island Park, he carried out the garbage
and chatted with the sanitation men, then dropped into his favorite chair in the
living room. He was somewhat groggy, feeling the aftereffects of a whirlwind
trip abroad.

Over the course of the morning, several old friends from the neighborhood
visited. From across the room, Michael Masone, superintendent of public works
for 20 years, volunteered that the Senate had not changed D'Amato. ''He's still
the same Tippy to us,'' said Masone.

D'Amato blushed at the sound of the nickname, and at first refused to tell how
he came by it. Finally he relented. ''Alfonse!'' he squealed. ''Growing up with
that, I needed a nickname.'' His relatives found one, calling him Tippy after
the family's active and excitable pet dog.

The Senator is the oldest of three children. His brother Armand, 37 years of
age, a State Assemblyman, lives a few miles away. His sister, Joanne Ribiero,
35, is married to a concert violinist and lives in Florida.

D'Amato attended Syracuse University, first as an undergraduate, then as a law
student, working part time as a janitor. At Syracuse, he met and married
Penelope Collenburg and moved back to Island Park after graduation. Through a
friend of his father, he got the clerk's job in the town attorney's office, and
he has not been off a government payroll since.

In 1977, D'Amato became Presiding Supervisor of Hempstead, a political entity of
840,000 people. He held the most heavily weighted vote on the county's Board of
Supervisors, but he did not have administrative responsibility over the police
and fire departments or health services. Two years later, he recalls, he decided
to make a bid for the Senate: ''I was fairly certain Javits would be vulnerable
to a primary. The Republicans felt estranged from him.''

After his victory, D'Amato found himself an outsider in an insider's city. On
his first trip to the capital after the election, he brought along just one
adviser - Thomas A. Bolan, a founder of the state's Conservative Party and an
early and influential Reagan supporter, but a man D'Amato hardly knew.

The two have since become close. Bolan, a law partner of Roy M.  Cohn, serves as
a middleman between the Senator and Reagan aides.  Some of these aides now feel
that D'Amato rode the President's coattails to victory in 1980 and has not shown
the proper gratitude.

As chief of his staff of 50 people, D'Amato chose John R. Zagame, a friend of
Armand D'Amato and a former State Assemblyman from Oswego. Zagame ran for
Congress in 1980 and was defeated in the Republican primary. His only previous
experience in Washington was as a Congressional page.

On many levels, the Senator has worked hard to adapt to his new job. His
clothing, for example. ''He's more spruced up,'' says his brother Armand. ''He's
not as Long Island-y.'' The suits come from a factory outlet, but they tend to
be darker, more conservative.

As a freshman Senator, his most important adaptation, D'Amato says, has been
what he calls ''a more balanced viewpoint.'' He explains: ''I am much more
willing to listen. I don't cling tenaciously to the thought that I know
everything.'' The Republican leaders in the Senate feel he has done what they
require of a freshman Senator, that he has voted with the party on most key
issues.

In the beginning, he made some embarrassing mistakes. The worst, he says, was
his proposal that Federal housing funds be denied to those cities that refused
to phase out rent control. The plan died, and D'Amato reaped nothing but ill
will among the thousands of his constituents who live in rent-controlled
housing. ''I opened my big mouth before I understood the facts,'' he says.

When he headed the Appropriations subcommittee that supervises the District of
Columbia, D'Amato endorsed a candidate to become police chief in the District.
This breach of etiquette - it was not within the subcommittee's purview -
particularly irritated the local political establishment because his man, who
happened to be of Italian extraction, was the only white candidate in the field.
(The Senator eventually won praise for his work on the subcommittee from The
Washington Post and from local leaders, including Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr.)

D'Amato learned another lesson in the ways of Washington when he prematurely
disclosed to the press that President Reagan had agreed to name John L. Behan, a
Vietnam War amputee who lived on Long Island, to head the Veterans
Administration. There had been a struggle over the appointment, and the early
disclosure so embarrassed the White House that Behan was never given the post.

The education of Al D'Amato, who had spent his life as a local politician in a
narrow corner of Long Island, resembles a cram course. He suddenly found himself
involved in large, complex issues, without a full briefing from his predecessor,
a standard procedure in the Senate. According to Javits, after the election he
offered D'Amato the assistance of his staff and access to background papers to
provide the newcomer with an ''education in national issues.'' But the offer was
never accepted.

On the Appropriations Committee, D'Amato votes on the allocation of funds for
programs approved by all other Senate committees. On the Banking, Housing and
Urban Affairs Committee, he faces a host of complicated questions.

''What did I know from Glass-Steagall or Steuben Glass?'' asks D'Amato. The
Banking Committee has been reviewing the Glass-Steagall Act, which governs how
commercial banks may go about their business.  Now, says D'Amato, ''There are
few people who know more about it than I do.'' A lobbyist from a major bank,
however, says of the Senator: ''He is not to be confused with gang busters, but
he is not all that bad. He has shown a willingness to learn.'' The leaders of
Wall Street have been trying to prevent commercial banks from gaining the right
to underwrite securities and, as head of the securities subcommittee, D'Amato
has been under pressure from both bankers and brokers. Both groups are heavy
campaign contributors.  D'Amato expects there will be some legislation this
year. ''I'll try to be fair,'' he says. ''What's going to happen? Both sides
will be annoyed.''

In the beginning, D'Amato was an unquestioning supporter of the Reagan
Administration, at least on economic matters. In an admiring Op-Ed article in
The New York Times in March 1981, during the battle over the President's first
budget, the new Senator pleaded, ''Let us not pick the Reagan package to
pieces,'' and counseled that unless ''even some meritorious programs'' were cut
from the budget, ''no significant change in our present economic morass will be
possible.'' His first break with the President came over the Administration
proposal to sell Saudi Arabia an $8.5 billion package of military equipment,
including AWAC radar aircraft. D'Amato, who received only 4 percent of the
Jewish vote in 1980, placed himself firmly in Israel's corner from the start.

By early 1982, he was labeling President Reagan's proposed 1983 budget ''an
absolute disaster,'' and later in the year, he joined 20 other Republicans in
voting to override a Presidential veto of a $14.1 billion supplemental spending
bill - despite an 11th-hour telephone call from the White House.

The President told him, D'Amato says, that a defeat on the budget would send the
wrong signal to the financial markets about Congress's determination to control
Federal spending. According to D'Amato, he told the President that Republicans
were starting to lose the support of middle-class people. He says he warned,
''Mr. President, we're going to divide this country.''

Since then, the Senator has taken pains to separate himself from the President
on a variety of issues. ''Don't lock me in with President Reagan,'' D'Amato told
one audience. The Reagan military budget particularly raises his hackles. ''You
do yourselves a terrible disservice'' he says, ''if you say the military is
sacrosanct. Any jackass who says you can't make cuts in a $250 billion military
budget is a jackass. That's where this Senator is coming from.''

The President and the Senator see each other only on formal occasions, and
D'Amato's contacts with the White House staff are limited. Given the new budget
presented last month by President Reagan, their relationship is not apt to
improve quickly. The President wants to trim $1 billion in funds for mass
transit. D'Amato said they were ''more drastic'' than the cuts sought by the
Administration in 1982, and that he looked upon them with ''disdain.''

In general, D'Amato sees himself as a ''mainstream Republican.'' The President,
he says, is ''a little more to the right,'' and Javits is ''well to the other
side.'' That leaves the Senator a long distance from the ultraconservative many
New Yorkers thought they were voting for, or against, in 1980.  Today, Al
D'Amato is still finding his way around Washington.  Rushing from meeting to
meeting, cheerfully greeting policemen and perfect strangers, he occasionally
makes a wrong turn and must ask for directions. But as he sits in his office,
there is a certain sense of comfort and confidence. D'Amato is a man of many
moods, and they shift like mercury as his staff moves easily in and out of his
office, many of them without knocking. One moment he snaps at a secretary for
not removing empty coffee cups fast enough, the next moment he may be hugging
her.

One day D'Amato complained to Ed Martin, his 28-year-old press secretary, that
he disliked the italic typeface used on some press releases. ''I hate this
typewriter,'' said the Senator, with no trace of humor in his voice. ''I have
such a hard time reading this,'' he added. ''No wonder they don't use the
releases.'' (The typeface remains unchanged.)

On another afternoon, the Senator's mood was buoyant as he leaned back at his
desk and spoke on the telephone with Michael Armstrong.  The previous day, a
growth, which was found to be nonmalignant, had been excised from D'Amato's
chest. The dressing protruded a few inches, and earlier this day it had been
removed.

The Senator made a sexual wisecrack, as he had several times earlier in the day,
about the missing bump on his chest. He laughed at his remark, then looked
around the room to make sure the aides and friends gathered there were laughing,
too.

The phone conversation ended, and then Tanya Metaksa, the chief legislative
aide, walked into the room. A quiet, efficient woman, she had worked for the
National Rifle Association before joining D'Amato's staff. ''Good news,'' she
said. Prospects looked promising for a D'Amato amendment that would allow
Federal funds to flow without interruption to seven new housing projects in New
York State.

Some technical work needed to be done on the amendment, and the gathering in
D'Amato's office broke up. Soon the Senator would be on the telephone to three
radio stations in Poughkeepsie to announce that rehabilitation could begin on 58
units of Federal housing in that city.

D'Amato spends part of most days on the phone, gossiping with local and state
political leaders back home. Many of the conversations center around Joseph M.
Margiotta, the Nassau Republican leader who had given D'Amato's career several
key boosts. While appealing a conviction on charges of mail fraud and extortion,
Margiotta still holds his powerful party post. D'Amato is intensely interested,
but he wants to stay out of the cross fire over whether his former mentor should
resign. He prefers the role of mediator. For example, when Anthony Prudenti,
Suffolk County party leader, and George L.  Clark Jr., state party leader, were
feuding, D'Amato invited them to dinner and patched it up.

The Senator insists he wants no formal role in state party politics, and says he
is content to let others vie for statewide leadership. Potential leaders include
Buffalo Congressman Jack F.  Kemp; Lewis E. Lehrman, who lost a bid to be
Governor last fall; Warren M. Anderson, majority leader of the State Senate, and
State Comptroller Edward V. Regan. ''I want to be Senator,'' says D'Amato.  ''I
don't want to be state party chairman.''

He does, however, want to keep his home-state image polished. When Congress is
not in session, D'Amato is traveling around the state.  During last fall's
recess, when a third of the Senate was running for re-election, his schedule was
so full it seemed that he, too, was running. In one 26-hour period in Buffalo,
he met with Mayor James Griffin and more than two dozen civic and business
leaders ... held a press conference about the meeting ... took an unscheduled
tour of a new housing project for the elderly ... kissed women customers during
a tour of the Broadway Market, where Polish is the first language ... spoke at a
lunch in his honor at Andy's Lounge on Buffalo's West Side, a predominantly
Italian neighborhood ...  visited the site of another housing project for the
elderly ... met with executives of The Buffalo News ... taped a 30-minute
television interview ... met with local political leaders ... responded to
questions for 90 minutes at a town hall meeting in Amherst, an affluent suburb
of Buffalo ... returned to Andy's Lounge for a fundraiser for the local sheriff
... slept for five hours ... spoke at a breakfast of local Republicans ...
appeared on a live local television talk show ... taped a radio show.

At stop after stop, his message was the same: ''I'm a small-town boy. I
understand the needs of neighborhoods and communities.  Unfortunately, people
become insulated and isolated in Washington.'' One local official after another
praised the Senator for the Federal money he had steered to this decaying
industrial city on the shore of Lake Erie.

At lunch, the Senator sat next to Representative John LaFalce, a respected young
Democrat. ''D'Amato does well here,'' LaFalce said.  ''He pays attention to
Buffalo. This is the time it counts, when it is not an election year. Jack
Javits wouldn't do this kind of stuff.  He was a national legislator. There are
lots of things I did when Carter was in office I can't do now with the Reagan
Administration.  When I need help for my district, I call Al.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Patrick Moynihan and Alfonse D'Amato photo of
Alfonse D'Amato

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CATHOLICS ON THE LEFT

BYLINE: By Alan Brinkley; Alan Brinkley, the author of ''Voices of Protest: Huey
Long, Father Coughlin, and the Great Depression,'' teaches American history at
Harvard University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1313 words


BREAKING BREAD The Catholic Worker and the Origin of Catholic Radicalism in
America.  By Mel Piehl.  Illustrated. 296 pp. Philadelphia: Temple University
Press. $19.95.

IN 1949 Paul Blanshard, a little-known writer and polemicist, published a
strange and surprisingly successful book, ''American Freedom and Catholic
Power.'' It was a savage indictment of the Roman Catholic Church, one of many
that dot the political landscape of American history. But Blanshard for the most
part avoided the hysterical warnings of dark international conspiracies that had
been the staple of anti-Catholicism in the past. He emphasized instead a more
mundane charge. The church, he claimed, was a bastion of authoritarianism and
reaction, a powerful, organized obstacle to social progress. And with this
argument, he achieved what few had ever done in the long and usually seamy
history of anti-Catholicism in the United States: He made the sentiment
respectable, even popular, among American liberals. By the late 1950's
Blanshard's book had been issued in a revised edition. The author was a regular
on the lecture circuit. And the idea of the Catholic Church as a pillar of the
right had become powerful liberal orthodoxy.

Only a few years later, in 1962, a young Catholic named Michael Harrington
published a book that inspired American liberals as few books ever have. ''The
Other America,'' a powerful expose of poverty and oppression in the United
States, helped launch nearly a decade of social reform and inspired the creation
of the war on poverty. The book also expressed a political vision well to the
left of even the most advanced mainstream liberalism.

Mr. Harrington was not simply an isolated exception among Catholics. He was the
product of an extensive, organized movement that had been fusing Catholic faith
with radical politics for 30 years, a movement that had shown how Catholicism,
despite Paul Blanshard's claims, could be as much a source of reform as of
reaction. That movement, founded in 1933 by Dorothy Day and Peter Maurin, was
the Catholic Worker. And ''Breaking Bread,'' a sensitive and intelligent study
by Mel Piehl, a historian at Valparaiso University in Indiana, is the first
serious, scholarly attempt to explain its impact on American Catholicism and
American society.

The Catholic Worker was the product of a strange alliance between two unlikely
reformers. Dorothy Day, a veteran of early 20th-century radical politics, was a
Catholic convert tortured by her inability to reconcile her new faith with her
older social commitments. She was 35 years old in 1932, when she met Peter
Maurin, an ascetic French social theorist 19 years her senior. Maurin worked to
persuade Day that Catholicism was not an obstacle to social activism but a
potent vehicle to advance it. Day was taken aback at first by Maurin's
persistence and his ideological intensity; indeed, she was never to feel
entirely comfortable with him. ''To be perfectly honest,'' she admitted nearly
three decades later, ''I wondered if I really liked Peter sometimes.'' But
despite her reservations, ''I was sure of Peter - sure that he was a saint and a
great teacher.'' In 1933 she joined with him to begin publication of a weekly
newspaper, directed initially toward the unemployed and named The Catholic
Worker.

The new paper differed from most other political journals of the Depression, for
it expressed a social philosophy that broke sharply with the progressive
orthodoxies of the time. Day and Maurin embraced an older, almost medieval
vision, a vision of a cooperative, decentralized community in which a sense of
mutual responsibility would replace the goal of personal advancement. As Maurin
wrote in one of the paper's early issues: ''The Catholic Worker believes in the
gentle personalism of traditional Catholicism. The Catholic Worker believes in
the personal obligations of looking after the needs of our brother. The Catholic
Worker believes in the daily practice of the Works of Mercy.''

The Worker rejected the idea that there was a distinction between the deserving
and the undeserving poor. ''God puts people where He wants them,'' Day once
observed. The poor, she believed, were bearers of a special divinity, a test of
society's capacity to express God's love. The Catholic Worker's mission,
therefore, was not to redeem individuals and put them back on the road to
conventional success.  It was simply to care for those in need, without passing
judgment, without attempting to ''improve'' them.

By the late 1930's The Catholic Worker had become not only a newspaper but a
political and social movement shaped and dominated by Dorothy Day. It operated
Hospitality Houses in industrial cities around the country, where the poor and
the unemployed could find support and assistance. It established experiments in
communitarian living; most survived only briefly. It supported union organizing
efforts. And it became one of the leading voices of American pacifism as the
nation began to move toward war.

In all this, Mr. Piehl makes clear, The Catholic Worker drew from the special
experience of Roman Catholics in the United States, people so long isolated from
the social and economic mainstream that they were peculiarly aware of the limits
of the mainstream's values.  But The Worker drew as well on a far older
tradition of Catholic social activism, more European than American, a tradition
that produced other American Catholic political figures in the 1930's.  While
most such activism disappeared rapidly with the advent of World War II, The
Catholic Worker survived, although it was divided and weakened for a time by its
commitment to pacifism. In the 1950's it was the most important Catholic
organization in mobilizing opposition to atomic weapons. In the early 1960's it
took the lead among Catholics in opposing the war in Vietnam.

The Catholic Worker was never a great popular success. Its social philosophy
failed to attract more than a very few followers. In lean times for the American
left it suffered the same revilement and obscurity as other radical groups; in
flush times it was usually overshadowed by larger organizations. Nevertheless,
Mr. Piehl insists, it played an important role in shaping American reform.
''Although never the dominant presence in social movements,'' he writes,
''religious groups like the Catholic Worker were among those that contributed to
a heightened moral sensitivity in recent American society and occasionally
aroused a 'moral constituency' that moved the centers of power.''

''Breaking Bread'' is at times disappointingly narrow in its focus. Mr. Piehl
places the movement within church history far more effectively than within
American history.  Although he insists that this is not a biography of Dorothy
Day, he breaks out of the orbit of her charismatic influence only fitfully.
There is but a faint image here of how The Catholic Worker actually performed as
a movement and how its members thought and behaved.

Despite these limits, however, ''Breaking Bread'' provides not only the best
study to date of this obscure but important movement but also one of the finest
analyses we have of the larger contours of American Catholic social thought in
this century. Mr. Piehl clearly admires the men and women he portrays, yet he is
sensitive to the ambiguities and limitations of their efforts. The Catholic
Worker has often seemed a strange, even inexplicable anomaly to those familiar
with the more conservative political manifestations of American Catholicism. But
in Mel Piehl's skillful hands, the haunting appeal of Dorothy Day and her
extraordinary movement becomes comprehensible, and we understand finally why the
''harsh and dreadful love'' that The Catholic Worker championed for more than 40
years proved both so powerful and so intimidating to all those who came within
its reach.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Assails China Over U.S. Oil Companies

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 138 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 13


Vietnam accused China today of violating Vietnamese sovereignty by allowing
American oil companies to operate in the Tonkin Gulf, off northern Vietnam and
southwestern China.

The official Vietnam press agency said Hanoi, ''basing itself on firm historical
and legal data, has many times affirmed its sovereignty over Vietnam's
territorial waters and continental shelf as well as over all the natural
resources in those areas.''

''The foreign companies that conduct the exploration and extraction of oil and
gas in violation of Vietnam's sovereignty,'' the agency added, ''must bear all
the consequences arising from their wrong actions.''

The eastern part of the Tonkin Gulf covers waters claimed by both Vietnam and
China. Several American oil companies have reportedly been cooperating with
China in the Tonkin area.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CONSERVATIVES GATHER IN CITY TO DEFEND THEIR PRINCIPLES

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 970 words


A conservative attack - and a conservative lament - were part of a gathering
this weekend in New York, as more than 200 writers and scholars met to explore
what some termed an assault on ''good, oldfashioned American patriotism.''

The principal themes were these: Conservative ideas and influence are stronger
now than they were a decade ago, but a harmful, unremitting antagonism toward
American society prevails among the artists and intellectuals who form the
liberal mainstream in this country.

Midge Decter, the social critic and chief organizer of the conference, said that
for two decades the dominant tendency of the artistic and intellectual community
''has been to hold itself at odds with - often to indulge in a full-throated and
naked hostility to - the policies and needs of the United States, the very
society which stands as a necessary guarantor of freedom all over the world.''

'To Mount a Defense'

The conference, which was held at the Plaza Hotel, was sponsored by the
Committee for the Free World, a conservative organization created two years ago
''to mount a defense of Western political institutions and Western democratic
society,'' Miss Decter said. As such, it brought together participants -
including Norman Podhoretz, editor of Commentary magazine; the social critic
Irving Kristol, and the sociologist Robert A. Nisbet, who was snowbound in
Washington and asked that his paper be read in absentia - whose shared
convictions include fervent anti-Communism, the need for a strong defense and
belief in the free market as the best path to economic betterment.

The conference was amply salted with humor and a variously lighthearted and
rueful lampooning of what the participants saw as leftist foibles. There was a
dance party on Saturday night. But on the whole, the gathering was dominated by
the clear and often gloomily expressed concern that the failure of intellectuals
to defend traditional values posed a grave danger to American freedom.

''Something odd has happened to American literary culture in recent years,''
Joseph Epstein, editor of American Scholar magazine, said.  ''Suddenly American
literature, contemporary American literature, seems rather lackluster, a bit
beside the point, less than first rate, even though American political power is
still great. Why?''

''To think the worst of our society -against a superabundance of evidence to the
contrary - gives the self-dramatizing American literary imagination a background
against which to dramatize itself,'' Mr. Epstein said. ''And the contemporary
literary scene is rife with writers whose chief stock in the trade of ideas is a
fairly crude sort of anti-Americanism.''

The Causes Are Explored

The conference touched on several factors that, long brewing inside the country,
have, in the conferees' view, produced anti-Americanism among American
intellectuals.

One factor was the long-range influence of the Vietnam War, with its tendency to
spread skepticism about the purpose of American goals in the world.

''Much of what was created by the New Left in the raging 1960's has become part
of the academic landscape,'' said Mr. Nisbet in his paper, which was read to a
panel on ''The University and Its Discontents.''

Citing polls among students at the Columbia Graduate School of Journalism, Mr.
Nisbet, who is professor emeritus at Columbia University, said that 75 percent
of the students believed the United States exploited and impoverished
third-world countries, and that 89 percent felt the primary aim of American
foreign policy was to advance private business.

Political Movement Predicted

''It is in this light,'' Mr. Nisbet said in his paper, ''that I expect to see a
new mass movement arise during the next few years comparable to the Greens in
West Germany.'' This was a reference to the West German anti- nuclear movement.

A panel on ''The Responsibility of the Press,'' whose main speaker was Mr.
Kristol, dealt with the role of newspapers, magazines and television in
presenting what he said was an unduly critical image both of America and
pro-American countries, and an insufficiently critical view of leftist
revolutions.

Mr. Kristol, while allowing that there were several news organizations of
consistently high quality, contended that there were several problems leading to
''mindlessness'' in news coverage, especially on television.

Among the problems were journalists' view of themselves as adversaries of
authority and institutions, and the intrinsic sensationalism of television
reporting.

The Nature of the Camera

''People in television journalism,'' he said, ''are all slaves of the camera,
and the camera is a sensationalist instrument.'' Television, Mr. Kristol argued,
tends to ignore situations of calm or quiet. When, for example, there are no
campus demonstrations, Mr.  Kristol said, ''the journalists ask, 'What's wrong
with the students? Why aren't they doing anything that we can televise?' ''

The last speaker at the conference, Mr. Podhoretz, of Commentary, contended that
the conservative point of view was stronger and more influential today ''by a
large order of magnitude'' than in the past. Still, he noted, ''there is an air
of discouragement hanging over this conference.''

Seeing a Long Way to Go

''Despite our progress,'' Mr. Podhoretz said, ''we have now discerned that we
have a very long way to go in the shaping of a national consensus on the issues
that concern us.

''It is necessary when you are a minority challenging a prevailing point of view
to refuse to submit to vilification and abuse.'' Citing the threat of the Soviet
Union as the chief issue, Mr.  Podhoretz concluded: ''We have to exercize the
same kind of responsible partisanship on this issue as we did in earlier phases
of the ongoing battle of ideas.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 15, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

REMEMBERING A FALLEN FRIEND

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture caption Tuesday incorrectly identified a Vietnam veteran's friend who
died in the war. He was David F. Skala of New York City, who was killed 13 years
ago. Richard M. Scala, who was mentioned in the caption, was also from New York.
He died 15 years ago.

GRAPHIC: A tribute to a comrade was happened upon yesterday at the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial in Washington. Roger Andal, a for-mer Army medic, found the
name of his best friend, Richard M. Scala of New York City. Mr. Scala died,
despite Mr.  Andal's efforts, in a battle 13 years ago. The New York
Times/George Tames

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 15, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CONCERN GROWING OVER UNCLEAR THREAT OF DIOXIN

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHABECOFF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2074 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 11


Concern is growing among public health officials, environmentalists, scientists,
and legislators that contamination by dioxin, one of the most toxic substances
created by man, may turn out to be a serious national problem for which they are
ill-prepared.

Recent tests have confirmed dioxin contamination at 22 places in Missouri, and
state officials fear that the chemical may pollute more than 100 sites there. In
1979, the Environmental Protection Agency prepared a list of 31

Reprinted from Saturday's issue of The Times, which was distributed incompletely
because of the snow.
cities across the nation where chemical manufacturing was likely to produce
waste contaminated with dioxin and destined for the nation's dumps for hazardous
wastes, which number in the thousands and whose contents are largely unknown.

There is no reliable information about how much dioxin has been produced or
where it is, and there is considerable controversy over what danger it poses to
health and the environment. Nobody knows for sure.

'Of Extreme Gravity'

Representative James J. Florio, Democrat of New Jersey, co-author of some of the
key legislation regulating hazardous waste, is worried about the scarcity of
information. ''This is something of extreme gravity and we have to treat it as
such,'' he said. ''I'm not saying we have to burn down every town in the country
that has been exposed to dioxins, but this problem deserves close scrutiny,
closer than other things.''

Richard C. Fortuna, staff toxicologist for the House Energy subcommittee headed
by Mr. Florio, said, ''We know that dioxin is a serious environmental problem,
but we don't know yet if it is a national emergency.''

Reagan Administration officials and chemical industry executives do not see any
emergency . They view the contamination in Missouri as an aberration and believe
that there are few if any other areas in the country where dioxin presents a
significant health problem. In the hazardous waste dumps, they observe, dioxin
clings tightly to soil particles and is nearly insoluble in water. And in
Missouri, they contend, the dangers to exposed humans have been exaggerated in
public accounts.

'Not a National Threat'

''It gets me that some scientists are saying that dioxin is the most deadly
chemical known to man. That's not true,'' said Rita M.  Lavelle, assistant
administrator of the E.P.A. until she was dismissed Feb. 7. ''It depends on the
concentration. In the right concentration, table salt is just as deadly.''

Miss Lavelle, who was in charge of protecting the public from hazardous waste
and responding to emergencies like the one in Missouri, belittled the
significance of dioxins as a threat to the environment and public health in an
interview before she left office.

''I am more worried about the threat of other chemicals,'' Miss Lavelle said.
''Dioxin is not a national threat.'' Dioxin is the name given to any of a family
of 75 compounds called dibenzo-para-dioxins composed of benzene and oxygen
atoms. When chlorine atoms are added, they become chlorinated dioxins, which
have been found to be toxic at low concentrations.

Human Effects Unclear

Laboratory tests on animals have linked chlorinated dioxins, even in tiny
amounts, to birth defects, skin disorders, liver ailments and other problems.
Concentrations as small as five parts per 1,000 billion have caused
statistically significant increases in cancer in rats. A single oral dose of 25
micrograms can kill a two-pound chicken. There are a million micrograms in a
gram and a thousand grams in a kilogram, and one estimate is that more than 80
kilograms of dioxin was produced in chemical manufacturing in the United States
every year from the 1950's to the mid-70's. Yet dioxin's effects on humans,
particularly long-term risks, are not clearly understood.

Representive Florio is concerned about what he views as legal loopholes that
would allow dioxin to continue to move into the environment if it was contained
in waste oils that might be recycled, as they were in Missouri, leading to the
contamination there. He says the E.P.A. should follow the recommendation of its
staff to declare dioxins a ''hazardous air pollutant,'' an action the agency has
not yet taken.

William N. Hedeman Jr., director of the environmental agency's Office of
Emergency Response, said in an interview that ''to the best of my knowledge,
there are no other Russell Bliss situations around the country.'' Russell Bliss
is the contractor who sprayed the waste oils containing dioxin on horse arenas
and roads in Missouri.

'Don't Know Where It Is'

Mr. Hedeman said he was not aware of other areas where dioxin had posed a
problem except for Love Canal in Niagara Falls, N.Y., where it was found in an
abandoned chemical dump. But he acknowledged, ''We don't know how much is out
there. We don't know where it is.''

On the E.P.A.'s 1979 list were 31 cities around the country where plants
produced chlorophenols. The manufacture of these chemicals produces dioxins,
including the deadly 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzenep-dioxin, TCDD, as an unwanted
byproduct.

The cities on the agency list were Tuscaloosa, Ala.; Jacksonville, Ark.;
Fremont, Calif.; San Mateo, Calif.; Orlando, Fla.; Chicago; Chicago Heights,
Ill.; Naperville, Ill.; Sasuaget, Ill.; Shenandoah, Iowa; Kansas City, Kan.;
Wichita, Kan.; Whiteford, Md.; Midland, Mich.; St. Paul; St. Joseph, Mo.; St.
Louis; Springfield, Mo.; Verona, Mo.; Clifton, N.J.; Linden, N.J.; Rahway, N.J.;
Niagara Falls, N.Y.; Cleveland; Dover, Ohio; Portland, Ore.; Ambler, Pa.;
Philadelphia; Port Neches, Tex.; Tacoma, Wash., and Nitro, W.Va.

Seeking Exposed Workers

The National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, an arm of the
Department of Health and Human Services, is now working on an updated and more
complete ''national registry'' of producers of products that leave dioxins as a
byproduct. A major purpose of that effort is to find workers exposed to dioxin
on the job.

Since the late 1970's, the use and production of many of the products that cause
the formation of TCDD have been restricted. But a significant amount of dioxin
was introduced earlier into various waste streams, and it is likely that some is
still escaping into the environment.

PICK UP 1ST & LAST ADD subDIOXIN

A rough guess at the amount of dioxin discharged into the environment was made
in a recent interview by Dr. Alvin Young, an environmental scientist for the
Veterans Administration who is a specialist in that agency's efforts to deal
with the problems resulting from Vietnam veterans' exposure to Agent Orange, a
defoliant that includes the herbicide 2,4,5-T, which is associated with TCDD.
Dr. Young said available figures showed that in 1975, about 800,000 gallons of
products associated with TCDD were produced. From what is known about the dioxin
residues in the manufacturing process, he estimated that about 2.1 kilograms of
dioxin was contained in the products themselves and about 80 kilograms was left
over as waste in that year. A kilogram is about 2.2 pounds.

Thousands of Waste Dumps

Dr. Young said that at least that amount of dioxin had been produced annually
since the 1950's. While the yearly production has been sharply reduced since
1975, ''that is a hell of a lot of dioxin,'' he said. But he said he did not
think dioxin constituted a national health problem, though it might pose a
problem in specific areas of the country.

There is broad agreement that a substantial proportion of dioxincontaminated
wastes are now buried in dumps around the country. Anne M. Gorsuch,
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, recently said there were
12,000 of these ''ticking time bombs''; other experts have put the number of
toxic dumps at 50,000 or more. There is little if any information on the content
of most of these sites.

Administration officials and chemical companies contend that the dioxins in the
waste dumps do not constitute a serious threat because they adsorb strongly to
soil and are not water-soluble; therefore, the officials say, they are unlikely
to seep into water tables.

But some environmentalists contend that other solvents in the dumps could flush
the dioxin into the water.

Some Use Continues

The spraying of Agent Orange and other pesticides and herbicides introduced
dioxin directly into the environment. Some of these uses have been suspended by
Government order, but other applications continue. Industry officials and some
Administration authorities argue that dioxin breaks down rapidly in sunlight and
therefore disappears quickly from the surface.

But surface contamination found in Missouri after many years has led other
scientists to question whether sunlight does cause the deadly substance to
disappear. And the manufacturing of some other products still in use forms
dioxins as byproducts.

Another route by which dioxin can enter the environment is through fires
involving transformers or other electrical equipment containing polychlorinated
biphenyls, or PCB's. When burned at low temperatures, these release substances
called ''furans,'' which are closely related to dioxins, according to scientists
at the E.P.A.

One of the scientists said that such a fire several years ago in a Government
office building in Binghamton, N.Y., produced ''maybe the only building in the
country where you can't find a single cockroach.'' The building has stood empty
since.

Released in Combustion

Fires or explosions at plants that produce pesticides, herbicides and other
products that involve dioxin, like the explosion at the Hoffmann-LaRoche plant
in Seveso, Italy, on July 10, 1976, also can provide a path through which dioxin
enters the environment.

In 1980, a study by scientists of the Dow Chemical Company suggested that dioxin
could be released from the combustion of organic materials. They found dioxins
in car mufflers, fireplace soot, charcoal-grilled steaks, cigarette smoke and a
variety of other sources.

Etcyl Blair and Perry J. Gehring, Dow scientists and officers, said in a
telephone interview that while it was true that dioxin was present in the
environment and was highly toxic, it did not constitute a serious problem.
''There is a difference between toxicity and hazard,'' Dr. Blair said. ''Just
because it is a risk doesn't mean you are in danger.''

The Dow officials said that employees working with dioxin in the 1960's had
developed chloracne, a skin disease, but that surveillance of the workers had
turned up no pattern of serious illness.

There appears to be no agreement among scientists on the health effects of
dioxin where it is known to have entered the environment in quantity: Missouri,
Love Canal, Vietnam and Seveso.

But Dr. Henry Falk, chief of the special studies branch of the National Centers
for Disease Control, remarked that dioxin contamination was ''very much regarded
as a significant public health problem that needs to be handled with extreme
care.''

More Russell Blisses

''There undoubtedly are other Russell Blisses around the country,'' Dr. Falk
said. ''We haven't systematically approached all of the past producers to
identify where their products are. That would really be an extensive job.''

He also said that the acute effects were not the only problem created by dioxin
in the environment. ''There is a lot of uncertainty about the long-term effects
on people,'' he said.

Dr. William Halperin of the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
said, ''In an occupational setting, exposure to dioxins is clearly a problem.''
Citing studies concerning exposed workers, he said dioxin ''is an extremely
toxic agent whose long-term consequences are only beginning to be understood.''

Regulation Called Faulty

Mr. Fortuna, of the Subcommittee on Commerce, Transportation and Tourism,
asserted, ''The regulatory structure protecting people from dioxins is full of
gaps.'' He noted that dioxin was not covered under the Resources Conservation
and Recovery Act, but Miss Lavelle and Mr. Hedeman of the E.P.A. said that the
rules were being changed, and that meanwhile, dioxin is controlled under the
Toxic Substances Control Act.

Even within the agency, some officials say the Reagan Administration has been
slow to respond to the dioxin problem and did so only in response to the public
outcry that followed the publicity given to the contamination in Missouri.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of James Florio

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 15, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 770 words


CHANNEL OF BEAUTY

The Channel Gardens is one of New York's most traveled throughways, the passage
from Fifth Avenue to the sunken plaza in Rockefeller Center between 49th and
50th Streets. Local walkers have long since learned to make course changes so as
not to obstruct sightlines for picture-taking by the countless tourists who are
trying to get their party, the RCA Building, the statues and Saks Fifth Avenue
all in the same snap.

Photography bulks large in Channel Gardens, a fact that apparently inspired a
camera company to establish Nikon House along the route at 620 Fifth Avenue
(586-3907). In here, the amateur who has been conceiving his own masterpiece
photos outside may wander through the generous gallery space and see how
professionals approach photography.

There is almost always an exhibition of interest, dwelling either on work of an
individual photographer or on a particular theme. At the moment, the show
consists of 45 black-and-white photographs by Gordon Baer. ''Vietnam: The Battle
Comes Home,'' tells of the problems and lives of veterans in settling down after
the conflict.  Mr. Baer took the pictures during an 18-month period, and his
camera catches the veteran in just about every aspect of postwar life.

One sees veteranss reunited with families, taking X-rays to determine what toxic
effects the war may have inflicted, painfully seeking work that often is not to
be had, looking for lost service friends. Some of the photos are small sequences
depicting survivors and burials. They all reflect the loneliness of forgotten
men from a war everyone else wants to forget.

Open, free, through Feb. 26, from 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M. Tuesdays through
Saturdays.
KEYBOARD

Last October, Judy Carmichael, a blond Californian in her 20's, made her New
York debut at Hanratty's, a restaurant at 1754 Second Avenue, at 91st Street
(289-3200), where jazz piano usually reigns in the dining room at the rear.

Miss Carmichael, an immediate critical success here and elsewhere, finished her
gig, but the taste lingered on. Tonight she starts three split weeks at
Hanratty's. It is a good room for jazz, one in which the customers listen to the
music without rattling dishes or chatting loudly during sets.

The specialty of Miss Carmichael that has brought her kudos from such experts as
Roy Eldridge, Benny Carter and Sarah Vaughan is stride piano, in which her left
hand hits the big chords and her right runs through the melody.

''Judy Carmichael's stride has a joyous, jumping drive,'' John S.  Wilson wrote
in a New York Times review. ''But she is even more impressive on Zez Confrey's
1920's piano novelties.''

The pianist will be at Hanratty's starting at 8:30 P.M. Tuesdays through
Thursdays and at 9 Fridays and Saturdays this week and the weeks starting Feb.
22 and March 1. A $5 cover plus a two-drink minimum. Main courses, $6.95 to
$12.95. Drinks, $2.50 up.
RETROSPECTIVE

The retrospectives usually offered by the Japan Society, 333 East 47th Street
(752-3015), often run to film and art exhibitions, but the series that starts
today is retrospective in that it draws from history to tell how things are
today between the United States and Japan.

''The Legacy of War and Occupation: U.S.-Japan Relations Today'' is a four-part
lecture series that considers how the war and the occupation affected all
aspects of life in Japan, including social, economic and political areas.

Today, Prof. Marlene Mayo, of the University of Maryland, will discuss ''The
Roles Reversed: U.S. Japanese Relations.'' All talks in the series are followed
by discussion and take place from 6 to 8 P.M. Other lectures will be on Feb. 22,
Feb. 28 and March 8, concluding with a session on ''Japanese-Americans: Victims
or Beneficiaries?'' Admission: $9; full series, $35.
FOOTWORK

The Ballet Company Today is a two-year old dance group and, like any respectable
arts organization, it needs money. It is throwing a party for itself tonight at
Studio 54, 254 West 54th Street, to raise funds for its spring season in
Connecticut and New York City.

Mercedes Ellington, the choreographer, is directing a special revue for the
occasion. It features Liliane Montevecchi of ''Nine''; Maurice Hines of
''Sophisticated Ladies'' and ''Ain't Misbehavin' ''; Ken Page of ''Cats''; Bill
Irwin and Charles Moore and Judith Jamison. Lee Roy Beams of ''42d Street,'' is
master of ceremonies.  The show starts at 11:30 P.M., but you can dance from
10:30 P.M. and wrap it up at 2 A.M. Admission: $15. Information: 865-5896.

Entertainment Events is on page C13. Tuesday Sports is on page B8.  Richard F.
Shepard

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 15, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

96 BOOKS ARE NOMINATED FOR AWARDS

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1270 words


Books by such well-known writers as Eudora Welty, Dumas Malone, Russell Baker,
Judy Blume and Paul Theroux have been nominated for the fourth annual American
Book Awards, along with those of first novelists Gail Albert, John M. Del
Vecchio, Susanna Moore, Gloria Naylor and David Small.

Altogether, 96 hardcover and paperback books published during 1982 were chosen
from more than 1,000 entries in 11 categories. Missing are ''George Mills'' by
Stanley Elkin, which last month was named the best fiction book of 1982 by the
National Book Critics Circle, and ''Antarctic Traveler'' by Katha Pollitt, which
won the critics' poetry award. Jurors of the American Book Awards, sponsored by
the Association of American Publishers, consist of authors, critics, librarians,
booksellers and editors.

The winners will be announced April 14 and a book-awards ceremony will be held
at the New York Public Library on April 28.  The nominees are:

AUTOBIOGRAPHY-BIOGRAPHY

Hardcover: ''Growing Up'' by Russell Baker (Congdon & Weed); ''The Path to
Power: The Years of Lyndon Johnson'' by Robert A. Caro (Knopf); ''Tumultuous
Years: The Presidency of Harry S Truman, 1949-53'' by Robert J. Donovan
(Norton); ''Sketches From Life: The Early Years'' by Lewis Mumford (Dial Press);
''Isak Dinesen: The Life of a Storyteller'' by Judith Thurman (St. Martin's
Press).

Paperback: ''Grant'' by William S. McFeely (Norton); ''The Sage of Monticello:
Volume 6 of Jefferson and His Time'' by Dumas Malone (Little, Brown); ''William
Carlos Williams: A New World Naked'' by Paul Mariani (McGraw-Hill); ''Nathaniel
Hawthorne in His Time'' by James R. Mellow (Houghton Mifflin); ''Alice James''
by Jean Strouse (Bantam).

CHILDREN'S BOOKS, FICTION

Hardcover: ''The Kestrel'' by Lloyd Alexander (Dutton); ''The Refugee Summer''
by Edward Fenton (Delacorte); ''Homesick: My Own Story'' by Jean Fritz
(Putnam's); ''Sweet Whispers, Brother Rush'' by Virginia Hamilton
(Philomel/Putnam's); ''A Formal Feeling'' by Zibby Oneal (Viking).

Paperback: ''Tiger Eyes'' by Judy Blume (Laurel/Dell); ''Notes For Another
Life'' by Sue Ellen Bridgers (Bantam); ''A Place Apart'' by Paula Fox
(Signet/New American Library); ''Anastasia Again!'' by Lois Lowry
(Yearling/Dell); ''Marked By Fire'' by Joyce Carol Thomas (Avon Flare).

CHILDREN'S NONFICTION
''Chimney Sweeps'' by James Cross Giblin (Crowell); ''Seafaring Women'' by Linda
Grant De Pauw (Houghton Mifflin); ''Journey to the Planets'' by Patricia Lauber
(Crown); ''Lobo of the Tasaday'' by John Nance (Pantheon); ''The Brooklyn
Bridge'' by Judith St. George (Putnam's).

CHILDREN'S PICTURE BOOKS

Hardcover: ''Shadow'' by Marcia Brown (Scribner's); ''Miss Rumphius'' by Barbara
Cooney (Viking); ''The Philharmonic Gets Dressed'' by Karla Kuskin/Marc Simont
(Harper); ''When I Was Young in the Mountains'' by Cynthia Rylant/Diane Goode
(Dutton); ''Doctor De Soto'' by William Steig (Farrar, Straus).

Paperback: ''A House Is a House for Me'' by Marry Ann Hoberman/Betty Fraser
(Puffin/Viking); ''Pinkerton, Behave!'' by Steven Kellogg (Pied Piper/Dial);
''Robert Frost's a Swinger of Birches'' by Peter Koeppen (Stemmer House);
''Space Case'' by Edward Marshall/James Marshall (Dial); ''The Bungling
Ballerinas'' by Ellen Shire (Little, Brown).

FICTION
Hardcover: ''A Mother and Two Daughters'' by Gail Godwin (Viking); ''Shiloh and
Other Stories'' by Bobbie Ann Mason (Harper); ''The Mosquito Coast'' by Paul
Theroux (Houghton Mifflin); ''Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant'' by Anne Tyler
(Knopf); ''The Color Purple'' by Alice Walker (Harcourt Brace).

Paperback: ''The Chaneysville Incident'' by David Bradley (Avon); ''The Company
of Women'' by Mary Gordon (Ballantine); ''Housekeeping'' by Marilynne Robinson
(Bantam); ''A Flag for Sunrise'' by Robert Stone (Ballantine); ''The Collected
Stories of Eudora Welty'' by Eudora Welty (Harvest/ HBJ).

FIRST NOVEL
''Matters of Chance'' by Gail Albert (Putnam's); ''The 13th Valley'' by John M.
Del Vecchio (Bantam); ''My Old Sweetheart'' by Susanna Moore (Houghton Mifflin);
''The Women of Brewster Place'' by Gloria Naylor (Viking); ''Almost Famous'' by
David Small (Norton).

GENERAL NONFICTION
Hardcover: ''China: Alive in the Bitter Sea'' by Fox Butterfield (Times Books);
''The Nuclear Delusions: Soviet-American Relations in the Atomic Age'' by George
F. Kennan (Pantheon); ''Indecent Exposure'' by David McClintick (Morrow); ''The
Fate of the Earth'' by Jonathan Schell (Knopf); ''Is There No Place on Earth for
Me?'' by Susan Sheehan (Houghton Mifflin).

Paperback: ''Joe McCarthy and the Press'' by Edwin R. Bayley (Pantheon);
''National Defense'' by James Fallows (Vintage); ''Abroad: British Literary
Traveling Between the Wars'' by Paul Fussell (Oxford); ''Pioneer Women: Voices
From the Kansas Frontier'' by Joanna L. Stratton (Touchson/Simon & Schuster);
''Everything We Had: An Oral History of the Vietnam War'' by Al Santoli
(Ballantine).

HISTORY
Hardcover: ''Voices of Protest'' by Alan Brinkley (Knopf); ''The Germans'' by
Gordon A. Craig (Putnam's); ''The Literary Underground of the Old Regime'' by
Robert Darnton (Harvard); ''Entertaining Sata'' by John Putnam Demos (Oxford);
''The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force and Society Since A.D. 1000'' by
William H.  McNeill (Chicago); ''Southern Honor: Ethics and Behavior in the Old
South'' by Bertram Wyatt-Brown (Oxford).

Paperback: ''White Supremacy: A Comparative Study in American and South African
History'' by George M. Fredrickson (Oxford); ''1587, A Year of No Significance:
The Ming Dynasty in Decline'' by Ray Huang (Yale); ''Utopian Thought in the
Western World'' by Frank E. and Fritzie P. Manuel (Belknap/ Harvard); ''The Gate
of Heavenly Peace: The Chinese and Their Revolution, 1895-1980'' by Jonathan D.
Spence (Penguin); ''The Mapmakers'' by John Noble Wilford (Vintage).

ORIGINAL PAPERBACK
''Stop Nuclear War: A Handbook'' by David P. Barash and Judith Eve Lipton
(Grove); ''The Red Magician'' by Lisa Goldstein (Bantam); ''Winning Back
America'' by Mark Green (Bantam); ''Nuclear War'' by Ground Zero (Pocket); ''The
Twilight Zone Companion'' by Marc Scott Zicree (Bantam).

POETRY
''Monolithos'' by Jack Gilbert (Knopf); ''Selected Poems'' by Galway Kinnell
(Houghton Mifflin); ''PM/AM'' by Linda Pasten (Norton); ''Letters From a Father
and Other Poems'' by Mona Van Duyn (Atheneum); ''Country Music'' by Charles
Wright (Wesleyan).

SCIENCE
Hardcover: ''Scientific Temperaments'' by Philip J. Hilts (Simon & Schuster);
''The Tangled Wing: Biological Constraints on the Human Spirit'' by Melvin
Konner (Holt, Rinehart); ''The Growth of Biological Thought'' by Ernst Mayr
(Belknap/Harvard); ''Cosmic Code: Physics as the Language of Nature'' by Henry
R. Pagels (Simon & Schuster); ''Subtle Is the Lord ...': The Science and the
Life of Albert Einstein'' by Abraham Pais (Oxford).

Paperback: ''The Mathematical Experience'' by Philip J. Davis and Reuben Hersh
(Houghton Mifflin); ''Mathematics: The Loss of Certainty'' by Morris Kline
(Oxford); ''Portrait in the Wild: Animal Behavior in the Western World'' by
Cynthia Moss (Chicago); ''The Medical Detectives'' by Berton Roueche (Washington
Square/Pocket); ''Darwin to DNA: Molecules to Humanity'' by G. Ledyard Stebbins
(W.H. Freeman).

TRANSLATION
Marion Faber for Wolfgang Hildesheimer's ''Mozart'' (Farrar, Straus); Richard
Howard for Baudelaire's ''Fleurs Du Mal'' (Godine); Allen Mandelbaum for Dante's
''Purgatorio'' (California); Philip B. Miller for ''An Abyss Deep Enough:
Letters of Heinrich von Kleist'' (Dutton); Richard Wilbur for Racine's
''Andromache'' (Harcourt Brace).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 16, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW CLERGY GROUP ASSAILS CHURCH AID TO LEFTISTS

BYLINE: By CHARLES AUSTIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words


An unusual group made up of clergy who are angry with their churches' positions
on world affairs and political activists with little past involvement in
religion has become a major critic of American denominations.

The group, Institute on Religion and Democracy, founded two years ago, charges
that American churches neglect democratic values in their international programs
and promote leftist views at home.

Critics of mainstream American churches often complain of a leftist bias in
church activities. The charges gained new prominence recently when spokesmen for
the institute, who are members of major denominations, were featured in an
article in Reader's Digest and on ''60 Minutes,'' the CBS News television
program.

The National Council of Churches and the World Council of Churches, along with
others named in the ''60 Minutes'' broadcast, have formally complained to the
magazine and the network about the way they were portrayed.

In the opinion of the institute's founders, many American religious leaders are
not sufficiently pro-American, pro-democratic and anti-Soviet. The institute
also says churches are silent about violations of religious freedom in countries
of the Soviet bloc.

Nicaraguan Project Cited

The critics object to money allocated by the National Council of Churches for
such projects as the Nicaraguan Literacy Program, which the critics say is a
front for radical political education. They also oppose aid to Vietnam by the
World Council of Churches.

Though small, the institute has a vigorous leadership and is spending about
$300,000 annually to spread its views.  ''God has given us no one set pattern
for the ordering of societies or of the world,'' the institute's policy
statement says, but it argues that religion has always fared better in
democratic, capitalist countries. ''Marxist-Leninism promulgates a doctrine that
is incompatible with a Christian understanding of humanity,'' it says.

Though ''no nation perfectly embodies the democracy we would affirm,'' it goes
on, ''the United States of America is the primary bearer of the democratic
possibility in the world today.''

The institute's leaders include clergy who have tried unsuccessfully to
influence their denominations. Other leaders are political activists and staunch
advocates of a capitalism they see threatened by forces in many developing
countries.

The Rev. Ed Robb, a Methodist evangelist from Marshall, Tex., heads the
institute's executive committee. He has been a leader in the Good News Movement,
formed to combat theological liberalism in the United Methodist Church. Although
he has often met with Methodist officials, Mr. Robb believes he had little
impact on the policies of the Methodist Board of Global Ministries, the world
mission agency.

Had Worked for Civil Rights

Another spokesman for the institute is the Rev. Richard Neuhaus, a Lutheran who
was once pastor of a parish in a poor section of Brooklyn. The author of the
institute's policy statement, he is the group's most articulate theological
voice. In the 1960's Mr. Neuhaus was considered a radical activist because of
his work for civil rights and in organizing clergy to oppose the Vietnam War.

Like Mr. Robb, Mr. Neuhaus has been a frequent critic of his denomination and
its policies.  Michael Novak, resident scholar at the American Enterprise
Institute, is also on the board of directors of the Institute on Religion and
Democracy and is a regular speaker at its conferences.  Once a Roman Catholic
seminarian, his views on the relationship between democracy, religion and
capitalism are highly regarded among conservatives.

The political strategists for the institute, David Jessup and Penn Kemble, were
both members of radical student organizations in the 1960's. Mr. Jessup's
complaints about United Methodist aid to organizations he considers leftist were
a factor in organizing the institute. Mr. Kemble, who says he holds no
particular church membership, heads the Foundation for Democratic Education, and
along with Mr. Jessup, has been a member of Social Democrats, U.S.A., a small
political party that is pro-labor and anti-Soviet.

Financed by Foundations

The institute has received most of its money from the same conservative
foundations that finance the American Enterprise Institute, the research
organization that has been closely linked with the policies of the Reagan
Administration. The institute's annual budget of $302,659 has been underwritten
largely by the Scaife Family Charitable Trust, the Smith Richardson Foundation,
the John M. Olin Foundation and the Earhart Foundation.

A year ago representatives of the ecumenical organizations invited institute
spokesmen to a debate. But now, said Harriet Ziegler of the National Council of
Churches communications office, many church leaders are angry ''at the false
charges leveled against us.''

''They have set out to do us in, and they must be taken seriously,'' said Claire
Randall, general secretary of the National Council of Churches. Dr. Randall and
others say they are particularly upset over the institute's charges that church
leaders are lying in explaining how offerings are distributed.

To church leaders like Dr. Randall, adopting the political views of the
institute could endanger church projects in developing countries and link the
churches too closely with American foreign policy goals.

''We have developed a sense of trust with people in other countries precisely
because we are not there to promote a particular political ideology,'' said the
president of the National Council of Churches, Bishop James Armstrong of the
United Methodist Church. He denounced the institute from the pulpit of Riverside
Church in Manhattan.

Dr. Randall denies the charge that links with churches in Communist and
socialist countries have led to a ''pervasive leftist influence'' in the
ecumenical organization. ''We need not agree with all the positions taken by
those to whom we give aid,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of clergy members

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 17, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WHERE CHARITY BEGINS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 732 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 16


If President Reagan has his way, Federal workers will no longer be able to make
about $4 million in payroll pledges to nonprofit groups advocating such things
as women's rights, civil rights and environmental issues.

To give more help to the ''the poor, the infirm, the hungry and the truly
needy,'' as a Administration official put it, the President will no longer allow
Federal workers and servicemen to pledge payroll contributions to charitable
groups that advocate social change.  Direct donations are, of course,
unaffected.

In announcing Mr. Reagan's recent executive order on the subject, Donald J.
Devine, director of the Office of Personnel Management, said last Thursday that
the President was trying to ''avoid the reality and the appearance of the use of
Federal resources in aid of fund raising for political and advocacy groups.''

This decision could mean a loss of several million dollars to about 36 so-called
legal defense funds.

Planning a Challenge

Groups likely to be cut from the official roster include the Sierra Club Legal
Defense Fund, the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc., Vietnam
Veterans of America Foundation and the Center for Science in the Public
Interest. A coalition of these groups, which gained access to the Federal
paychecks only in the past few years, met today to start planning a legal
strategy to remain in the annual fund drive.

''It's utterly hypocritical of President Reagan to say he wants to increase
private giving and then cut dozens of charities from the fund-raising
campaign,'' said Timothy Saasta, a spokesman for the National Committee for
Responsive Philanthropy.

The new eligibility criteria are likely to exclude only a few conservative
groups. Prominent among these is the National Right to Work Foundation, which
fueled the long-simmering controversy by gaining admission to the Federal
Combined Campaign last July. Labor unions fiercely opposed participation by this
group, which provides free legal service to ''victims of compulsory unionism,''
according to Joanna Boyce, a spokesman.

Drive by United Way

Such controversy does not sit well with the mainstream charities, which rely
heavily on payroll contributions made to the United Way of America. United Way,
which collected $1.68 billion from all public and private sources in 1981,
organized a coalition of 20 major charities last year to petition the President
to consider new restrictions. His executive order closely follows their
requests.

Debate over admission to the Federal charity drive began in 1962, when President
Kennedy opened up the program to ''health and welfare charities and others.''

Mr. Reagan's order states that eligibility ''shall be limited to voluntary,
charitable, health and welfare agencies that provide or support direct health
and welfare services to individuals of their families.'' It adds, ''Agencies
that seek to influence the outcomes of elections or the determination of public
policy through political activity or advocacy, lobbbying, or litigation on
behalf of parties other than themselves'' shall not be eligible to participate.

Limitation on Testifying

Much uncertainty exists because the personnel office has yet to write
regulations putting the executive order into effect. The restrictions on
lobbying, for example, are so stiff that representatives of the American Lung
Association, which supported the order, would no longer be able to testify at
Congressional hearings in favor of advertising regulations for cigarettes.
Joseph A. Morris, general counsel of the Federal personnel office. the principal
author of the executive order, said in an recent interview that any group that
lobbied for any public policy would be ineligible for participation.

The stakes are big. Last year, the 2.8 million Federal workers and 2.2 million
members of the armed services authorized the Government to deduct $100 million
for donations to 111 individual charitable organizations and 11 umbrella groups
such as United Way. Federal donations increased by a near record of seven
percent, but pledges earmarked for United Way decreased by more than $4 million.

''A lot of the money went to special interest groups,'' said Steve Delfin, a
spokesman for United Way. ''I'm not saying that they don't have valid social
roles, but they tend to drain money away from the priority health and welfare
needs.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 17, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CONCERT: ROBERT BLACK AND NEW MUSIC GROUP

BYLINE: By JOHN ROCKWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 428 words


ROBERT BLACK'S New York New Music Ensemble has proved itself one of our best
contemporary music groups, and indeed the performances Tuesday at Carnegie
Recital Hall were again first-rate. But the concert was a little misleading if
you took the ensemble's title literally.

Fairly or not, the term ''new music'' has been appropriated by the
experimentalists, as in the annual New Music America festivals. But what Mr.
Black and his cohorts play, and did so especially on Tuesday, is party-line
''uptown'' musical modernism. Similarly with the term ''ensemble'' itself. No
doubt this is an actual group. But on Tuesday three of the six pieces were for
single performers and the fourth was for a duo, leaving only one third of the
program actually for an ensemble.

What one looks for in grab bags like this is one piece that stands out, one (or
more, of course, but one is a good batting average in this league) score that
suggests real vitality and imagination amidst the prevailing earnest dross.

The liveliest score on Tuesday was the longest and oldest - Zoltan Kodaly's Duo
(Op. 7) for violin and cello, composed 69 years ago.  Kodaly's chamber music is
bolder than much of his larger-scaled work, and this duo is full of inventive
extensions of folk idioms. It was sympathetically played by Suzanne Ornstein and
Eric Bartlett, too, even if they didn't capture the folk spirit with much zest.

The rest of the program was contemporary, and the best here was the second of
Joan Tower's ''Breakfast Rhythms'' I and II (1975), which ended the evening.
These studies for clarinet (Laura Flax) and five other instrumentalists seem
curiously diverse. The first is constricted, but the second opens up
luxuriously, full of drama and color.

The program began with Seymour Shifrin's ''In Eius Memoriam'' (1968), a concise,
sometimes chromatically cliched lament - but in the end a moving one - for the
losses of Vietnam. Mr. Bartlett, who had a busy night, then offered the first of
his two cello solos, a rather inconclusively diverse ''Caprice'' (1978) by Larry
Bell; his second solo, after the Kodaly and the intermission, was Joseph
Tamosaitis's pleasant, bland ''Fantasy'' (1980).

The fifth piece was Matthew Harris's ''MBTA'' for solo percussionist, named for
the Boston rapid-transit system and consisting - at least in this performance by
Daniel Druckman, who advised in its composition - of lots of loud,
coloristically bold, formally vague daubs of sound. The other two fine musicians
for the night were Jayn Rosenfeld, flute, and Elizabeth DiFelice, piano.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 17, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE THEATER: 'WANDA JUNE' RETURNS

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 32, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 664 words


THE title character of Kurt Vonnegut Jr.'s madcap play ''Happy Birthday, Wanda
June'' is in heaven, the casualty of an ice-cream truck, but all's well in her
theatrical cloudland because she is playing shuffleboard up there with a Nazi
named Siegfried von Koningswald.

Below them, on the earth level of the homey Equity Library Theater stage, there
are other lovable characters, including a former American colonel who dropped
the atom bomb on Nagasaki and ever since has been blubbering, a vacuum-cleaner
salesman with Silent Majority views, and an antinuke physician who doesn't look
as if he could heal himself or anyone else. And then there's the chap who
excuses his odd behavior with the explanation that he never made Eagle Scout.

The time is 1970, or B-52 time over Vietnam, and the flexible setting is a New
York City apartment. To compound the plot, the two leading characters may remind
you vaguely -very vaguely - of Odysseus, here called Harold Ryan, and his wife,
Penelope, who bears the same first name as the Queen of Ithaca in the Greek
legend. So in the background of the tumult and shouting (there's a lot of both
on stage) are several wars or antiwars: Homer's, Vonnegut's, Vietnam and maybe
the next one.

Search below the surface of the domestic comedy and maybe you'll find a modern
morality play. But don't look too hard because what we have in the entertaining
evening is the satirical novelist juggling his human bestiary. If you
haphazardly juxtaposed some of the pages of ''Slapstick'' and
''Slaughterhouse-Five,'' you might come up with the spirit of ''Happy Birthday,
Wanda June.''

In the clever set designed by Joe Mobilia, we learn how the Ryans first met
before he wandered off to his games of war and hunting. A cardboard Cadillac
appears, with the blowhard Ryan, strongly played by David Adamson, behind the
wheel. Penelope, in the person of Joyce Cohen, is not unraveling Laertes's
shroud; she's selling burgers as a car-hop. The sprightly actress would turn
heads in any man's hamburger heaven.

Their marriage, however, is not heaven-sent. Somehow, Ryan equates the tocsin of
war with the artillery of sex. Returning home, he lives under the sign of
stuffed animal heads. When the doorbell rings, it doesn't -instead, it is a
recorded lion roar, courtesy of Abercrombie & Fitch. In this charade between
Harold and Penelope, the author makes you choose sides quickly, and you hope
that the carhop will send her hunter packing.

Although Vonnegut as playwright has a lot of unsolved carpentry problems in
''Happy Birthday, Wanda June'' - only a Thornton Wilder could get away with
performers' telling the audience when an act is over - his fans will enjoy his
alarums and asides.

Under Elowyn Castle's direction, a professional cast that includes lively
moments by Marcia Savella, Ward Asquith, Dale Place, Richard Voigts and James
Mathers move quickly and rather loudly through three acts. Mr. Vonnegut's play,
which originally ran at the Theater de Lys and Edison Theater in 1970-71, is a
worthwhile revival in the Equity Library Theater's 40th anniversary season. It
will run through Feb.  27.

It's 1970 Again
HAPPY BIRTHDAY, WANDA JUNE, by Kurt Vonnegut Jr.; directed by Elowyn Castle;
scenic design, Joe Mobilia; costume design, Margie Peterson; lighting design,
Mark Weingartner; sound design and original music, Hal Schuler; production stage
manager, Penny Landau. Pre- sented by the Equity Library Theater, 310 Riverside
Drive.  Penelope Ryan .............................Joyce Cohen Paul Ryan
................................Mark Ballous Dr. Norbert Woodly
.........................Dale Place Herb Shuttle
............................James Mathers Harold Ryan
.............................David Adamson Looseleaf Harper
.........................Ward Asquith Wanda June ...................Victoria
Gabrielle Platt Siegfried van Konigswalkd ..............Richard Voigts Mildred
................................Marcia Savella

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 45 words


A picture caption Tuesday incorrectly identified a Vietnam veteran's friend who
died in the war. He was David F. Skala of New York City, who was killed 13 years
ago. Richard M. Scala, who was mentioned in the caption, was also from New York.
He died 15 years ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: CENSORSHIP CAN TAKE INDIRECT FORMS

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1238 words


ON April 1, 1950, Macmillan published Immanuel Velikovsky's ''Worlds in
Collision,'' a book that attempted to explain the origins of the universe by
references to the Old Testament, world literature and ancient mythology. Widely
condemned by the scientific community, the book nevertheless soared onto The New
York Times best-seller list, where it remained for 31 weeks. Yet two months
after publication, at the height of its popularity, Macmillan literally gave the
lucrative Velikovsky title to Doubleday without cost and dismissed the editor
who had signed up the book. Moreover, Gordon A.  Atwater, who wrote an article
praising the author's approach, even while disagreeing with many of his
conclusions, was summarily dismissed as chairman of the astronomy department of
the American Museum of Natural History and as curator of the Hayden Planetarium.

The reason? An influential group of scientists, led by the late Harlow Shapley
of the Harvard College Observatory, were so enraged by what they considered the
''crackpot'' ideas of Dr. Velikovsky, who was a psychoanalyst, that they
threatened to boycott Macmillan's textbook department unless the company ceased
publishing the book.  Since textbooks accounted for some 60 percent of the
besieged company's sales, Macmillan executives decided to give the book to a
publisher that did not have a textbook department and could not therefore be
pressured by academics.

That episode is recounted in ''Stargazers and Gravediggers: Memoirs to Worlds in
Collision'' (William Morrow & Company), a book at once sad and frightening,
which is scheduled for publication March 21. The book, most of it completed by
Dr. Velikovsky before his death in 1979, is based largely on personal
correspondence, plus articles and reviews from those embattled years. Much of
the controversy will also be recounted in a book tentatively scheduled for
publication next year from the University of Illinois Press, ''Beyond
Velikovsky: Analysis of a Public Controversy'' by Dr. Henry Bauer, dean of the
College of Arts and Sciences at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University.

The renewed interest in the Velikovsky affair, which a Morrow press release
labels ''one of the most shameful episodes in the history of science,''
naturally raises the question of whether something similar could happen again.
Or, more broadly, is censorship or repression possible in publishing today?

'We Would Not Back Away'

Because the Velikovsky incident happened so long ago, no Macmillan official from
that time is still with the publishing house. Bruno A.  Quinson, president of
Macmillan general books, was not even aware of the matter. ''But I can tell you
that there is nothing in good taste that we would not consider publishing, and
we would not back away from anything we did publish,'' Mr. Quinson said. ''We
have published books lately that we don't necessarily agree with, politically or
philosophically, and we have supported them to the fullest.''

In fact, editors and publishers say that, except for self-styled local censors
and committees that monitor textbooks for ideological purity, and which are
effective only locally, there are few institutionalized pressures today on
publishers. In the past, many publishers shied away from publishing books
critical of aspects of Roman Catholicism or of Israel, according to industry
sources, for fear of arousing backlash from influential and articulate
partisans.  And some houses still refuse to publish books that can even remotely
be construed as implying racial superiority or inferiority.

That last taboo is still generally strong, sources say, although in 1980 the
Free Press, a division of Macmillan, published ''Bias in Mental Testing'' by
Arthur R. Jensen, the Stanford psychologist, who argued that I.Q. tests on which
blacks had scored lower than whites were not culturally biased. Many books
critical of aspects of Catholicism and of Israel have been published in recent
months, most notably Jacobo Timerman's ''The Longest War,'' and more reportedly
are on the way.

Still, some books are turned down simply because publishers haven't the energy
or the stomach for the controversy they are likely to stir up. Derek Freeman,
the Australian anthropologist whose forthcoming book from Harvard University
Press on Margaret Mead has already excited great interest and even greater
passions, said that when he submitted an early version to a commercial publisher
some years ago, it was turned down cold. ''It was sent out to be evaluated, and
the readers couldn't imagine anybody saying a critical word about Margaret
Mead,'' he said.

Drums vs. Symphonies

Books by and about blacks, Asians, radicals, conservatives and free enterprise
are in relatively short supply on trade lists.  However, industry sources say
this is not an example of suppression or censorship but a reflection of editors'
interests, their perception of what will sell and the quality of the arguments.
Said Bruce Lee, a senior editor at Morrow, who edited the forthcoming Velikovsky
book: ''If a writer submits a well-written manuscript that presents a cogent
argument on a significant issue, he can get it published. But so many come in
that merely beat a single drum, and you need a symphony to sustain an entire
book.''

What worries publishers more than pressure groups is the growing number of
actual and threatened lawsuits against publishers and authors.

Soon after signing up an author to write a book about the recent Bendix
Corporation-Martin Marietta Corporation merger, Arbor House received a letter
from the lawyer for William Agee, former chairman of Bendix, and for Mary
Cunningham Agee, who resigned as a Bendix vice president three years ago after
denying rumors that she and Mr.  Agee (who was was not yet her husband) were
having an affair.

''The lawyer said he understood that the author was planning a slanted,
inaccurate and defamatory version of their 'involvement' in the
Bendix-Martin-Marietta matter, and he warned against it,'' said Eden
Collinsworth, associate publisher of Arbor House. ''We turned his letter over to
our lawyer to answer, but we regarded it as a preemptive strike, an attempt to
pressure us. Nevertheless, we're moving forward with great determination and
enthusiasm.''

No Meddling From Above

Critics frequently say that book companies owned by conglomerates shy away from
publishing books that would offend their corporate owners, but several prominent
examples point in the other direction.  ''Shortly after we were bought by Gulf &
Western,'' said Richard E.Snyder, chairman of Simon & Schuster, ''we published
'Global Reach' '' - by Richard Barnet and R.E. Muller - ''parts of which are
critical of Gulf & Western. I never thought to discuss the book with corporate
officials, and they never thought to discuss it with me. I learned months later
they weren't fond of that book, but that showed me there would never be any
interference with the book operation, and there never has been.''

In 1973, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, which is owned by CBS, published Gen. Anthony
E. Herbert's ''Soldier,'' a book alleging that General Herbert had been removed
from command in Vietnam because of his complaints about war crimes. The most
scathing attack on the book and author came not from the press but from network
television, specifically from ''60 Minutes,'' the pride of the CBS network.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GREGORY HARRISON IN 'THE FIGHTER'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 31, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 904 words


GREGORY HARRISON, star of the series ''Trapper John, M.D.,'' occasionally
ventures out into a television movie. Last time, it was ''For Ladies Only,'' in
which he played a male stripper in a nightclub that caters to cheering and
whistling female customers.  Now, tomorrow night at 9 on CBS-TV, Mr. Harrison is
going the wellworn route of the struggling boxer in a film titled, directly
enough, ''The Fighter.'' As usual with this intense actor, he ends up being more
impressive than might be anticipated of a poster-pinup figure.

''The Fighter'' does try to get away from some of the standard cliches of the
boxing movie, the kind of situations and characters that are milked in such
productions as the ''Rocky'' movies. Merle Banks (Mr. Harrison) is not a young
kid from the slums with dreams of becoming a world champion. He is a Vietnam
veteran who finds himself unemployed after the closing of the big mill in town.
He has become a bellhop at the local hotel. His wife, Rindy (Glynnis O'Connor),
has gone to work as a beautician. Living with them in their modest home is his
father, Henry (Pat Hingle), unemployed for two years and addicted to sports on
television.

Merle drifts toward the fighting scene only because it might bring in more money
than a job he finds humiliating. ''I can't carry people's dogs no more,'' he
cries. He wins an amateur fight and gets $20. Then he finds out about a contest
sponsored by an organization called the Brawlers, which is having one of its
regional events in his town. The final prize down the line is $10,000. Egged on
by his manipulating trainer (Steve Inwood), Merle decides to go for it.

The script, by Jerome Kass (''Queen of the Stardust Ballroom''), does try to
take some innovative turns. The Brawlers organization, for instance, is shown to
be primarily greedy and irresponsible, exploiting the out of work and the out of
shape. With its bikiniclad ''hostesses,'' it offers sex and violence with
cynical abandon. And the movie provides a number of pointed observations on the
state of the economy.

But, in the end, cliches are inevitable in a fight picture. Merle's wife,
adamantly opposed to his boxing and to violence of any kind, becomes pregnant
and, as the plot would have it, is delivering their child on the very night of
the big bout. And the fights themselves are familiar symphonies of thudding
punches, vicious knockdowns and unbelievable comebacks. Most viewers have been
there before, too many times. Still, they can appreciate two very sympathetic
performances from Mr. Harrison and Miss O'Connor. They might also take careful
note of Susan Kellerman, who plays Lily Montgomery, the tough organizer of the
Brawlers. Following on her recent splendid depiction of a nun in ''Dixie:
Changing Habits,'' Miss Kellerman is certainly compiling an impressive record.

Hispanic Community

Focus of New Series

Sunday morning at 10, WABC-TV is taking note of its public-affairs
responsibilities with ''Tiempo,'' a new series aimed at New York's Hispanic
community, which is said to number some three million persons. With Dario
Boronat as producer and David Navarro as associate producer, the programs will
accent the positive in the experience of Spanish-speaking people, from Puerto
Rico to Mexico, from South America to Spain. Their numbers in the United States
are said to total 19 million.

The weekly hosts are Anna Carbonell, a native of Arecibo, P.R., and Miguel
Perez, born in Havana and now a reporter for The Daily News. On the premiere,
Miss Carbonell interviews Placido Domingo, the Metropolitan Opera tenor, who was
born in Spain and brought up in Mexico. He speaks of wanting to establish
centers for the performance of zarzuelas, traditional Spanish songs, in New
York, Los Angeles and Miami. Mr. Perez talks with Carlos Montalban, perhaps best
known as El Exigente on those television coffee commercials. Mr. Montalban,
brother of the actor Ricardo Montalban, turns out also to have been the founder
of a Spanish-speaking theater in the Bronx during the 1940's and to be adamant
about correct Spanish usage.

The half-hour is pleasant, moving along brightly and attractively.  Future
sessions will feature the actor Raul Julia; Eduardo Costa, a jewelry designer,
and Carlos Cordoba, a banker. The emphasis on good news for a segment of the New
York community that is too often relegated to only unfavorable television images
is valuable and refreshing.

Novel Now TV Movie

One of the season's glossier productions is ''Rage of Angels,'' a television
movie beginning on NBC-TV on Sunday at 9 P.M. and continuing Monday night at 9.
It is based on one of Sidney Sheldon's best-selling novels, and Mr. Sheldon has
served as the executive producer. At the center of the piece, as in most Sheldon
books, is a beautiful woman. This one is Jennifer Parker, a lawyer who heads for
New York to seek fame and fortune. She is played by Jaclyn Smith, who, as every
devotee of the ''Charlie's Angels'' series can attest, has beauty to spare. (A
detailed review of ''Rage of Angels'' appears in Sunday's Arts and Leisure
section.)

'Pirates' Film on Cable

Tonight is the night when the $10 million film version of Joseph Papp's
production of ''The Pirates of Penzance'' will be made available to some
cable-television homes for a one-time payment, in most cases $10. It will not,
however, be available in New York City.  This Universal Pictures film will also
be released in movie theaters today. The theater people are not happy about the
direct competition with television. The cable people are anxious to see how many
homes actually buy the presentation. The results are expected to be revealing
for the future of pay television.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gregory Harrison

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Elsa Thompson, Made Radio Documentaries

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 142 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 17


Elsa Knight Thompson, a pioneer of radio news documentaries, died Saturday at
Merritt Hospital in Oakland. She was 76 years old.

Mrs. Thompson, who was raised in Seattle, began her radio career on the
international affairs desk at the BBC and was one of the first journalists to
interview survivors of Nazi concentration camps.

In 1957, she became Director of News and Public Affairs for KPFA, a
noncommercial radio station in Berkeley, Calif. While there, she produced shows
on civil rights issues, the rise of the Black Panther Party and the Vietnam War.
She was known for her 1960 documentary on the House Un-American Activities
Committee called ''Black Friday.'' From 1975 to 1979, Mrs. Thompson worked for
the Pacific News Service in San Francisco.

She is survived by a sister, Jeanny Paterson, and a brother, James Knight, both
of Seattle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

William T. Sweigert; A U.S. Judge Since '59

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 237 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 17


Federal District Judge William T.  Sweigert, who ruled the Vietnam War
unconstitutional in 1970, died Wednesday at his home after a short illness.
Judge Sweigert, who was partly retired, was 82 years old.

Judge Sweigert, though a Democrat, was a protege of Chief Justice Earl Warren, a
Republican. In his 60-year career he rose through the judicial ranks from
Assistant District Attorney of San Mateo County to the Federal bench, to which
he was nominated by President Eisenhower in 1959.

While Mr. Warren was California Attorney General, he appointed Mr.  Sweigert
Deputy Attorney General in 1940. Three years later, as Governor, he made Mr.
Sweigert his executive secretary and chief aide. The Governor appointed him to
the San Francisco Municipal Court in 1949 and to the Superior Court five months
later and encouraged President Eisenhower to name him to the Federal bench.

In 1970 Judge Sweigert ruled in favor of three Berkeley law students who argued
that the war in Vietnam was illegal because it had not been declared by
Congress. His decision was overturned.

In 1974 he struck down the National Football League's contract rule that
severely restricted a player's choice of which team to play for even after
becoming a free agent.

Judge Sweigert is survived by his wife, Alice Virginia; two sons, William of
Sacramento and Philip of Washington State, and a daughter, Jane Marie Roche of
San Francisco.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
THE REDSKINS FROM PRINCETON

BYLINE: By Ira Berkow

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 977 words


WASHINGTON I t has been three weeks since his team won the Super Bowl, and yet
the Redskin quarterback has received no offers for endorsements, for
commercials, for personal appearances.

Johnny Carson hasn't phoned him, and Merv has taken a powder.  But none of this
upsets him, for Bob Holly, the rookie backup quarterback, didn't expect it.  Joe
Theismann, the team's star quarterback, is, of course, doing the celebrity rag.
''Joe's agent is flooded with requests,'' said Charlie Taylor, the Redskins'
public-relations director. ''I don't know how Joe's going to handle it all.''

Holly, from Clifton, N.J., and Princeton University, has his own problems. He's
been seeking an offseason job on Capitol Hill, or in a law firm. So far,
nothing.

Holly was one of two substitute quarterbacks behind Theismann. The other was Tom
Owen, a nine-year veteran of the National Football League. And in 13 games last
season, nine in the regular season and four in the playoffs, Holly did not play
a single down, though he was eager to. He didn't call a single play, or wing a
single pass, or suffer a single sack.

One of his contributions, it turns out, was saving the team money on laundry
bills.  Another was standing on the sideline with a clipboard and charting each
of Washington's plays.  Despite this, Holly ended up with $70,000 in playoff
money, the same amount pocketed by Theismann and John Riggins, the locomotive
with a helmet, and the ''Hogs'' and the ''Fun Bunch'' among the 48 other roster
Redskins.

Holly was a long shot from the beginning. Picked by Washington on the 11th round
of the college draft last year, he was the 295th player selected over all.
Choice he wasn't.

Holly recalled this recently in the living room of the town house he shares with
three teammates in the Washington suburb of Herndon, Va.

At 6 feet 2 1/2 and 198 pounds, Holly has the gentle eyes of a scholar but the
firm jaw of a football player. He wore jeans and Topsiders and a cowlick in his
short brown haircut.

''Some of my teammates couldn't believe what Ivy League football was like,''
said Holly. ''No scholarships, no spring practice, and I had to miss practice
during the season to work on my thesis in American history.'' The thesis covered
discrepancies between how the United States Government and the American news
media reported the Tet offensive in the Vietnam War.

''Some guys on the Redskins told me they never went to class, were given TV sets
and got money to go on vacations,'' said Holly. ''I once missed a seminar
because of football practice and my professor was appalled. 'Boy, oh boy,' he
said, 'this school's getting as bad as U.S.C.' ''

Holly had been accepted by Fordham Law School and was ready to enter last fall
if he didn't make the Redskins.  In the last exhibition game he got his chance.
He played the second half against Cincinnati and moved the club, showing poise
and a formidable arm, connecting on 9 of 19 passes and a 37-yard touchdown.

''On the last day of training camp,'' he said, ''I just went to the quarterback
meeting as I had been doing. No one said don't come.  There used to be five
quarterbacks there, now there were three. To this day none of the coaches has
told me I've made the team.''

He got uniform No.8 from the Redskins and a one-year deferment from Fordham.
''There were a couple games when we won by three or four touchdowns that I
thought I might play,'' he said. ''But obviously Coach Gibbs likes to stay with
one quarterback.

''Rookie quarterbacks rarely just start playing right away, anyway, especially
when you've got a great quarterback like Joe.'' Finally, and incredibly, the
Super Bowl. Running onto the field at Pasadena was, Holly said, one of the most
thrilling experiences of his life.

Running off, at game's end, was, well, a mixed emotion.  ''You know, before the
game, you have to prepare just like you're going to start and go the distance,''
he said. ''I had to know the game plan cold, just as I did for every game. If
Joe gets hurt, I could become the most important person on the field.

''The night before, I imagined myself leading the team to victory.Well, the
stands were very close to the field, and it was a beautiful day, and when I ran
out from the tunnel and saw all those people - 103,000 of 'em -whew! Took my
breath away.''

Owen also didn't get in for a single play all season, but since he had more
experience, he probably would have got the call first. If the team didn't
respond, then it would've been up to Holly.

''When it was over, and we had won the Super Bowl and I hadn't played, I felt a
sense of disappointment. But it was only momentary.  I said to myself, here I am
a 22-year-old guy just out of college and surrounded by all this good fortune.
Really, it was great, it's just that I wasn't tired.''

Not like some Saturday afternoons in the Ivy League, such as in his senior year
when he threw for 501 yards and four touchdowns to help Princeton beat Yale for
the first time in 15 years.

''I know I'll get my chance in the pros,'' Holly said. ''You have to be groomed.
Joe's 34 years old. He's not going to be around forever.''

Holly said he wasn't embarrassed about taking the $70,000 playoff money. ''Not
at all,'' he said. ''I earned it. I had to stay ready and,'' he smiled, ''I had
to take a lot of abuse.''

For example, his locker was situated with the offensive and defensive linemen,
in an area known as ''Pig Alley.'' ''They're nice guys, but they resented that
my uniform was always so clean. They threatened to get me evicted and moved over
to the backfield guys.

''They really got on me before one practice when I slipped into my red thermal
underwear. Drove 'em wild. But it was zero outside. I said, 'Sorry, fellas, they
keep me warm.' ''

Pig Alley may have to resign itself to those long johns. They could be around
for years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bob Holly

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MISSOURI DIOXIN CLEANUP: A DECADE OF LITTLE ACTION

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 3724 words

DATELINE: JEFFERSON CITY, Mo.


The long and unhappy story of dioxin contamination that is unfolding across
Missouri began one day in late 1971 when Judy Piatt got into her bronze-colored
Buick sedan, determined to find out what was killing her beloved appaloosas and
quarter horses.

Dozens had died agonizing deaths, even Lobo, her favorite mare, and Mrs. Piatt
suspected the culprit was something in the oil that had been sprayed on the dirt
floor to keep down the dust at her stable east of St. Louis.

So for 15 months, often disguising herself, she followed trucks of Russell
Bliss, the salvage oil dealer who had sprayed the stable.  She compiled a list
of 16 or so sites where she said she had seen Mr. Bliss dump chemical wastes, as
well as spray oil. She sent the list, in early 1973, to numerous state and
Federal officials, assuming something would be done.

Times Beach Awaiting Word

For a decade, almost nothing happened.  Only now is a concerted effort under way
to find and clean up the poison, suspected in 100 places and confirmed in 22,
including the entire town of Times Beach. Its residents, warned by Federal
health officials to leave their homes, are now awaiting definitive information
on the contamination levels and what dangers they pose.

The history of the lost years between Mrs. Piatt's warnings and the belated
response has been pieced together from interviews with a score or so of the key
figures, from court documents and testimony, and from Missouri records ordered
opened here at the capital by Gov.  Christopher S. Bond.

The tale is one without many heroes or, for that matter, many villains. Rather,
it is a convoluted story rooted in the casual way toxic wastes were handled a
decade ago, before their potency was well understood or their disposal
controlled by law.

Inertia and Uncertainty

It is also a story of the way institutions work, or fail to work, of
bureaucratic inertia and buck-passing, and of scientific uncertainty in a realm
where certainty always seems elusive.

But if there were official lapses, it must also be said that those responsible
at the time worked with little public support, and with little legal authority
or money to clean up. The Missouri investigation was for years carried on mainly
by a poorly paid state veterinarian in his 20's.

The dioxin, considered one of the most toxic compounds known, originated as
waste from a chemical plant, now closed, in the southwest Missouri town of
Verona that made the germicide hexachlorophene. A byproduct of the manufacture
of this chemical, the dioxin was in sludge that Mr. Bliss hauled away from the
plant and mixed with waste oil to spray for dust control.

It was identified, nine years ago, as the toxic agent that caused animal and
human illnesses at Mrs. Piatt's Shenandoah Arena and three other Missouri
stables. Eight years ago, the Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta
recommended that two home sites in Imperial, to which contaminated dirt from one
stable had been removed, be re-excavated and the soil buried in a deep, remote
landfill.

The state authorities rejected that recommendation in 1975, and since then the
tainted soil has spread through erosion. The sites were among 418 listed for
cleanup recently by the Federal Government under a $1.6 billion program known as
the ''superfund.''

An Earlier Start Suspected

Many officials and environmentalists suspect that the chain of events that led
to the Missouri mess was duplicated throughout the country in the 1970's before
strict new laws on hazardous waste were passed late in the decade.

That the officials are moving at all now in Missouri is almost a quirk, the
result of an anonymous telephone call to the Environmental Protection Agency in
1979 alerting Federal officials that the Verona chemical plant had
surreptitiously buried scores of drums of waste sludge on a nearby farm. Even
then the inquiry might not have gone much further, had it not been for the
persistence of a young field investigator with the Kansas City regional office
of the E.P.A., Daniel J. Harris, who urged redoubled efforts in the face of
indifference at the agency's headquarters in Washington.

After the initial contamination in 1971, state and Federal investigators made a
partial effort to track down the dioxin, asking Mr. Bliss to list sites where he
had sprayed the contaminated oil, and interviewing others involved. But nine
years after the last batch of hexachlorophene was produced by the Verona plant
of the North Eastern Pharmaceutical and Chemical Company, or Nepacco, Mr.
Harris was the first to try to account for the full 120 pounds of dioxin the
E.P.A. estimates was produced there, mostly in the form of sludge, or ''still
bottoms.'' He was the first to pull together all the documentation on the
episode and conduct a thorough examination of Mrs. Piatt's records. More than 40
pounds of dioxin is still unaccounted for.
Investigation Called Far From Complete

In an internal report dated April 20, 1981, from Mr. Harris to the E.P.A.'s
hazardous site control division, a copy of which was obtained from agency
sources in Washington, he wrote, in part:

''It is apparent that this investigation is far from completion and that the
need for dioxin analyses promises to be greater in the future than it has been
in the past. There is certainly no assurance that all the still bottoms have
been accounted for nor that other Nepacco sites will not pop up.

''With regard to the horse arenas and the resulting secondary sites, there are
many questions which remained unanswered, and the record does not provide
assurance that the public and the environment is protected from low-level
long-term exposure to dioxin.''

Complicating the story is medical scientists' uncertainty whether long-term
exposure to relatively low levels of dioxin in the soil is indeed harmful to
human beings; the handful of illnesses in Missouri attributed to contact with
dioxin involved only those exposed to extremely high concentrations, like
chemical workers and the Piatts.

The record suggests that Missouri officials over the years were remarkably
unconcerned, or unaware, of the chemical time bomb they were sitting on. On Dec.
14, 1978, in response to a United States Senate committee inquiry, Gov. Joseph
P. Teasdale wrote: ''We have been extremely fortunate and have had very few
incidents of spills or dumping of hazardous materials in Missouri.'' He added
only a vague allusion to the dioxin problem, saying there were ''some cases
currently under investigation where there is a potential danger to the
environment.''

PICK UP

1st add DIOXIN

Even as recently as Nov. 12, 1981, Dr. Mohammad N. Akhter, then director of the
Missouri Division of Health, dictated a memorandum for the record taking note of
the renewed E.P.A. investigation. The memo mentioned that dioxin had been found
in a stream near the Verona plant, adding that the possible contamination of
drinking water, grazing cattle and fish in the area had ''wide-range economic
implications.'' The memo concluded: ''There's nothing we need to do at this
point in time except to keep on eye on the situation and to stay in touch with
E.P.A.''

The handling of the home sites at Imperial offers a graphic example of the
official inertia.  Ironically, the initial government response in 1971, when
horses began to fall ill and die, with uncontrolled weight loss, hair loss,
abdominal paroxsyms and other ailments, seemed promising.

The state sent in a veterinarian, Dr. Patrick E. Phillips, then only 23 years
old. Mrs. Piatt recalls him as a ''hippie'' with long hair in a pony tail, jeans
and sandals, and she praises him as the only official who stood by her family
throughout.

In an impressive piece of detective work, Dr. Phillips, with the help of a
suspicious Mrs. Piatt, other stable owners and other doctors, traced the source
of illness to Mr. Bliss.

According to Dr. Arthur A. Case, then a professor of veterinary medicine at the
University of Missouri, the stable soil was laced with a chemical so powerful
that it ''would knock your hat off, make your nostrils burn and your ears
ring.'' Samples were sent to the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, but
with no reason to suspect dioxin the laboratories lost three years searching for
other contaminants until crystals of trichlorophenol, TCP, were found.
Dioxin Is Identified As the Culprit

This suggested, Dr. Renate D. Kimbrough of the C.D.C. said in a recent
interview, that the original source might have been a herbicide factory, since
TCP is used as a starting point in the manufacture of 2,4,5-T herbicide, better
known as an ingredient of Agent Orange, used in Vietnam.

Then, in August 1974, the centers finally identified dioxin, a byproduct, as the
culprit, but by then the poison had inadvertently been spread to other places,
including the home sites at Imperial.

The soil at Mrs. Piatt's stable contained astonishingly high levels of dioxin -
in the range of 31,000 to 33,000 parts per billion. The Centers for Disease
Control considers soil concentrations higher than 1 part per billion as
warranting cleanup; 1 part per billion is comparable to 1 second in 31.7 years.

With the aid of Defense Department records, Dr. Phillips and two C.D.C.
physicians traced the dioxin in Mr. Bliss's oil to a plant in Verona where
Hoffman-Taff Inc. once made Agent Orange. As it turned out, that company was not
responsible for the contamination, but it had sold the plant to Syntex
Agribusiness, which had leased part of it to Nepacco, the maker of
hexachlorophene, whose manufacture also involves TCP. Nepacco paid Mr. Bliss to
haul away its waste.

The initial reaction of Dr. Phillips's boss, Dr. H. Denny Donnell Jr., then
director of epidemiology and disease control at the Missouri Division of Health,
was to minimize public knowledge of the potential health hazards. In an internal
memorandum about Dr.  Phillips's report, dated Sept. 11, 1974, Dr. Donnell
wrote: ''Since most of the information contained in the report was obtained on a
confidential basis and the resulting hypothesis still unproven, it is suggested
that extreme care be exercised in any release of information for public
consumption to the press.''

Dr. Donnell, still with the state, did not respond to three requests for
comment.  Meanwhile, the investigators discovered that 850 cubic yards of
contaminated soil from another horse arena sprayed by Mr. Bliss, Bubbling
Springs, near Fenton, Mo., had earlier been excavated after horse deaths and
used by a contractor for residential landfill. The contractor, Vernon Stout,
piled some of it near two mobile home sites he owned on a hill in Imperial,
about 25 miles southeast of St.  Louis, and sold a few truckloads to some
friends nearby, Harold and Valerie Minker, who used it to landscape their front
yard.

Dr. Phillips promptly visited the Minkers in August of 1974 and told them of the
probable dioxin contamination. He also spoke to Mr.  Stout, who was not living
at the site. Mr. Stout apparently did not tell the people living in the mobile
homes, nor did Dr. Phillips.  ''If you want to point a finger, start with me,''
Dr. Phillips said in a recent interview. He is now 34 years old, with a droopy
mustache and a cowboy hat and boots that confirm his Texas origins.

Nor did anyone tell the Minkers' downhill neighbors. Dr. Phillips said he had
not thought that was necessary because the soil seemed stable and dioxin was not
thought to leach out of the soil easily.  Since then the soil has eroded,
spreading to other plots and a creek.

At the time, Dr. Phillips took samples that showed dioxin levels of 170 to 440
parts per billion at the Stout site and 85 to 740 parts per billion in the
Minkers' yard. The Minkers remained.

A few months later, on March 31, 1975, the Centers for Disease Control
circulated a report recommending that the Minker/Stout site be ''re-excavated
and dumped at a remote, deep landfill.'' The agency also urged that the contents
of the abandoned storage tank at the old Verona plant, 4,600 gallons of sludge
laced with dioxin at 306,000 to 356,000 parts per billion, be detoxified.
Officials Thought Poison Would Degrade on Its Own

But the report also said - erroneously, it is now known - that the half-life of
dioxin, the period of time over which half of any quantity of the chemical would
degrade naturally, was one year and that it did not move readily in soil. This
apparently served to lull the Missouri officials.

The report went to Dr. Donnell and Dr. Phillips at the Health Division; the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources; Dr. David P.  Rall, director of the
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; Dr. Lawrence Plumlee, then
medical science adviser at the E.P.A.; Dr. Jack Finklea, then director of the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, and dozens of Federal
epidemiologists.

The record gives little indication of Dr. Donnell's response to the report, if
any. One of the first signs of concern came not from a health official but from
Robert M. Lindholm, a Missouri assistant attorney general, who wrote a note to
Kenneth M. Karch, director of environmental quality at the state's Department of
Natural Resources on June 11, 1975. It read:

''I believe an effort should be made to locate the site where the dirt removed
from the stables was used as a residential yard fill so that proper precautions
can be taken to prevent harm to residents in the area.''

Both the C.D.C.'s and Mr. Lindholm's suggestions were rejected.  Robert M.
Robinson, director of the state's Solid Waste Management Program, and Joseph
Eigner, Hazardous Waste Project chief, dismissed the centers' report as ''overly
cautious'' in a memorandum to Mr.  Karch. Since the half-life of dioxin was
about a year, the memo explained, the concentrations at the Minker/Stout sites
should have been reduced to about 200 parts per billion. ''The chance of human
contact appears to be very much less,'' the memo said, urging further study. Dr.
Phillips concurred.

Mr. Karch, now with the Weyerh@a@e@user Company in Tacoma, Wash., did not return
a telephone call seeking comment. Mr. Robinson, now in private industry in
Kansas City, said: ''We did not have any authority to do anything about it. We
did not have authority over liquid wastes. We were working on a lot of other
things.'' Mr.  Eigner, now a private consultant in St. Louis, said, ''There was
no system to take care of it at the time.''

PICK UP

2d & LAST ADD DIOXIN

Dr. Phillips said all attention was focused on the storage tank at Verona, which
seemed a much greater risk. ''Our No. 1 priority was the tank,'' he said.
Agency Didn't Have Specific Authority

Dr. Phillips lowered his head and shook it slowly, then added: ''If I had known
all the heartache we would go through in the last six months I'd have changed
priorities. But what would we have done? We had no law, no money, no personnel,
no incinerator. We could not force people to evacuate.'' Only by declaring a
health emergency and asking the Missouri Legislature for a special appropriation
could more have been done.

Mr. Lindholm himself was not surprised that his advice of eight years ago was
not followed. ''At that time it was hard to get public concern about this kind
of thing,'' he said in a recent interview here. ''We did not have the resources
or the law to deal with it.''

The record shows that the state lost interest almost entirely in the residential
sites after 1975 and turned its attention, at the urging of the Centers for
Disease Control and the environmental agency, to the tank in Verona. It
presented a major problem: No state would permit the sludge to be trucked across
its boundaries for incineration. It was ultimately detoxified at the site
through exposure to ultraviolet light, at the expense of Syntex, the company
that owned the plant but only leased it to the germicide manufacturer.

At the time, Governor Bond was serving his first term. His spokesman, Nancy
Vessel, said recently that the Governor was aware only of the Verona tank. ''He
had no indication of the extent of the problem,'' she said. ''The Governor was
never made aware of any problems beyond Verona.''

In fairness to Dr. Phillips, Dr. Donnell and other state officials, it should be
said that the Missouri Legislature was sluggish in dealing with environmental
contamination. In a 1979 survey, the National Wildlife Federation rated Missouri
the second worst state, after Georgia, in safeguarding residents from toxic
wastes. The state had no law regulating disposal of such wastes until 1977, and
compliance was not required until mid-1980, nine years after nearly 100 horses,
plus dogs, cats, and countless wild birds, keeled over dead of dioxin poisoning.

The difficulty in detecting dioxin, not to mention disposing of it, also helps
explain why so little was done at the time. The state of knowledge about the
compound was very much in flux, and there was much confusion about it.

But the record and interviews suggest that, for time-honored bureacratic
reasons, none of the agencies was willing to assert itself when the others
failed to, unless it had specific legal authority.

''How forceful should you be?'' asked Dr. Kimbrough of the Centers for Disease
Control, who is widely considered the leading authority on dioxin toxicity, when
asked why she did not press the issue of the Imperial homes.

''I make recommendations because I feel I'm right, but I don't know how much it
will cost,'' she went on. ''I've asked myself, maybe we should have been more
forceful in 1975. We cannot enforce these things. We can only make
recommendations. People get resentful. We want good working relations with the
states. Also, you begin to wonder, are you really right?'' She said she had
tried to get the head of her agency to write the E.P.A. urging action.

''Our investigation had to have a limit,'' said Dr. Coleman D.  Carter, a signer
of the disease control centers' 1975 report who has since left for private
practice in Charlotte, N.C. ''The E.P.A.  should have followed up. The problem
was not having perspective on how big the problem would become.'' He said he
talked to many officials at the E.P.A. about the tainted home sites.

If so, there is little recollection at that agency. Dr. Plumlee, the former
medical adviser, said he did recall discussing the Minker/Stout situation with
Dr. Kimbrough and Dr. Rall and probably passed the report on to his agency's
office of toxic substances. But he said the agency was then primarily concerned
with air and water pollution and had no clear-cut authority over toxic wastes.

''These problems were handled like hot potatoes,'' he recalled.  ''Officials
like to look responsive when the public is looking, but otherwise they try to
sweep it into someone else's jurisdiction. If nothing was done in 1975 it was
because there were well-meaning people who said, 'We've got all these other
problems and commitments - how can we make room for something else?' ''
Later Samples Showed Levels as High as Ever

Charles V. Wright was the deputy administrator of the E.P.A.'s Kansas City
office in 1975. He said he had no recollection of his office's receiving the
C.D.C. report. Even so, he said his agency lacked authority then, before the
creation of the Federal cleanup fund in 1980, to do much. ''You can feel
something is wrong but cannot take action unless you have authority,'' he said.
''That is the way it should be. Otherwise individual officials could go off and
harrass agencies and companies on the basis that they did not think it right.''

Dr. Rall of the Environmental Health Sciences Institute said that as the head of
a research agency, ''I would have been slapped down if I had pushed harder.'' He
suggested that the C.D.C. was slow in pressing its case. Dr. Finklea, former
head of the Occupational Safety and Health Institute, did not return a telephone
call.

If the ball was dropped in 1975, there was another opportunity to recover the
next year. Dr. Phillips returned to the Imperial sites in December 1976 to take
more samples for the Centers for Disease Control to analyze. If dioxin really
degraded as speedily as then believed, these results would show that the problem
was taking care of itself. In fact, the levels were as high as ever, but no one
focused on the 1976 results.

Dr. Phillips says he called the C.D.C. two weeks after sending the sample, and
then again in 1977. Each time, he was told, the results were not yet ready.
After that, he acknowledges ruefully, he dropped the matter. Dr. John A. Liddle,
a C.D.C. chemist, says today that he informed Dr. Phillips orally of the results
in 1977, but he recalls no written confirmation. He provided a document showing
that samples from the Stout and Minker sites were analyzed in February and March
1977, indicating dioxin levels ranging from 190 to 720 parts per billion, just
as high as two years earlier. This might have raised alarms about the half-life.
''We did not follow up,'' Dr. Liddle said. ''We were concentrating on the Verona
tank.''
11 Years Later, State Issues Alert

And so it was not until Dan Harris of the E.P.A. reopened the inquiry that the
citizens of Missouri learned what they might have known all along. The horse
arenas were resampled early last year, and the Imperial homesites in May and
June. The results, released Aug.  18, confirmed, again, that the poison was not
degrading.

The next day, Aug. 19, 1982, more than 11 years after animals began to die and
humans fell ill from dioxin, the Missouri Division of Health issued its first
public ''health advisory'' on the effects of dioxin.

Meanwhile, Judy Piatt, an intense woman with an air of controlled bitterness,
says she and her two daughters remain ill with heart, liver, kidney, bladder,
endocrine, arthritis and other ailments she traces to their dioxin exposure. She
ekes out a living renting house trailers and raising a few colts.

Her Shenandoah Arena, still partly tainted, has long since been sold to new
owners who for months resisted suggestions that it should be shut down until
cleaned and continued to hold riding events. They finally yielded to pressure
from the state and the E.P.A. last month, closing the arena to the public nearly
12 years after it was poisoned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Judy Platt, upset over the death of her horses
(page54) photo of Debbie Fullington, a technician (page54)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
China Rejects Complaint Of Vietnam on Oil Hunt

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 115 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 19


China today rejected Vietnamese charges that it was violating Vietnamese
sovereignty by allowing foreign companies to search for offshore oil in the
disputed Tonkin Gulf off northern Vietnam and southeastern China.

The official New China News Agency warned Vietnam that if it obstructed the
search for oil, it ''should bear the responsibility for the consequences arising
therefrom.''

Last Sunday Vietnam accused China of violating Vietnamese sovereignty by
allowing American oil companies to operate in the Tonkin Gulf. Part of the gulf
covers waters claimed by both Vietnam and China. Several American oil companies
have reportedly been cooperating with China in the Tonkin area.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'WHY ARE DOCUMENTARIES SO DULL?'

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1738 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Richard Lacayo is a freelance writer.

By RICHARD LACAYO

As an independent producer of television documentaries, Robert Drew has been
guided by what seems like a simple idea. ''Find stories that can be told through
characters and action,'' he says. ''Let those stories tell themselves, and cut
the narration way down.'' Yet, the first time Mr. Drew applied that idea he
challenged the main approach to documentary filmmaking and undid some
assumptions of broadcast journalism. People have debated the result ever since,
among them the French, who named it cinema verite.

It's a tag that Mr. Drew dislikes but has learned to live with since it was
first applied to ''Primary,'' his 1960 portrait of a Presidential primary race
between John F. Kennedy and Hubert H.  Humphrey. Talking recently in the East
Side townhouse that is his headquarters, he recalled how he and his team trailed
the two candidates for days, filming all the while with the first portable
cameras and recorders. They then shaped their footage with lots of editing but a
minimum of the spoken narration that covered most documentaries like a sauce.
The result was a novel sense of immediacy and candidness, a flavor of reality
that Mr. Drew found lacking in the nonfiction films he thought of as
''illustrated lectures.''

''Strong experience of the real world,'' he says now, ''that's what television
can do that no other medium can do. When television tries to describe or analyze
the world, it's doing what publications can do better.'' His latest work, ''Fire
Season,'' is 90 minutes with California's Civilian Conservation Corps, a
state-run jobs program that draws many young recruits from districts of
violence, hopelessness and poverty. But viewers who see ''Fire Season'' - it
will be shown Wednesday evening at 10 on Channel 13 - are unlikely to be
startled now by Mr. Drew's methods. Time has made them more common, even if they
have never received the regular network exposure that Mr. Drew once hoped for.

For one thing, the use of verite methods was carried into movie theaters by Drew
alumni like Richard Leacock and Don Pennebaker, who refined the genre of the
rock documentary with ''Don't Look Back'' and ''Monterey Pop,'' and Albert
Maysles, who along with his brother David, made ''Gimme Shelter'' and ''Grey
Gardens.'' The results of their new methods found an eager audience in the
1960's, when a stress on honesty in all things spurred approval for a technique
that promised a purer representation of reality. Even fictional films sought the
cachet of authenticity through verite techniques; the wobbly, hand-held look
found its way into ''A Hard Day's Night'' and ''The Graduate.''

At the same time, however, network news organizations were having second
thoughts about the appropriateness of the verite approach to news documentaries,
even as Mr. Drew was determined to defend its legitimacy. By the late 60's, he
began to have difficulty gaining access to the networks for his films. More
often, they were syndicated to local stations, as with ''Storm Signal,'' his
awardwinning picture about drug addiction, made in 1966. He now points to it as
one of the most widely seen specials of that year, despite its having been
rejected by the networks.

In the 1970's, the Public Broadcasting Service was giving a home to verite-style
documentaries by Frederick Wiseman (''Hospital,'' ''Canal Zone'') and Craig
Gilbert (''An American Family''). Mr. Drew likewise found a showcase there for a
number of his productions, including films on the Bicentennial parade of the
Tall Ships, and a recent portrait of Indira Ghandi that was supervised by his
wife, Anne. In 1980, he also produced a number of segments for NBC's
''Magazine.'' Today, his company, Drew Associates, consists of 10 people,
including his wife and his son, Thatcher, both producers. It makes use as well
of outside talents, like Sidney Reichman, the cameraman/director on ''Fire
Season.''

At 59, Mr. Drew can enjoy the sight of three film-festival awards on his mantel
for some of his early verite efforts, and nearby, an Emmy, for a profile of the
dancer Edward Villella shown in 1968 on NBC. With scores of films behind him and
a full schedule ahead, it is surprising to hear him say, ''I think we failed.''
By ''we'' he means those who saw cinema verite as a tool of journalism. ''There
were individual shows that in themselves were smashing, but we haven't taken
this new concept of journalism and brought it home to a big audience,'' he
elaborates. ''The films weren't programmed in a regular manner. They appeared at
odd times, in odd places. The big audience never knew they existed.'' Yet, he
can say of the present: ''I've never been more optimistic or excited. I think
the situation has turned around.''

To understand his mixed mood, it helps to start back in the early 1950's, when
Mr. Drew, then a writer-editor for Life magazine, was fascinated by Life
photographers like Alfred Eisenstaedt and Eugene Smith, pioneers of the
photo-story. As he recalls, he was in Chicago covering an immense antitrust suit
when ''the big idea hit.''

''On the day the trial began,'' he explains, ''I was there with a Life
photographer, watching as the attorneys for the company filed in, 100 of them -
the president of the Bar Association, former Congressmen, all the legal brass of
Chicago. Then in came the Government's side - one man and one woman. I'd never
seen a picture that so beautifully established the odds.''

It was while leaving the courthouse that Robert Drew the writer began his
metamorphosis into Robert Drew the filmmaker. Watching an attorney try
helplessly to explain to a TV news reporter what had happened ''in there,'' Mr.
Drew had a thought. ''We had what had happened in there, except that our
pictures were silent and still.  That one experience compelled me to ask, 'Why
are documentaries so dull? Why aren't they doing what we're doing?' ''

That question led him through six years of tinkering with the elements of
documentaries before his breakthrough with ''Primary.'' His first efforts were
encumbered by the heavy film equipment of the 1950's. Going after
life-on-the-wing with a 200-pound camera was like playing catch with a steam
shovel. The tag-along camera technique used for ''Primary'' was impossible
without the lightweight, portable gear, which Mr. Drew, Mr. Leacock and Mr.
Pennebaker helped to create.

The success of ''Primary'' enabled Mr. Drew and his colleagues to produce a
variety of network documentary films, including profiles of world leaders like
Nehru and the Aga Khan, and the individual dramas that Mr. Drew liked best - a
very young Jane Fonda facing her Broadway debut, a condemned man awaiting
execution.

''The first thing I'm looking for is a good story,'' he says simply. The story
in ''Fire Season,'' for instance, joins three threads: the daily experience of a
few new C.C.C. recruits, the unemployment and gang violence in some Los Angeles
neighborhoods, and the legislative lobbying by the program's administrator, B.T.
Collins, a disabled Vietnam veteran with a vivid sense of political showmanship.
Watching a canny personality like Mr. Collins, one can understand better Mr.
Drew's habit of referring to the people in his films as ''characters.''

Yet, it is that very frame of mind that has led some to ask whether he looks for
drama and color at the expense of balance and information. Mr. Drew thinks
otherwise. Both in the field and in the editing room, he argues, the good verite
filmmaker is guided by his own alertness, conscience and common sense. And he
adds, ''People who feel I am superimposing drama on reality should consider
whether I am not in fact finding in reality the underlying dramatic structures
that are there.'' The personal dramas that Mr. Drew selects are those, he
believes, that cast light on public issues, even if they cannot demonstrate
their every dimension.

''If, through a film, policymakers could live the life of an unemployed man,
they would understand mere statistics as something more,'' he says. ''If the
film got you really involved with a farmer and he went bankrupt and lost his
farm and it broke your heart - and you can see such things week after week - who
knows what impact it could have?''

Mr. Drew's hopes for an age of weekly documentaries never materialized. Further,
by the later 1960's, television was tending to restrict its use of verite
techniques to less-controversial subjects, like the arts and science. The method
was being criticized for providing too little information to permit viewers to
make judgments on more contentious matters.

There were practical problems, too. Networks dislike the absence of an on-camera
reporter. ''From the very beginning,'' Mr. Drew says, ''the main job of the
network news president has been to get his correspondents on camera.'' A final
setback came from the marketplace. ''Film got expensive,'' he explains, ''and
the idea in verite is that you're going to roll and roll and roll. That's what
gives the possibility of spontaneity.''

So, what are the reasons for his present optimism? Part of it has been brought
on by ''Fire Season,'' which is his first featurelength use of videotape rather
than film. Video reels are longer and more easily loaded into the camera than
the average reel of film. That permits more of the unbroken shooting important
to the verite goal of realism. Perhaps more important, Mr. Drew says, is that
''video cameras are getting very widely dispersed, and videotape is very, very
cheap. Any good verite filmmaker who can get his hands on the new video
equipment can afford again to make verite films.''

More important still for the future, he says, is the proliferation of new
avenues for broadcast - cable, satellite and so on. He sees those increasing the
outlets for new programming while putting pressure on the networks to come up
with more interesting ideas for documentaries. Mr. Drew is encouraged that
lately a few good examples of cinema verite have found their way back onto
network television.

Thinking back for a moment to his beginnings as a documentary producer, he says
with a smile, ''I really thought I could make a revolution in a few months. Then
it stretched out to a few years. It has now been 23 years and I think it may be
just getting into a position to take off.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert Drew photo of scene from 'Fire Season'
photo of Clive Revill photo of Peppermint Patty

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEBANON: IF ISRAEL WITHDREW IN HASTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 222 words


To the Editor:

Your editorial recommendation (Jan. 26) to return Dr. Kissinger to the Middle
East negotiations coincided with the 10th anniversary of the Paris peace
agreement. Perhaps we can learn something from the coincidence.

he total failure and defeat that followed so soon after the Paris agreement was
no doubt caused by the hasty withdrawal of U.S. troops from Vietnam, a
withdrawal prompted by domestic political expediency. President Nixon was
interested in a cosmetic agreement, the appearance of peace without regard to
the predictable consequence: a vacuum that would attract all the hostile
elements that had caused the war to begin with.

In Lebanon today, Dr. Kissinger would face the same predicament.  Any pressure
on Israel for hasty withdrawal from that country, so long torn by internal
strife supported by its Arab neighbors, would predictably lead to bringing back
all the forces of violence and terrorism which Israel, to everyone's relief, had
helped to remove decisively.

The memory of the Vietnam debacle should teach us that long-range goals of peace
are not served by appeasing the forces of violence and terrorism, nor by giving
in to momentary political expediency.  Our long-range interests in the Middle
East coincide with those of Israel.  MANFRED R. LEHMANN Nairobi, Kenya, Feb. 1,
1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

EL SALVADOR: THE STATE OF SIEGE CONTINUES

BYLINE: By Richard J. Meislin; Richard J. Meislin, a New York Times
correspondent based in Miami, covers the Caribbean and Central America.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4728 words


In a conference room behind the high gray walls, heavy steel latticework and
thick bulletproof glass of the United States Embassy in San Salvador, one of the
highest-ranking members of the diplomatic mission is offering his view of the
facts of life to a group of American visitors. The delegation, which includes a
Congressman, two entertainers active in human-rights causes and several others
concerned about American policy, is angry; they have seen and spoken to
political prisoners who say they've been tortured, Salvadoran officials who say
they are doing their best and refugees who say little but suffer a lot. The
diplomat is tired. This is the 17th delegation the embassy has shepherded
through the Salvadoran labyrinth during the past few weeks. ''The semiannual
precertification flying circus and hootenanny,'' another embassy official calls
it.

''We take as a given that this country is a horror,'' the beleaguered diplomat
tells his visitors. ''There are things here which are frightening and appalling
to any sensitive human being. And those of us who work in this environment and
see our friends killed, murdered, tortured by one group or another are not
insensitive to these things.''

The diplomat asks not to be identified by name for ''security reasons'' - a
reasonable request, even for someone who works in an urban fortress, lives in a
home guarded by a Salvadoran carrying a semiautomatic rifle and commutes between
the two in an armored car.  In El Salvador, silence and safety still go hand in
hand.

As the diplomat speaks, officials at the State Department in Washington, some
2,000 miles away, are feverishly putting the final touches on a report that will
certify El Salvador's progress in improving human rights and in meeting the
other conditions set by Congress for six more months of United States military
aid. ''The situation is not perfect,'' the 67-page report will say when it
reaches Congress two days later, on Jan. 21, ''and the progress was not as great
as desired, but it is progress nonetheless.''

In San Salvador, the diplomat and his visitors assume this will be the outcome -
it has happened twice before - and the diplomat offers an explanation in
advance: ''The criterion is not whether you come up with the bare minimum
standards of social justice in the country, but has there been some progress
toward that goal. And the question is really, 'All right, so there has been some
progress. So what?' ''

The certification process's increasingly tenuous connection to the realities of
El Salvador is raising new questions in Congress and even within the Reagan
Administration it-self. The feeling, variously, is that it is not bringing about
the desired improvements in El Salvador, is continuing to provide aid to a
Government whose actions are at least questionable, or is diverting attention
from the deeper questions facing the United States in its policies toward El
Salvador and the rest of Central America.

Recent talks with American diplomats and Congressmen found an increasingly
urgent desire for a cogent political strategy to complement, or even replace,
United States military support for the Salvadoran Government, yet nothing seems
to be immediately forthcoming. Talks with the provisional President, Alvaro
Alfredo Magana Borja, other Salvadoran officials and political prisoners in
their cells help indicate why this is so difficult to attain.

The aid and advice provided by the United States, American military people in El
Salvador say, is not so much helping the Salvadorans win the war as keeping them
from losing it to a guerrilla force that has shown - as it did three weeks ago
in briefly taking the town of Berlinan increasing sophistication and an ability
to ''roam at will and raise havoc,'' as one military man put it.

Despite United States aid and advice, the Salvadoran Army continues to struggle
on in what is at best a holding action against the guerrillas; its own arcane
''good-old-boy'' politics, Western analysts believe, have kept Salvadoran
military leaders past their prime in important posts and prevented the military
from taking full advantage of counterinsurgency techniques that might be more
effective in controlling the guerrillas. As of early this month, there were 37
American military trainers in the country. They are not called advisers, since
they are not supposed to be directly involved in the conduct of the war. But the
frustration of working with an army that they perceive as lacking an overall
strategy and unable to fight on more than one front at a time has occassionally
drawn them into the fray. An American communications technician was injured by
guerrilla gunfire during a helicopter mission three weeks ago, becoming the
first American soldier wounded on duty in El Salvador.  Three other American
trainers found to be involved in ''direct contact with a Salvadoran Army unit on
a tactical operation'' were subsequently relieved of their duties.

On Capitol Hill, Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, who had
visited El Salvador just prior to the most recent certification report, spoke
for many Administration critics during a hearing of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, of which he is a member, when he said: ''Certification is a farce,
it's irrelevant. We've spent $748 million there in three years ... and what do
we have to show for it? ... The military and political situations aren't
improving at all.'' Appearing before the same committee, Thomas O. Enders,
Asssistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, conceded that United
States policy in El Salvador was ''confused,'' and that this had resulted in the
Salvadorans getting, and acting on, ''mixed signals.'' For now, certification is
played largely by the numbers - the falling number of civilians found dead or
brutalized, the rising number of farmers who are benefiting from El Salvador's
three-phase land redistribution program. It is an interpretation that makes it
difficult for many - particularly those who have experienced the horrors of El
Salvador firsthand - to see what type of disaster would have to befall the
country before the United States would feel compelled to suspend aid.

Elliott Abrams, the United States Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights
and Humanitarian Affairs, cited two possibilities: the fall of the fledgling
democratic Salvadoran Government to a military coup from the right, or a sharp
upswing in the number of civilians killed by right-wing death squads and
security forces. But while both of these potential threats would come from the
political right, the Administration's greater concern is from the political
left.

''A guerrilla victory in Central America - the fall of El Salvador, Guatemala
-would fundamentally change the security environment of this country,'' Abrams
said, ''in part because of the impact on Mexico, and in part because it would
also give rise to a refugee crisis. It is incredible to me that those things are
rarely debated in Congress; instead we debate the details of certification.''

Many in the United States Congress disdain this numbers game, and it has its
critics within the Reagan Administration as well, but United States Government
officials say they are simply meeting the requirements of certification.

''You wanted to know how many hectares in Phase 3 and how many bodies were
found,'' Abrams continues. ''Now you come back and say, 'What kind of rinky-dink
report is that?' It's the report they asked for. If they're dissatisfied with
our answers, maybe it's because they're asking the wrong questions.'' Congress
first imposed its certification requirement for aid to El Salvador late in 1981,
at the urging of members who feared the new Reagan Administration's escalating
support for the Salvadoran Government and its increasingly strident rhetoric
against the leftist insurgency in the country were leading toward a Vietnam
-style involvement that could become irreversible. Their concern was heightened
by alarming reports of Government atrocities - in the name of anti-Communism -
against thousands of Salvadoran citizens, as well as seven United States
citizens.

As in most Congressional efforts, the language that resulted was a compromise,
requiring that in order to provide continuing military aid to El Salvador the
Reagan Administration must certify that the country:

''(1) Is making a concerted and significant effort to comply with
internationally recognized human rights.

''(2) Is achieving substantial control over all elements of its own armed
forces, so as to bring to an end the indiscriminate torture and murder of
Salvadoran citizens by these forces.

''(3) Is making continued progress in implementing essential economic and
political reforms, including the land reform program.

''(4) Is committed to the holding of free elections at an early date and to that
end has demonstrated its good-faith efforts to begin discussions with all major
political factions in El Salvador which have declared their willingness to find
and implement an equitable political solution to the conflict, with such
solution to involve a commitment to (a) a renouncement of further military or
paramilitary activity; and (b) the electoral process with internationally
recognized observers.''

Congress also said that United States assistance should be used to encourage ''a
complete and timely investigation of the deaths of all United States citizens
killed in El Salvador since October 1979.''

Congress gave itself no formal veto power over this process. The hope was that
with the threat of a suspension of aid clearly on the books, the Salvadoran
Government would be more responsive to moving in the directions sought by
Congress.

In hindsight, what this failed to take into account was both the level of the
Reagan Administration's determination to continue aid to the country to prevent
a leftist takeover, and the fact that the elements within Salvadoran society
most responsible for the activities so appalling to Congress - wealthy,
far-rightist civilians and security-force members accustomed to protecting their
interests - were also the ones who have always felt least threatened by a loss
of United States aid.  An evenhanded description of El Salvador today would hold
that while life is still a nightmare, it is less of one than a year or two ago.

With support from the left, guerrillas, grouped together as the Forabundo Marti
National Liberation Front, continue to mount an active war in the countryside,
straining both the Salvadoran military and the country's economic structure
nearly to their limits. While they assert that they are striving to improve the
lot of the peasants in the long run, for the moment the guerrillas' war
activities are making their mean lives even more miserable - power lines and
water are cut for days or weeks at a time, ''war taxes'' are collected from
those ill able to afford them, buses and bridges are bombed, life and livelihood
are disrupted.

Against this backdrop, some elements of the ''legitimate'' political spectrum
are trying, with the encouragement of the United States, to become a democratic
government - a political terrain as unfamiliar to most Salvadorans as the
surface of Mars. The task is made complex not only by its novelty after decades
of military dictatorship and rule by violence, but by the fact that most key
political actors who in other places would be accused of nothing worse then
being liberal, have either been jailed, been killed, or have fled the country
out of fear of the alternatives.

''Death squads'' - widely believed by Salvadorans to be composed largely of
Government security forces - continue to kidnap, torture and kill those
suspected of being leftist sympathizers; progress is declared when the numbers
of these civilian murders drop, or when increased numbers of the ''disappeared''
show up alive in prison rather than as mutilated corpses in a roadside ditch.

Such was the case during the past six-month period. Although the actual numbers
are constantly in dispute because of differing methods of collecting
information, all the agencies that track the murders of civilians showed a
decline in the area of 50 percent between 1981 and 1982. What to draw from the
fact that ''only'' 5,553 civilians were killed in political violence last year,
as the independent Commission on Human Rights of El Salvador calculates, or
''only'' 4,419 were killed, as the University of Central America in San Salvador
calculates, or ''only'' 2,722 were killed, as the United States Embassy counts
them from Salvadoran press reports, is open to question.

In its latest certification report, the Reagan Administration attributed the
change in part to ''increased consciousness by the Government of the importance
of more effective action on human rights, including formation of new
institutions for this purpose.'' Others less sympathetic to United States and
Salvadoran Government policies have a different view, recalling the state of
siege, the curfews and the house-to-house police searches that took place in
Salvadoran cities from August 1980 until October 1981.  ''The security forces
are in control of the urban centers, which was where most of the killings were
taking place,'' says one independent Salvadoran political analyst. ''Those who
are left are at the deepest levels of clandestineness or have joined the
guerrillas in the mountains. And in the countryside, people disappear and vanish
and never even become a statistic.''

Meanwhile, conservative elements within the political system continue doggedly
to resist any changes intended to bring greater social equality at the expense
of the new class of private entrepreneurs - those who stayed behind and rose to
the top of the social structure after a coup by liberal-minded officers toppled
the military government of Gen. Carlos Humberto Romero in 1979, causing much of
the old oligarchy to flee.

In the most recent certification report, an increase of more than 33 percent in
the number of farmers who had filed applications to own their own land under
Phase 3 of the land-distribution program was hailed as progress. The number of
provisional titles issued, however, increased by only 7 percent. And the
Government, strapped by the cost of fighting the prolonged guerrilla war, had
been able to provide funds to turn over only 408 definitive titles to peasants.
This was a sharp increase, but barely a start toward the massive redistribution
program's original goal of reaching the 125,000 small farmers who qualify. Mere
survival - of a program or a person - is a greater achievement than most people
outside El Salvador could imagine.  The process of democratization got off to a
widely hailed start last March, when hundreds of thousands of Salvadorans cast
ballots for a Constituent Assembly. The initial results were unexpected and, to
the United States, dismaying. The moderate Christian Democrats, who had led the
interim military-civilian junta with United States support for most of the two
and a half years since the Romero Government fell, received a plurality, but not
a majority, of the 60 seats. The runner-up was the far-right Nationalist
Republican Alliance, better known by its Spanish acronym of Arena. Its leader,
cashiered Army Major Roberto d'Aubuisson, had been linked to rightwing
death-squad activities. And the parties whose politics fell between the two
seemed more sympathetic to Arena than to the Christian Democrats.

While Arena succeeded in installing d'Aubuisson as President of the Assembly, it
failed - under intense pressure from the Salvadoran military and United States
officials - to seize the executive branch. The provisional presidency went
instead to Magana, a 57-yearold political neutral who had gained favor with the
military through gracious treatment of its officials during his 17 years as head
of the nation's largest mortgage bank.

The feared right-wing coalition has turned out to be far more mercurial than
anyone had expected. The center right, which has enough seats to control the
outcome of legislation, has shown flexibility in joining the moderates or the
far rightists. While this is seen in some quarters as a sign of political
health, it has also raised the frustration of d'Aubuisson and his supporters
close to dangerous levels. There has been growing talk of removing d'Aubuisson
from the Assembly leadership - and he has suggested that he might resign in
April -although the desire to see him leave has been tempered by a belief,
shared even by critics, that it is safer to have him inside the Government than
outside it.

It has fallen to President Magana, a short, gray-haired man who wears
conservative business suits and a perpetually worried look, to try to hold the
political structure together while trying to inch forward, and he has shown a
remarkable sensitivity to the limits and delicacy of his position.

''Many people here want democracy, and many people here want pacification,''
Magana says, ''but probably I'm the only one who wants that and nothing else.''
Magana insists he wants just to get through the transition period before
elections, now scheduled for March 1984, with the Government and the social and
economic revisions intact. He will not, he says, be a candidate.  President
Magana's 10 months in office have been a continual test of power. To this
moment, he has generally prevailed, aided in his efforts with the Assembly by a
military largely sympathetic to his goals and by Francisco Jose Guerrero, the
Minister of the Presidency. Guerrero, widely regarded as one of the craftiest
political maneuverers in the country, also happens to be a high-ranking member
of the rightist National Conciliation Party, a major source of swing votes in
the Assembly despite a recent split in its ranks.

The provisional President's relations continue to be good with the military,
although it operates for the most part independently of the civilian Government
and with a considerably higher level of social control. The military found it
useful last month to invoke Magana's powers as Commander in Chief in quelling
the rebellion of a highly regarded military commander in the northern province
of Cabanas.  While concerned over the longer-range effects of this action, the
President was pleased with the immediate outcome.

But his most significant progress to date, Magana says, was the creation last
August of the ''Pact of Apaneca,'' a platform of government signed by four of
the five largest political parties in the Assembly. In it, they committed
themselves to seeking peace, human rights, democratic institutions, a working
system of justice and economic recovery - all of which, everyone could logically
agree, now barely exist in El Salvador. A political commission was formed, and
promptly set an election schedule; a seven-member human-rights commission was
formed to complement those already in existence, which the United States accuses
of leftist sympathies.

In hailing the new human-rights commission as another advance, the Reagan
Administration points out that of the 32 reports of disappearances received
during its first week of operation, five were resolved ''with the cooperation of
the security forces.'' The first case, in fact, was resolved simply by looking
in the jail cells of one of the new commission's members, Col. Reynaldo Lopez
Nuila, director of the Salvadoran national police, something tactfully left out
of the Reagan Administration's report.

President Magana's most difficult problem has been the creation of a peace
commission, also mandated by the Pact of Apaneca, to find a way out of the
country's greatest problem, the continuing guerrilla war.

There is a widespread, though not uniformly shared, belief that this can be
accomplished only through some type of discussion with the left. The United
States, while ruling out negotiations that would result in a sharing of power by
an unelected leftist force, has been promoting the idea of finding a way to
bring the moderate left back into the political structure, thus isolating the
far leftists fighting in the countryside. ''Guillermo Ungo doesn't belong out in
the bush with Cayetano Carpio and Shafik Handal,'' says Assistant Secretary of
State Abrams, referring to the head of the opposition political front and two
guerrilla leaders. ''He belongs in San Salvador, running for office.''

Some members of the United States Congress are so intent on pressing for
discussions that they are hoping to amend the certification procedure to require
them as a condition for future aid. Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a Democrat
from Brooklyn and a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee who recently visited
El Salvador, has said that negotiations with leftist guerrillas were ''the only
way to bring the war to an end,'' while Senator Dodd has declared that it is
''time to internationalize the mediation process and seek help of other Central
American countries and Mexico.''

But to some elements of the far right and of the military, who remain convinced
that a military solution is still possible, any type of discussion is anathema.
For the moment, President Magana says, pressing the point would only make the
problems worse. The process must be a slow one, he says: First, human-rights
abuses must be brought under control; next, an effective amnesty law must be
enacted to allow guerrillas to return to society without fear, something that is
impossible until the first condition is met. Only then, he says, will
discussions with the left be a possibility. The peace commission, he says, would
be a useful tool to allow the Government to float trial balloons safely, and
deflect damage to its credibility if one faction or the other shoots them down.
And it is possible, he believes, that the visit of Pope John Paul II, scheduled
for March 6, could give additional weight to those hoping for discussions.

As for a United States mandate, ''that doesn't help me at all,'' he says.
Indeed, when the United States Ambassador in San Salvador, Deane R. Hinton,
began making faintly optimistic sounds last fall about the possibility of talks
with the left, elements of the extreme right exploded in rage. D'Aubuisson
denounced the idea as ''ridiculous,'' although he failed to get the Assembly to
pass a measure which would have barred any discussions outright. Elements of the
security forces took more direct action, kidnapping five leading affiliates of
the Democratic Revolutionary Front, the political arm of the opposition, as well
as 10 representatives of labor organizations. After a frantic search by the
Defense Minister and the United States Embassy, eight of the victims -including
all the major political figures - were found alive, reportedly in the custody of
the Treasury Police, the most widely feared of the security forces.  Those
political figures who ''reappeared'' are now in detention in a prison ironically
Page 54 named La Esperanza - ''The Hope.'' The facility, a remarkably clean and
open place on the outskirts of the capital, is so full of political detainees
that the rebel radio station refers to it as the ''fifth front'' of the war. The
prisoners, who by their own account mostly run their own affairs through their
own committee, tell visitors that despite occasional raids, sometimes
accompanied by beatings, their situation is mostly tranquil. The walls of the
committee office sport a poster of the revolutionary Che Guevara along with one
of Roman Catholic Archbishop Oscar Romero, who was assassinated by a death squad
while saying mass in 1980. An inscription under the Archbishop's likeness reads:
''You live forever in the battles of our people.''

Carlos Molina, who headed the economics department of the University of El
Salvador and is a leader of the Independent Movement of Professionals and
Technicians of El Salvador, sat in his cell as he dispassionately described the
events following his seizure.

''We were taken to a clandestine jail, blindfolded and handcuffed,'' he said.
''I was being interrogated day and night. They used everything from beatings to
electric shock. They wanted all of us to acknowledge that the Democratic
Revolutionary Front was the same as the Farabundo Marti National Liberation
Front, which we denied very emphatically.''

What, he was asked, had he done to attract the attention of the security forces?
''We were working for a dialogue, the same as the church,'' he replied.

In its certification report, the Reagan Administration called the kidnapping ''a
setback to efforts for political reconciliation.'' The fact that the political
figures were found alive and jailed under the state-of-siege law, however, was
described as suggesting ''progress in greater respect of established legal
procedures.'' The fact that seven of the labor leaders were not found went
unmentioned.  Despite the conditions attached to United States aid, most
observers say, human-rights abuses continue, and the pursuit of justice remains
an elusive goal. More than two years after the crimes, the cases against the
soldiers believed to have killed four American churchwomen have barely begun. In
the case of two workers for the American Institute for Free Labor Development,
two soldiers have confessed to pulling the trigger, on orders, but one officer
implicated in the crime has been set free and is back on duty and another has
fled the country. The families of the victims believe that the higher-ups who
were ultimately responsible will never come to trial.

In the killing of a young American wanderer last fall, the Salvadoran Army has
yet to explain the discrepancies between its assertion that he was shot while
trying to flee and the powder burns in his fatal back wounds, which indicate
that he had been shot at point-blank range. The bones of John Sullivan, a
freelance writer who disappeared two years ago, may have just been found; it is
doubtful his killer will be. And a Salvadoran-born American citizen, Patricia
Cuellar, who had worked with a Salvadoran human-rights commission, remains
missing after disappearing last July. The clues are slim.

Some 30,000 Salvadorans, by the estimate of Ambassador Hinton, have been
''killed illegally - that is, not in battle'' - since 1979.  Fewer than 200
people have been convicted of all these crimes. When the question is one of
justice, the Ambassador told a stunned American Chamber of Commerce gathering in
San Salvador last fall, ''it is sad to see a society in which the answers are so
painfully and consistently inadequate.'' (The Ambassador's blunt speech,
according to officials in Washington, infuriated President Reagan, who felt the
Ambassador was kicking an ally when it was down.)

''In El Salvador,'' says Assistant Secretary Abrams, ''we are convinced that
American assistance is both helping the Government in the war and promoting
development, which has just begun, of a centrist consensus on the development of
democratic institutions. And we are persuaded that if we were to end our
assistance there would be a fabulous increase in bloodshed and a complete end to
democracy and the development of social and economic reform.''

The leftist insurgency and the violent nature of El Salvador did not develop
overnight, Salvadorans remind impatient American visitors, and they will not
quickly be resolved. Nor, Salvadorans say, are they solely the result of
agitation by outside forces from Cuba and Nicaragua, although these have played
a role. They stem from decades of repression in a social structure in which a
small number of families, protected by a succession of military governments,
have controlled the vast bulk of the nation's land and wealth, paying a pittance
to peasant workers who have had little or no voice in determining their own
fates. This will, they say, take time, and a lot of delicate maneuvering, to
undo.

''This kind of thing we are living has subverted the sense of values,'' says
President Magana. ''That is why it is so difficult to come out of the violence
fast. It is not only because of Nicaragua and Cuba, but because certain
conditions had been created here.

''It looks like the problems are many, are tremendous,'' he says, ''but they are
all interconnected - you solve one and all will be solved. The problem is how we
start.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A caption on a picture on page 39 of The Times Magazine Feb. 20 incorrectly
identified soldiers in Berlin, El Salvador. They were members of the Salvadoran
Army.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of funeral for dead woman and daughter photo of
prison inmates, including one who claims he was tortured with photo of woman
displaying album with photos of unidentified bodies photo of Salvadoran
guerillas marching through town of Berlin

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LIGHT ON A DARK SUBJECT

BYLINE: By Richard Sennett; Richard Sennett is director of the New York
Institute for the Humanities.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1802 words


SECRETS On the Ethics of Concealment and Revelation.  By Sissela Bok.  332 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $16.95.

IN 1969 a young student named Tatiana Tarasoff was murdered by a man who had
told his psychotherapist two months before that he wanted to kill her. The
therapist called in the police when his patient first confessed his desire; the
young man was questioned, found ''rational'' and let go. The university's
director of psychiatry overseeing the case then asked that the police expunge
their intervention in the matter from the young man's record. No one informed
Miss Tarasoff or her parents of the danger; it was thought to abrogate the
confidential relationship between doctor and patient. One day Miss Tarasoff
admitted the man to her home, was shot and stabbed. The parents later sued Miss
Tarasoff's university, the campus police and the therapists for negligence. The
California Supreme Court upheld the parents: ''The privilege (of
confidentiality) ends,'' the court wrote, ''when the public peril begins.''

Sissela Bok has written a subtle and often eloquent book about conundrums of
secrecy like those posed by the Tarasoff case. She is a philosopher whose
learning is immense and whose range of reference is wide: ''Secrets'' deals with
the Pentagon Papers, the Abscam trials, the Iranian hostage crisis and other
contemporary events, as well as making considered judgments on John Locke,
Thomas Carlyle and the 14th-century Japanese text ''The Confessions of Lady
Nijo.''. The aim of her book is to fashion an ethics of secrecy -when it is
justified, when it is not. Like the California Supreme Court in the Tarasoff
case, she is disposed to think that secrecy must end when public peril begins.
What makes ''Secrets'' complex, however, is the author's acknowledgement that
legal definitions of proper and improper secrecy will always miss the
psychological and, indeed, theological rationales for secrecy. Her book explores
keeping a secret as both a sacred and as a profane act.

Twenty-five years ago this book would perhaps have been unthinkable.
Anglo-American philosophers were then disposed to write analyses of such matters
as ''in what sense can a dog 'know' its parents?'' Brilliance was exercised in
proportion to the triviality of the subject at hand; experiences of death,
obsession and moral compromise were considered unsuitable for rigorous
philosophic analysis, and somewhat embarrassing. Sissela Bok belongs to a new
generation of philosophers - Bernard Williams in England, Ronald

Dworkin and Thomas Nagel in this country - who have put philosophy in the
service of clarifying somewhat the mess of adult life. The vexing problem of the
dog's parents has been put aside for inquiries into the ethics of abortion or
the censorship of pornography. In this new effort, Sissela Bok's work is
distinctive because of her sensitivity to questions of power as they relate to
ethics.

The present work is in one sense a companion volume to her previous book,
''Lying.'' In both, she pays much attention to the context in which lying or
secrecy occurs, specifically what difference it makes to consider these
phenomena as private or public acts. In both books she is as much concerned with
the psychological motives for lying or for keeping a secret as with the act
itself. But ''Secrets'' is also a significant advance on the earlier work; it
goes deeper into its subject at the risk of being less clear. ''Lying'' was a
brisk, efficient analysis: As the rationales for lying were toppled one after
the other, certain nagging but important problems were pushed to the side, like
the relationship between a lie and a fiction. There are no such evasions in
''Secrets''; the problems raised are explored from many sides. Indeed, the book
is almost maddeningly fair-minded: In her effort to probe the complexity of
secrecy, the author takes such pains to present views contrary to her own that
the reader sometimes is at a loss to know what she believes. But there is a
clear position in ''Secrets,'' one that appears if the reader is as patient with
her as she is scrupulous to other writers.

Basically, this book argues that there is a break between secrecy in private and
in public. What makes secrecy important as an interior experience cannot
therefore easily be used to justify professional, military or governmental
secrecy. At the end of her study, Sissela Bok writes: ''With no capacity for
keeping secrets and for choosing when to reveal them, human beings would lose
their sense of identity and every shred of autonomy. Their plans would be
endangered and their creativity stifled; they could not count on retaining even
the most fundamental belongings. And yet this capacity too often serves to
thwart the very same human needs, since it risks damaging the judgment and
character of those who exercise it, and conceals wrongdoing of every kind.''

The reason for this potential damage, she says, is that ''Control over secrecy
and openness gives power: it influences what others know, and thus what they
choose to do.''

The thesis may sound obvious when stated baldly. It isn't, because of the way
she analyzes the inner, subjective experience of keeping a secret. Like the
sociologist Georg Simmel, she begins by asking why a person's secrets, in her
words, ''once revealed, will seem paltry and out of proportion to all that went
into guarding them.'' The reason, both say, is that making something secret
gives it value. Indeed, a secret creates in us the sense of interior life, so
that our inside is not something we have but something we make, partially
through our secrets.

At this point Sissela Bok parts company with Georg Simmel. His emphasis is on
how the psyche continually shores itself up by making new secrets; hers is on
how the psyche traffics its secrets in the world. In much the strongest chapter
in the first half of her book, ''Confessions,'' she makes clear how psychiatric
attitudes toward listening to confessions differ from priestly attitudes and how
the person confessing a secret can manipulate others through the act.  Despite
her keen eye for the abuse possible in harboring and revealing personal secrets,
she emphasizes the moral importance of this traffic. She believes that through
learning discretion, people can learn respect for the privacy of others, and
that through sharing secrets they can create strong fraternal bonds. Most
important, she believes that an awareness of the value of secrecy kindles an
awareness of mystery: No one can, or indeed should, try to lay bare the
unfathomable inner core of another human being that constitutes his or her
distinctiveness. In taking this position, Sissela Bok sides with Lionel Trilling
against what he called the cult of displaying one's inner authentic self; she
shows moreover that in this respect for the secret begins our belief in the
sacred.

The trouble is that the sense of something sacred about our secrets is so easily
profaned. Gossip profanes, for example. In the last half of her book the author
shows how institutions and persons in power profane secrets. They do so in two
ways. The obvious way is ''Big Brother's'' method, the use of power to uncover
personal secrets and so gain control over individuals. The less obvious way,
practiced by the doctor, the military strategist and the journalist, is the
cloaking of actions of power in secrecy; what makes this complicated is that the
individual in power justifies his or her secrets by appealing either to the
necessity of his or her work, or by claiming that the keeping of a secret is
beneficial to those who don't know. These appeals justify secrecy as if there
were no question of using it as a tool of power - to coerce, mislead or violate.

SISSELA BOK does not throw all these appeals out of court, but she shows when it
is fallacious to reason from the individual to the collective and when
institutional claims of secrecy are suspicious on their own terms. There is an
especially trenchant chapter on military secrecy. She makes it clear, through an
analysis of the Iranian hostage crisis, and particularly the Government's
attempt to rescue the hostages through military action, just how the practice of
secrecy within military channels created the very inefficiency that caused the
military effort to abort. She has equally unkind things to say about the
efficacy of Great Britain's Official Secrets Act. This analysis, which also
touches on military deception during the Vietnam War, adds up to a vindication
of Jefferson's position on the citizenry's right to know about the possibility
of war: ''It is their sweat which is to earn all the expenses of the war, and
their blood which is to flow in expiation of the causes of it.''

''Secrets'' makes a strong case, then, against what the California Supreme Court
called in the Tarasoff affair the ''privilege'' of secrecy in public affairs,
and a strong case for the privilege of secrecy in private. But I finished the
book with a certain feeling of dissatisfaction. Government officials have become
virtuosos at appearing candid while hiding their real actions; politicians have
perfected the art of advertising themselves while keeping their own counsel. The
position taken in ''Secrets'' is one that any reasonable official might
subscribe to in principle, but only in principle. And the book's analysis of
''disinformation'' and other techniques for creating the illusion of openness is
all too brief. Since ''Secrets'' operates at a more profound level than
''Lying,'' I wish the author had returned to her earlier theme and spent more
effort on analyzing how people lie when they have a secret.

SOMETHING in the premise is also troubling. Not all acts, experiences or beliefs
are equally potent in creating that mysterious ''inner'' region we make sacred
by keeping secret. Our dog's parents are not a fit subject for mystery; our own,
unfortunately, are. For all its evils in practice, one of the virtues of
psychoanalysis as a theory is to indicate which of our experiences have the
weight to inspire awe and so the desire to keep them locked inside. ''Secrets''
does not pay enough attention to which secrets matter. It provides an ethics of
secrecy without a real theory of value.

For this Sissela Bok's liberality of spirit is to blame, if blame is the right
word. While suspicious of secrecy in the public realm, she shows absolute
respect for the varieties of individual belief and desire. The conundrum that
faces the author and probably most of her readers -myself included - is how to
make judgments of value while respecting the variety of values. What Sissela Bok
has created instead are tools for criticizing the powerful when they claim the
right to keep us in ignorance. ''Secrets'' is a distinguished and necessary
book.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S DOING IN WASHINGTON

BYLINE: By David Shribman

SECTION: Section 10; Page 10, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2228 words


DAVID SHRIBMAN is a correspondent in the Washington bureau of The New York
Times.

Washington was always something of a small town. In the 19th century, when it
had some of the broadest boulevards in America, Supreme Court justices and
cabinet officials rode streetcars and members of Congress lingered in billiard
halls and boarding houses.  Many of the billiard txals and boarding houses are
gone, but even today, when Washington has three professional sports teams, some
of the grandest art galleries in the country, some fine restaurants and a
formidable cadre of lawyers and lobbyists, the capital remains a bit of a small
town - a quiet, almost shy place, still easy to get around in.

For visitors, Washington is more like Hershey, Pa., than New York City: The
attraction is a process. Despite a flourishing boutique trade and the growth of
high-priced cellar restaurants with salmonpink walls and homemade mustard salad
dressings, the main preoccupation is politics. It is that process, and the
splendid buildings in which it is transacted, that holds so much interest.

Coming Events

The next few months are in many ways the most pleasant in Washington. The cherry
blossoms, mainly clustered around the Potomac's Tidal Basin, will soon be in
bloom. Although one never can be sure of the exact date, they usually place
their delicate pink cape around the city toward the end of March or the
beginning of April, and this year's Cherry Blossom Festival is set for April 3
to 9.

Some other special events scheduled for spring in some of the city's buildings
are nearly as colorful as the cherry blossoms.  ''Maps and Minds,'' a historical
view of cartography, will open at the end of March in the National Geographic
Society's Explorers' Hall (17th and M Streets, N.W.). The National Portrait
Gallery at Eighth and F Streets N.W. is holding an exhibition of printed
portraits of the Civil War called ''Heroes, Martyrs and Villains.'' An
exhibition of painting in Naples, with works by such artists as Caravaggio and
Giordano, runs along with special exhibits of works by Raphael and Manet in the
National Gallery at Sixth Street and Constitution Avenue. The Library of
Congress plans to open a major exhibition March 26 called ''The American
Cowboy.'' The show, in the library's new Madison Building, traces the cowboy
from migrant worker to mythical hero and examines the international cult of the
cowboy through more than 350 artifacts, paintings, posters, books and film
clips.

Monuments

Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan both harnessed the national resentment toward
Washington in their drives to the White House, and these days when a politician
speaks of ''Washington,'' he is likely to be using a synonym for the Federal
Government. There is more to the city than the Government, but Government
buildings and monuments dominate the landscape. In the middle of the city sits
the Capitol, its white dome projecting above the skyline. Sixteen blocks away,
set in a small grassy park, is the White House. Nearby are the Washington
Monument, the 90,000-ton obelisk rising 555 feet above the Mall, and the
memorials to Jefferson and Lincoln. Across the Potomac is Arlington National
Cemetery.

These are, truly, public buildings -built by the public, for the public and open
to the public. The problems of a complex society and the blessings of
air-conditioning have led to increasingly lengthy Congressional sessions, and
these days the House of Representatives and the Senate are in session in all
four seasons.

Tours of the Capitol, including visits to the House and Senate galleries, are
available from the Rotunda, and tours of the White House are offered every
morning but Sunday and Monday; visitors can make reservations for White House
tours by contacting their local Congressional offices. The Washington Monument
is open from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., but the Lincoln and Jefferson Memorials are
illuminated until midnight and are perhaps most inspiring when viewed in the
solitude of the evening hours.

The newest addition to Washington's attractions is possibly its most moving.
Just a short walk from the Lincoln Memorial, in the western end of Constitution
Gardens, is a stark and striking tribute to the thousands of Americans who
served in the Vietnam war and a memorial to those who died or remain missing.
The walls of the Vietnam Memorial, which are inscribed with 58,000 names, point
to the northeast corners of the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial.
Already thousands of Americans have paused at these walls to reflect on lost
loved ones and on the bitterness of the Vietnam era, and already it has emerged
as a national symbol of remorse and reconciliation.

Independence and Constitution Avenues, the two streets that run the length of
the Mall, are lined with Government buildings. Many of them, like the National
Archives, where the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and the Bill
of Rights are displayed, are open to visitors. So, too, are the new J. Edgar
Hoover Building, where demonstrations of marksmanship and crime-fighting
techniques are given by Federal Bureau of Investigation agents, and the Bureau
of Engraving and Printing, where money and stamps are printed. On Capitol Hill,
the Supreme Court and the Library of Congress also invite visitors to linger.

The Nation's Attic

Washington does not live by politics alone, however. The city's museums, both
historical and art, in a sense speak more eloquently of the American mind than
the city's politicians.

The crown jewel is the Smithsonian Institution, which with its 13 museums and
the National Zoo is considered the world's largest museum complex. All but the
Cooper-Hewitt Museum, which is in New York City, are in the District of
Columbia; seven of them, including the immensely popular National Air and Space
Museum, are on the Mall. In one afternoon, a visitor can see the Hope Diamond,
Martha Washington's inaugural dress, a 92-foot model of a blue whale, a painting
by Rubens, the Friendship 7 space capsule, an Alexander Calder sculpture and a
working steam engine - an exhaustive, and exhausting, collection.

The National Gallery of Art, also on the Mall, boasts one of the finest
collections of American and European art in the country, with the accent on
Italian painting and sculpture. In recent years the gallery's East Wing,
designed by I.M. Pei, has attracted large crowds to many special exhibits. Now
the gallery has completed renovation of the West Wing, and last month Paul
Mellon donated 93 works, including important French Impressionist and
Post-Impressionist paintings, to the gallery.

Across the Mall is the Hirschhorn Museum and Sculpture Gallery, with a permanent
collection of paintings by Thomas Eakins and sculpture by Rodin, Calder, Kenneth
Snelson and David Smith. The National Portrait Gallery, the Freer Gallery of
Art, the National Collection of Fine Arts, the Renwick Gallery and the Corcoran
Gallery of Art round out the art scene in the city's center. A short cab ride
away, at 1600 21st Street N.W., three blocks from Dupont Circle, is the Phillips
Collection, a well-loved gallery of 19th- and 20thcentury art, including
Renoir's ''Luncheon of the Boating Party.'' All the museums are open without
charge.

Getting About

Many attractions are so close together that walking remains the best means of
transport. Most Washingtonians would advise against driving downtown; parking is
difficult and traffic is heavy. Many points of interest are linked by bus or
subway, and the subway covers most downtown spots as well as the Pentagon,
Arlington National Cemetery and National Airport - at a daytime rate of 65 cents
a ride. (Rush-hour rides cost more and vary depending on distance traveled.)
Taxicabs, which charge by district and not by distance, are relatively
inexpensive, with a trip between the White House and the Capitol costing $1.70
plus tip. Some visitors prefer using the Tourmobile, a National Park Service
concessionaire that takes visitors between attractions, including the Jefferson
and Lincoln Memorials, and lets them linger as long as they like. A day of
unlimited reboarding costs $5.50, $3.25 for children under 12 years old. Tours
that include Arlington National Cemetery and Mount Vernon cost more.

Capital Digs

Washington, as Ronald Reagan has been saying for more than a decade, is a city
of big spenders. Because of the prices, even visitors become big spenders. A
room for two at the Madison Hotel (15th and M Streets, N.W.; 202-862-1600) is
$140, and a similar room at the Ritz Carlton, formerly the Fairfax, at 2100
Massachusetts Avenue, N.W. (202-293-2100), starts at $145, with one-bedroom
suites ranging from $275 to $475. The Canterbury Hotel, 1733 M Street, N.W.
(202-393-3000), a charming European-style hostelry, offers large suites with
kitchenettes, dining rooms and in-room bars at prices ranging from $128 to $150.

Washington is enjoying something of a hotel boom. Among new hotels are the
Washington Marriott at 1221 22nd Street, N.W. (202-872-1500, with rooms for two
from $120), the Capitol Holiday Inn at 550 C Street, S.W. (202-479-4000, with
rooms for two at $90), the Ramada Renaissance at 1143 New Hampshire Avenue, N.W.
(202-775-0800, with rooms for two ranging from $105 to $115), and the Marbury
House, a Quality Royale hotel at 3000 M Street, N.W. (202-726-5000, with rooms
for two at $95, $50 on weekends). The Vista International at 1400 M Street, N.W.
(202-429-1700; 410 rooms) opened this month and is offering an introductory rate
for two of $86.25; beginning April 1, the rate will rise to a minimum of $105.
The Henley Park, a converted former apartment building near Washington's new
Convention Center at 926 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W. (202-638-5200, with rooms
for two between $115 and $155) will open March 21.

Some visitors prefer less expensive lodgings in the Virginia and Maryland
suburbs, using public transportation for trips into the city. Double rooms in
Marriott hotels in the suburbs are available in the $100 range (considerably
cheaper on weekends). The Holiday Inn in Chevy Chase, Md. (5520 Wisconsin
Avenue; 301-656-1500), offers a room for two for $62 a night.

Food

Washington has more than its share of quality restaurants. One of the latest
additions, the Sichuan Garden (1220 19th Street, N.W.; 202-296-4550) has caused
something of a sensation. In an elegant setting, waiters serve the work of 18
chefs brought to the United States in a bit of cultural imperialism practiced by
China at prices beginning at about $40 a couple.

Many of the better restaurants are on the K Street corridor, on Capitol Hill and
in Georgetown. A favorite of lobbyists is Mel Krupin's (1120 Connecticut Avenue,
N.W.; 202-331-7000), where a lunch of hearty American food runs between $25 and
$30 a couple and dinner about $50 to $60 a couple. A clot of lawyers can almost
always be found at Joe and Mo's (1211 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.; 202-659-1211),
where the tab for a varied menu runs $20 and $30 a couple at lunch and about $70
at dinner. Vincenzo's, an Italian seafood restaurant at 1606 20th Street, N.W.
(202-667-0049; $50 to $60 a couple), is a favorite of embassy officials. Cantina
d'Italia (1214A 18th Street, N.W.; 202-659-1830) serves Italian food at $40 to
$50 a couple at lunch and $80 to $100 at dinner. The Palm (1225 19th Street,
N.W.; 202-293-9091) is a steak and lobster establishment with food and prices
(about $30 a couple for lunch, $70 a couple for dinner) much like those at the
New York versions of the restaurant.

Like New York, Washington has an abundance of expensive restaurants, some of
them self-consciously so. Unlike New York, however, the city is lean on more
modest lunch spots, delicatessens and bakeries. It is, in fact, easier to find
homemade pasta than good pizza; a good corned beef or pastrami sandwich is
elusive and a doughnut worthy of the name has yet to be found. There are,
moreover, precious few restaurants near the usual points of interest, with the
exception of Capitol Hill, which has a number of good bistros and more ambitious
establishments.

The alternative is the Government cafeterias, which offer good, reasonably
priced fare. Among the best are the cafeterias in the basement of the Longworth
House Office Building and the Russell Senate Office Building, where lunch runs
about $2.50 a person and where a large strip steak platter with potatoes,
vegetables and salad is $3.95. Generations of Washingtonians have found hearty,
inexpensive food at the two Sholl's cafeterias (1433 K Street, N.W.,
202-783-4113, and 1990 K Street, N.W., 202-296-3065), where breakfast begins at
$1.50 and lunch at $2.

For Day Trippers

Washington is good point of departure for side trips. Great Falls Park, Va., a
half-hour away, is a pleasant place for a picnic. The towpath of the Chesapeake
and Ohio Canal, with an entrance a block south of 13th and M Streets, N.W., has
long attracted walkers and nature lovers. Gunston Hall and Woodlawn Plantation,
both with impressive gardens, are a short drive away. Middleburg, in the heart
of Virginia horse and hunt country, is a sleepy little town with some charming
shops and restaurants. And Charlottesville, with the University of Virginia and
Monticello, also makes a good day trip as does Shenandoah National Park.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of subway trains photo of Spirit of St. Louis
photo of Phillips Gallery photo of Vietnam memorial photo of the sculpture
garden map of Washington D.C.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STATE AFFIRMATIVE-ACTION PROGRAM FOR JOBS IS ANNOUNCED BY CUOMO

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 960 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Feb. 20


Governor Cuomo announced tonight the appointment of three black and five
Hispanic officials and a three-part program to strengthen the state's minority
hiring.

Among the nominees are former State Senator H. Carl McCall as Commissioner of
the Division of Human Rights, and Julio A. Martinez for reappointment as head of
the Commission of Substance Abuse Prevention and Education. Only Mr. McCall and
Mr. Martinez must be confirmed by the State Senate. Mr. McCall lost the
Democratic primary for lieutenant governor last September to Alfred B. DelBello,
who became Mr. Cuomo's running mate.

Mr. Cuomo made the announcements in a speech at the 12th annual meeting of the
State Legislature's Black and Puerto Rican Caucus. The caucus met at the
Convention Center of the Empire State Plaza.

''I am issuing three executive orders that will insure affirmative action as a
central priority of this administration,'' the Governor said.

The first order will establish an Executive Committee for Affirmative Action,
which will ''develop annual goals for minority employment in every department of
state government.'' The second will create a Governor's advisory committee for
Hispanic affairs.

The third, the Governor said, will direct the State Commerce Department and
other agencies to give minority businesses ''the special assistance they need in
getting started and in contributing to the state's economic resurgence.''

The last order is almost identical to one issued by Governor Carey toward the
end of his administration. Mr. Cuomo did not give details in his speech, but a
spokesman for the Governor, Betsy Buechner, said that his order on affirmative
action ''mirrored one issued by Governor Carey but that it provided enforcement
provision that the previous order lacked.''

Mr. Cuomo plans to empower the president of the State Civil Service Commission,
Victor S. Bahou, to order state agencies and departments to improve their hiring
of minorities. If an agency is found to violate the Governor's executive order,
the commission's president will be authorized to put into effect a plan of his
own, Miss Buechner said.

''There are no number quotas,'' she said. ''He is talking about equal
opportunity at all levels of government.'' Women, the disabled and Vietnam-era
veterans, in addition to racial minorities, will be included under Mr. Cuomo's
hiring goals, she said. It was not clear how Mr. Cuomo would decide how an
agency was not meeting its hiring goal.

'Basic Differences' in Plans

During the day, Mr. McCall, who was at the meeting, said that the ''basic
difference'' between Mr. Cuomo and Governor Carey was that Mr. Cuomo ''has the
community in his camp and that there is a sense that he will fulfill his
promises to the minority community.''

Assemblyman Joseph Galiber, Democrat of the Bronx, said, ''Minority groups will
be looking to Cuomo to preserve their position within the administration despite
the Governor's call for reductions in the state's work force.''

Assemblyman Arthur Eve, Democrat of Buffalo and a former chairman of the caucus,
said: ''Governor Carey had all the right intentions, but part of his problem was
enforcement. We are in hopes that the Cuomo administration will turn desires and
hopes into results.''

He said he welcomed the Governor's use of the Civil Service Commission as an
enforcement tool, ''but we would like him to consider firing commissioners who
are not aiding him in providing equal opportunity.''

The Governor told the caucus: ''No government that regards equal opportunity as
more than a polite, meaningless phrase can deny the absolute necessity for
positive government action - direct and unequivocal - to break down the barriers
that hold back so many millions of our people from going as far as their talents
will take them.

''Affirmative action isn't favoritism. It's simple justice, and it will be a
central part of every program this administration takes.'' He defended his
proposed state budget, which is now awaiting approval by the Legislature.  ''If
it directs more aid to communities with large minority populations,'' Mr. Cuomo
said in his remarks, ''that's because the nation's legacy of racism still
condemns blacks and Puerto Ricans to the back of the economic bus, still leaves
them poor and deprived in disproportionate numbers.''

Mr. Cuomo's Advisory Committee for Hispanic Affairs will be a ninemember
unsalaried panel, whose members have not yet been appointed, Miss Buechner said.
The panel will advise Mr. Cuomo on ''increasing opportunity in all aspects of
state government,'' including the awarding of state contracts, she said.

The Governor characterized the panel in his speech as ''a special mechanism
within the Executive Chamber to deal with the unique problems of our rapidly
growing Hispanic population.''

The other appointments announced in the Governor's speech were these: Joe
Semidei, for promotion from associate social services commissioner to deputy
commissioner.  Esmeralda Simmons, a civil rights lawyer with the Federal
Department of Education, as deputy commissioner of human rights.  Ramond
Rodriguez, an assistant commissioner and counsel in the State Department of
Corrections, as deputy commissioner of youth.  Andre Dawkins, a budget analyst
on the Assembly Ways and Means Committee staff, as program assistant to the
Governor.  Martin Reyes, described by the Governor's office as a middlemanagment
staff member in the State Labor Department, as Director of the Division of
Economic Opportunity.  Hector Del Toro, a member of the staff of Assemblyman
Angelo Del Toro, Democrat of Manhattan, as assistant commissioner of housing.
The two men are brothers. Assemblyman Del Toro is the chairman of the Black and
Puerto Rican Caucus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gov. Cuomo, wife Matilda, Cal McCall, and Gov.
Carlos

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THAI TRIBE IS BEING PRICED OUT OF ITS OWN RELIGION

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words

DATELINE: CHIANG RAI, Thailand


Lao Lu, a high priest of the hill people known as the Yao, seemed the soul of
trust as he talked with a visitor to his village northwest of here. He is 62
years old and his real name is Lei Tsan Kuei, but everyone calls him Lao Lu -
''sixth eldest'' among his brothers.

Talking in the smoky cabin, he showed off a tattered stack of Yao religious
texts, from which he read briefly, fingering the Chinese characters.

When his visitor later showed him a new book devoted to the paintings through
which the Yao invoke their religious pantheon, Lao Lu laughed with pleasure. He
said he had once met the book's author, a French anthropologist named Jacques
Lemoine, but had never seen the costly volume. He cleared a space for it among
the tea glasses, and his sons and turbaned daughters gathered to see the bright
photographs of their sacred portraits: the Jade Emperor, the Master of the
Saints, the Three Pure Ones and the others. Painted on scrolls, they looked like
Chinese warlords in fiery red robes.

But when Lao Lu was asked to show the paintings he himself owned, his face fell.
The problem was not that they were normally kept out of sight except on
ceremonial occasions; the problem was that he had come to fear letting strangers
know of their existence. The market value of the Yao's old paintings had lately
climbed so high in Bangkok and Western Europe that robbers have begun to loot
Yao villages of their religious objects.

'A Drastic Disruption'

The jolted fortunes of Thailand's 50,000 Yao mirror the fortunes of half a
million hill tribesmen in this country. Yao refugees from Laos number in the
thousands, far fewer, as it happens, than the fleeing Hmong, a related tribe
whose reported exposure to chemical weapons, and whose mysterious nighttime
deaths as refugees in the United States, have made them symbols of a people at
the end of their rope.  But the Yao, too, have suffered in the aftermath of
Southeast Asia's recent wars.

All the hill tribes in this region are undergoing ''a drastic disruption'' of
their cultures and economies, in the judgment of two American anthropologists,
William Y. Dessaint and Alain Y. Dessaint.  Their future, these scientists
believe, is likely to be ''rife with tension and conflict.''

An estimated 200,000 Yao in Vietnam, Laos, Burma and Thailand originated in
China, where more than a million Yao still live. They started trickling into
Thailand early in this century, with the flow increasing after 1945. They have
been nomadic cultivators, like other highland tribes. They have lived by cutting
down a patch of forest, burning the scrub brush, growing rice and some opium,
and then moving on after a few seasons to fresher soil along the next forested
ridge.

The Yao are running out of ridges, as are the Hmong, the Akha, the Lahu, the
Lisu and other tribes. Infant mortality has dropped and the population has
risen. Thai farmers from the lowlands have been moving up the slopes. Thai
officials have made inroads against opiumgrowing, jungle-burning and villages
that move. Thai military attacks against these villages ceased a decade ago, yet
thousands of tribesmen have been bombed or forced to move by raids aimed at
upland Communists and criminals.

Cheerful and Industrious

Lao Lu's village of Pa Dua seems quite cheerful and industrious.  Women and
girls in black turbans and embroidered trousers sit chatting on benches. They
stroll about, ignoring the black pigs underfoot; their eyes are fixed on their
perpetual embroidery. Most hill tribes sell fabric and silverwork to tourists in
the big northern towns.

Pa Dua also grows rice and corn, and sells soybeans instead of opium for cash.
The Government has lately put its faith in tribal progress, and 11 hill-tribe
development centers have sprung up across the north.

The Yaos' origins have put them in touch with Chinese merchants in the lowlands.
Their rudimentary literacy has helped as well. Few other hill tribes have had
such luck.

The Yao cope, moreover, with endemic childlessness and Down's syndrome, the
latter probably caused by inbreeding. They buy babies from the Akha, the poorest
hill tribe, and raise them as Yao.

''Unfortunately the price of these babies has risen,'' said Satawat
Sathitphiansiri, a Thai university graduate who works at the Government's tribal
center nearest here. ''I know a Yao boy, 13 or 14, whose nickname is 50 baht,''
his price as an infant in Thai currency, the equivalent of $2.50. ''An Akha
child today costs 800 to 1,500 baht.''

Viewed as Primitive and Dirty

Many Yao keep trying to move to richer soil. ''But when they try,'' said Mr.
Satawat, ''the police send them back. They burn things down.'' The King of
Thailand owns their land. They have been told to terrace it and use fertilizers.

The Yao's legendary progenitors were a Chinese princess and one of her royal
court's pet dogs: but the royal part goes unnoticed by most Thais, who tend to
view the hill tribes as colorful, shrewd, primitive and dirty. ''The women do
the work and the men smoke opium,'' said a Thai journalist from Bangkok. ''We
live with them,'' said the Governor of Chiang Mai Province, Chaiya
Poonsiriwongse. ''We have to pacify them, and eventually they will become Thai
citizens.''

The Yao are not only losing their icons to thieves, but are selling them
outright, and many Yao are converting to a new religion. Five years ago the
century-old efforts of northern Thailand's Christian missionaries suddenly took
hold, and ''sudden conversions'' followed, Mr. Satawat said.

Lao Lu, whose village of 500 people includes just one Christian family, offered
a theory. ''The reason they change is that they cannot find a priest to contact
the spirits,'' he said. ''The young people don't want to become priests and
learn the old ways.''

'Too Many Pigs and Feasts'

Mr. Satawat has asked scores of Yao why they converted. ''They all say the old
religion costs too much,'' he said. ''Too many pigs and feasts.'' A pious family
must also acquire at least some of the old Yao paintings.

But the price of such paintings is prohibitive. Art dealers in Bangkok say their
prices have soared for the last five years. A ritual set of 16 portraits sells
in Bangkok today for $10,000 and up. A 200-year-old set by a graceful artist may
fetch $25,000 and a single portrait by a clumsy painter more than $500.

Rumors smolder in these parts. One rumor - it lacks hard evidence - is that the
missionaries want the Yao to burn their paintings ''as the work of the Devil,''
as one longtime Western resident put it.

Lao Lu was gentler. ''It's their choice,'' he said of the converts. As for
selling the tribe's icons, which stopped being painted years ago, he said he had
done the same himself once.

Leafing through the book of his tribe's sacred paintings, he found photographs
of a set he had once owned. It had come from Laos, and he had paid $350 for it.
Seven years ago he sold the set for $500 to the author of the book.

''The price now must be $5,000,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Lao Lu photo of women map of Thailand

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE LIMITS OF FED POWER TO CURE THE ECONOMY

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 521 words


To the Editor:

Prof. James Tobin's argument on your Feb. 8 Op-Ed page, ''Make Jobs, Cut
Deficits,'' is a political plea disguised as an economist's statement. He
prescribes low real rates of interest and alleges that the Federal Reserve can
bring these about.

Let's suppose the Fed could, in fact, lower real rates to any level desired and
once again produce a situation in which Treasury bill rates are ''below 2
percent, even negative, at recession troughs.''

First, we are most likely past the recession trough. Second, low and even
negative interest rates discourage saving and therefore fly in the face of
infrastructure and industrial modernization financing needs.

In addition, and precisely because the saver has experienced negative real rates
during the 1973-82 decade, the Fed cannot in fact produce low real rates at
will.

The ''expected inflation'' premium in bond rates will promptly rise when the Fed
begins to overstep the bounds of noninflationary growth. The fact is that real
rates only appear to be high

- no one knows whether even a five-year security purchased today will yield any
real rate of return over its full term.  Professor Tobin reinforces the saver's
concern when he downgrades the inflationary potential of record Federal
deficits.  Everyone agrees that a substantial part of the 1982-84 fiscal-year
deficits is recession-related, but by no means all of it. According to Tobin,
one percentage point in the unemployment rate is worth $30 billion in the
budget. That means there is still a big gap in the budget even at a hypothetical
6 percent unemployment rate. Very roughly, a $200 billion deficit in the 1984
budget could be reduced by $120 billion to $80 billion if unemployment quickly
fell to 6 percent from 10 percent. But $80 billion happens to be an all-time
record ''high-employment'' deficit.

Tobin's notion that lower interest rates would additionally help to reduce
debt-service costs in the Federal budget is strictly piein-the-sky. The burden
of financing an added $200 billion a year in actual and prospective deficits
into the indefinite future is the main factor that constantly creates upward
pressure on current and future expected interest rates.

Professor Tobin's suggestion that the Fed claim credit for victory in its war on
inflation is analogous to former Senate Aiken's suggestion that we claim victory
and get out of Vietnam.

Consumer prices rose 6 percent on average in 1982 over 1981, and the consensus
of economists looks for about 5 percent in 1983. Most are apprehensive about the
direction of inflation in 1984; a majority expect higher inflation next year.

The country needs noninflationary growth. Most likely, and regrettably, this can
be achieved only by a gradual approach to high employment. The risk of
generating renewed large-scale inflation and thereby wrecking growth itself is
high.

Professor Tobin's ''damn the torpedos, full speed ahead'' advice to the Federal
Reserve and the country should be disregarded.
FRANCIS H. SCHOTT, Senior Vice President, Chief Economist, Equitable Life
Assurance Society, New York, Feb. 9, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 22, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-OFFICIAL'S OBSESSION WITH VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 950 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 21


Fourteen years ago Ralph W. McGehee sat in a sparsely furnished Saigon apartment
contemplating the disintegration of his small corner of the American Dream. He
thought about hanging a banner out his window that said ''THE C.I.A. LIES'' and
then shooting himself with the rifle he kept in his bedroom.

Mr. McGehee, a janitor's son from the South Side of Chicago who played on three
national championship football teams at Notre Dame in the late 1940's, joined
the Central Intelligence Agency in 1952 to fight Communism. Like dozens in his
generation of C.I.A. recruits, he served loyally and eagerly in the front lines
of the cold war.  Then, while working in Southeast Asia in the 1960's, he became
disillusioned and convinced that the agency was intentionally distorting
intelligence information to mask the extent of support for Communist forces in
the region.

It was an agonizing personal and professional awakening that changed his life.
Mr. McGehee, like some other American officials who were directly touched by the
Vietnam War, became a kind of permanent prisoner of the conflict. He is part of
a small but distinctive fraternity of former officials and journalists in
Washington whose lives still revolve around Vietnam. For the last 10 years he
has poured most of his intellectual and emotional energy into coming to terms
with the war and his role in it.

Immersed in History

His friends call the effort an obsession, and Mr. McGehee doesn't disagree. To
the exclusion of almost everything else in his life, he has immersed himself in
the history of America's involvement in Vietnam searching for some understanding
of how he and the Government he was once devoted to lost their bearings in
Southeast Asia. He accumulated a small library of books about the war, became a
denizen of the Library of Congress and, contrary to all his training in the
C.I.A., started to seek out journalists to convey his account of failures by the
agency in Vietnam.

Eventually, part of this reckoning took the form of a book.  Entitled, ''Deadly
Deceits, My 25 Years in the C.I.A.,'' it was published earlier this month in New
York by Sheridan Square Publications.

The book is likely to add new fire to the debate over whether the Government
doctored intelligence information in the Vietnam War, concealing the degree of
pro-Communist sympathy, to support official forecasts that the war was being
won. A CBS News documentary broadcast last year charged that senior American
officials in Vietnam, including the commanding general, William C. Westmoreland,
conspired to alter and suppress estimates about the strength of North Vietnamese
and Vietcong forces. Mr. Westmoreland, who vehemently denied the charge, sued
CBS for libel, demanding $120 million in damages. The case is still in
litigation.

'A Fog of Angry Disbelief'

For Mr. McGehee the issue is primarily personal, based on his experiences as an
intelligence officer in Thailand and Vietnam.  Specifically, he charges that the
C.I.A. suppressed estimates he prepared showing widespread pro-Communist support
in one area of Thailand. He says the reports contradicted earlier agency
estimates that placed enemy support at a lower level.

When he first submitted his report about Thailand, Mr. McGehee said, his
superiors praised his survey methods. However, when it became clear that his
pessimistic assessment was not shared by senior C.I.A. officials in Washington,
Mr. McGehee contends that the Thailand survey was abruply canceled and that he
was transferred to another country.

''I traveled back to the province in a fog of angry disbelief,'' he recalls in
the book. ''How could the agency let such a program die?  It produced the
highest-rated intelligence, and I thought it destroyed the insurgency. It did
all of this at virtually no cost.  What in the hell was going on?''

The doubts, once planted, festered and Mr. McGehee became a tormented man during
his tour in Vietnam that began in 1968. When he urged the agency to employ the
techniques for estimating enemy strength he developed in Thailand, his memo was
returned with no comment. ''Every waking moment I fought an internal battle of
doubts and contradictions,'' he recalls in the book. ''I couldn't sleep, my head
ached all the time, the tension was terrible.''

Words of Coach Recalled

Mr. McGehee was eventually transferred back to Washington where he says he was
assigned to a series of dead-end jobs and denied a promotion. He lost his
friends. ''Once my views became known, I was isolated,'' he recalled in a recent
conservation at his home in Virginia.

Little of the Norman Rockwell boy remains in the man who retired in 1977. He
still recalls with a smile the words of his coach at Notre Dame, Frank Leahy:
''You have to pay the price, but if you do, you can only win.''

But as he sits in his basement office beneath a picture of the 1949 national
championship team, Ralph McGehee admits that he lost both his crusade and his
innocence. ''I guess I justify myself by thinking that I fought for what I
thought was right,'' he said. ''I didn't quit. I tried to get the C.I.A. to tell
the truth. I also had to put my children through college.''

After spending the better part of the last five years researching and writing
the book, and arguing with the C.I.A. about what he could print, Mr. McGehee
seems relieved that his days as an author have ended. ''I'd sit over the
typewriter for weeks before I could write anything,'' he said. ''But it was a
theraputic experience.''

He likes to show visitors the Career Intelligence Medal he was awarded by the
C.I.A. after his retirement. ''I think they hoped it would shut me up,'' he
said. ''It didn't.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ralph McGehee

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 23, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE A-BOMB IS 'CONVICTED' IN NUREMBERG

BYLINE: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 747 words

DATELINE: NUREMBERG, West Germany, Feb. 20


The Green Party and its friends gathered this weekend in this city where Nazi
war criminals were once tried, and, with swift justice, convicted nuclear
weapons of being a crime against humanity.

The mock trial, a centerpiece of the Greens' uphill election campaign, was
called a Tribunal Against First Strike and Mass Destruction Weapons in East and
West. But three days of testimony let the Soviet Union off the hook while
soundly criticizing the United States.

The shading of guilt was apparent on the cover of the trial's slickly printed
program, which showed a Dracula figure meant to evoke a nuclear Armageddon. His
right eye was a clearly visible American flag; his left one a very blurred
Soviet one, the hammer and sickle lost in black shadows.

The jury, questioning like-minded witnesses in Nuremberg's Meistersinger
auditorium, struck the same balance between East and West. Early on, Herman
Veerbeck, a Dutch priest and juror, asked a witness if he did not agree that
Western European nations were ''satellites of an American military
dictatorship.''

A Peace-Loving Army

Daniil Proyektor, a former Soviet colonel, was let off lightly on
cross-examination after testifying that the Soviet Union fielded a peace-loving
army that had no first-strike weapons. The United States Government declined to
send a representative.

The trial was the idea of Petra Kelly, the Greens' 35-year-old star personality,
who is running for a seat in Parliament from Nuremberg. The American-educated
Miss Kelly and other Green candidates need all the help, and publicity, they can
get because opinion polls show the party's popularity sinking.

To make it into Parliament for the first time since they were founded in 1979,
the Greens must gain 5 percent of the national vote. A recent poll by the
Allensbach organization put the party's share of the vote at 6.2 percent, but
other polls have put it below 5 percent.

The Greens' grass-roots campaign style handicaps them in reaching a national
audience in the depths of winter. The party gets only spotty television
coverage, though its prepared television shorts are eye-catchers. One shows a
hapless middle-class German unwillingly taking delivery of a huge cruise missile
at his front door.

Full Coverage by the East

Miss Kelly's antimissile trial here was largely ignored by West German
television, but Soviet and other Eastern European journalists gave it full
coverage.

The trial's formal indictment asserted that the British and American
carpet-bombing of German cities in World War II ''removed the legal and moral
restrictions to the employment of atomic weapons as a means to asserting
national interests.''

''Here in the Federal Republic of Germany,'' said Dieter Burgmann, a Green
politician, ''there are some people, a considerable number, who have learned
from their atrocious past.'' That lesson often seemed to be that West Germany
was today victimized by the United States, a role reversal from the war.

Alfred Mechtersheimer, a self-styled ''peace researcher,'' told the jury, ''NATO
armies are no different from Hitler's armies.'' He called on West German
soldiers to ''defend the freedom of the German nation,'' and urged ''a German
policy in German interests that is radically in contradiction to the United
States.''

Agee and Ellsberg Attend Trial

Americans invited to the trial were similarly rough on the United States, and
mostly deferential toward the Soviet Union. Philip Agee, the former agent of the
Central Intelligence Agency, accused the United States of systematically
protecting Nazi war criminals at the end of the war.

Daniel Ellsberg, the veteran of the campaign against the Vietnam War, accused
the United States and its allies, including West Germany, of preparing ''the
greatest crime against humanity'' in the form of nuclear war ''plans for
escalatory genocide.''

''Two million people died in the death camp at Auschwitz,'' Mr.  Ellsberg said.
''Each of these missiles on both sides is a single Auschwitz - even the
production of them is Auschwitz.'' He recalled that after the war people had
criticized the Germans for doing nothing to stop Hitler and his crimes.

''We are all Germans now, and we should learn from their experience,'' said Mr.
Ellsberg, who said nuclear war would be ''the final solution against humanity.''
In a nuclear war, he continued, ''we are all Jews. We have nowhere to run, we
have nowhere to hide, we have no one to whom we can surrender.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 24, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI PLANS CUTS IN CAMBODIA FORCE

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 389 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 23


Vietnam said today that it planned to withdraw some of its troops from Cambodia
this year and would consider yearly withdrawals after that.

It insisted, as it has before, that its occupation of Cambodia would not end
until China stopped threatening Vietnam and until all support to Cambodia's
anti-Vietnamese rebels had stopped.

A statement on Cambodia had been widely expected in preparation for a meeting of
nations that describe themselves as nonaligned, scheduled to open March 7 in New
Delhi.

Many of these countries have condemned the occupation of Cambodia and have urged
India, which is about to assume the chairmanship from Cuba, to invite Prince
Norodom Sihanouk to address the conference.

Prince Sihanouk is a former Cambodian chief of state, a founder of the
nonaligned movement and, since last June, head of the anti-Vietnamese coalition
that the United Nations recognizes as Cambodia's legitimate government.

July Statement Is Recalled

Last July, at an Indochinese foreign ministers' conference in Ho Chi Minh City,
Vietnam said some troops would be withdrawn from Cambodia. Though several
thousand troops were withdrawn, some Western governments said fresh troops soon
replaced them. Vietnamese soldiers in Cambodia are estimated at 180,000, a
figure that has not changed greatly in four years.

The plan for withdrawals was among decisions made at a two-day conference of the
leaders of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos who met Tuesday and today in Vientiane,
Laos.

At a news conference here, reporting on the Vientiane decisions, Foreign
Minister Nguyen Co Thach said Vietnam had been represented at the meeting by Le
Duan, the party chief, and by Prime Minister Pham Van Dong.

According to an official announcement, the Indochinese leaders also urged ''more
cooperation in all fields,'' especially economic, and emphasized their close
links with the Soviet Union and their distrust of China.

They expressed ''their desire to have normal relations with the United States.''
Only Laos among the Indochinese countries now has diplomatic ties with the
United States.

The last such meeting, in April 1970, involved North Vietnam and the Communist
insurgents of Cambodia, Laos and South Vietnam. The Cambodian representatives
included Prince Sihanouk, who had just been ousted from the leadership by Lon
Nol.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 24, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

END RUN ON SALVADOR

BYLINE: By John B. Oakes; John B. Oakes is the former Senior Editor of The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 805 words


Secretary of State George P. Shultz is in danger of putting himself in the same
class as the Watts and the Burfords and all the other Presidential appointees
who are busily engaged in doing end runs around Congress and the law in order to
carry out the policy objectives of the Reagan Administration.

He is falling into this trap by blandly and blindly following the road to
disaster in Central America as laid out by his predecessor, former Secretary
Haig, for whose policies Mr. Shultz only recently expressed warm admiration.
That's not surprising, he observed, since they both serve the same President.

What is surprising, however, is that a man of Mr. Shultz's stature would put his
name to the latest State Department document certifying to Congress that El
Salvador's Government qualifies for the threefold increase in military aid that
the Administration is now proposing.

Two revealing reports, virtually unnoticed in the press, by American observers
just back from El Salvador demonstrate the falsity of the State Department's -
and Secretary Shultz's - position.

The first of these comes from a mission to El Salvador of the Association of the
Bar of the City of New York and is signed by a former President and a former
chairman of its Committee on Inter-American Affairs.

''The slaughter of civilians by security forces goes on at a monstrous rate,''
the report declares, ''and, thus far, there is no evidence that a single member
of these forces has been convicted or sentenced in any case involving the murder
or torture of a citizen labeled 'subversive' by the security forces. ... If the
incidence (of civilian murders) should decline to 'only' 5,000 killed a year
(the most probably accurate count, as against the State Department's estimate of
2,600) it suggests a decline in available targets rather than an increase in
humane behavior or attitude.''

As a condition of continued aid, Mr. Shultz had to certify, under United States
law, that El Salvador is making ''a concerted and significant'' human rights
effort and is achieving enough control over its own security forces ''to bring
to an end the indiscriminate torture and murder of Salvadoran citizens.'' But if
El Salvador's Government is in control of its security forces, then it obviously
is not making the required human rights effort; if it is not in control, then it
cannot bring the murders to an end. Either way, the report observes, the
Secretary's certification is ''unwarranted and unsupportable.''

Secretary Shultz's certification does something more than evade the clear
meaning of the law. It suggests to all the world that, despite the State
Department's periodic denunciation of human rights violations, the United States
is willing for policy reasons to acquiesce in the elimination by illegal means
of alleged subversives abroad. If, then, abroad, why not at home?

The other new report cites compelling evidence of the State Department's
obstructionism and collusion with Salvadoran authorities in blocking a thorough
investigation of the murder two years ago of four American church-connected
social workers, three of whom were nuns. Issued by the highly respected Lawyers
Committee for International Human Rights, which represents the victims'
families, this report is almost as much an indictment of Mr. Shultz's State
Department as it is of Salvadoran justice. It accuses the Department of
supporting Salvadoran officials in their refusal to follow leads that point
clearly to the involvement of ''higher-ups'' in ordering the murders, for which
five wretched low-ranking guardsmen are now awaiting trial.

The Reagan Administration has played so fast and loose with the certification
procedure that proposed additional restrictions - such as a requirement that the
Salvadoran Government open negotiations with the opposition - are likely to be
no more effective than the existing ones. The real change that is needed is not
in law but in policy.

Secretary Shultz sounded a good deal like former Secretary Haig the other day
when he rejected the idea of negotiations to bring this American-fueled war to
an end. In doing so, he only strengthened the analogy between United States
policy in El Salvador now to that in Vietnam a few years ago, where a
''no-negotiation'' stance - until too late - helped pave the way to total
disaster. If we continue to pursue the same course in Central America's
revolutionary civil wars - whether in El Salvador, Nicaragua or Guatemala - as
we did in Southeast Asia's, we are likely to end up with the same appalling
result.

Unfortunately, the Reagan Administration still seems to believe that American
military ''advisers,'' American military training and increasingly massive
American military equipment will save the day for democracy in Central America -
instead of burying it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 25, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LABOR PARTY SUFFERS SEVERE DEFEAT, LOSING LONDON BASTION TO LIBERAL

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Friday, Feb. 25


Britain's Labor Party suffered one of its worst defeats since World War II on
Thursday, losing a previously invulnerable parliamentary seat in a by-election
that weakened Michael Foot's hold on the party leadership.

Simon Hughes, the candidate of the Liberal-Social Democratic alliance, trounced
Peter Tatchel, the Labor nominee, in the voting in the dock district of
Bermondsey on the south bank of the Thames.  It was the biggest electoral gain
for the alliance in a year.

Mr. Hughes won more than half the vote in a field of 16 candidates. A Liberal,
he added 50 percentage points to his party's showing in the last general
election. Mr. Hughes polled 17,017 votes to 7,698 for Mr. Tatchel, with the
other candidates trailing far behind.

The Bermondsey contest had at first been considered a walkover for Labor, which
had comfortably held the seat for six decades. In May 1969 the Labor candidate,
Robert Mellish, won by 11,756 votes. But controversy swirled from the start
around Mr. Tatchel, a 31-year-old left-wing militant, and that completely
transformed the race, making Mr. Hughes's startling triumph possible.

Labor Left Seized Control

Mr. Mellish, the retiring M.P., is an old-line Laborite, a toughtalking, Roman
Catholic, working-class politician from a toughtalking, Roman Catholic,
working-class district. But the left has seized control of the party machinery
in Bermondsey, which has been devastated by the gradual closing of the London
docks in the last two decades. Instead of a man in the Mellish mold, it picked
Mr. Tatchell as a standard bearer, and he staked out a platform of homosexual
rights, ''real'' socialism and extraparliamentary resistance to Mrs. Thatcher's
programs.

Mr. Foot, appalled by what was happening, said he would not agree to Mr.
Tatchell's candidacy, but he was forced to backtrack. He issued statements of
support and had his picture taken with the candidate.

Not so Mr. Mellish. Stepping down after 36 years in Parliament, he was unwilling
to give way to the left, and he supported John O'Grady, an old ally who used to
head the local council. Together they campaigned as the ''Real Bermondsey Labor
Party,'' denouncing Mr.  Tatchell as ''a shocking liar'' and an ''ignorant
pig.'' They also branded Mr. Tatchell, who was born in Australia and came here
in part to avoid military service in Vietnam, as ''a traitor to his Queen and
country.''

It appears, however, that they only weakened Mr. Tatchell without establishing
the dour, earnest Mr. O'Grady as a credible candidate.  Mr. Tatchell thought
victory to be essential for the Labor Party as a whole and for the left in
particular. If he failed to win convincingly, he said last week, ''there will be
those who will use it as a stick to beat us, not only in Bermondsey but in the
rest of the country.'' In an effort to overcome the adverse publicity, he talked
personally with 23,000 voters and knocked on nearly half of the doors in the
constituency.

But doors were often slammed in his face, and his campaign manager, David Fryer,
conceded at a news conference this week that Labor's surveys showed Mr. Tatchell
only 2,000 votes ahead of Mr. Hughes, a 31-year-old lawyer.

''There has been a lot of mud thrown in this campaign,'' Mr.  Tatchell said.
''Some of it, unfortunately, has stuck.'' Mr. Tatchell's troubles could not have
come at a worse time for his party leader. Mr. Foot, a 69-year-old left-winger,
is considered a liability by many Laborites. In three opinion polls last week,
fewer than one-fifth of those surveyed said they thought he was doing a good
job. A writer and orator of unquestioned brilliance, he manages to convey an
impression of political indecision, an image reinforced by his own disheveled
appearance.

Labor Behind Conservatives

With Labor running as much as 21 percentage points behind Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher's Conservative Party in some polls, and a June general
election still possible, something close to panic has set in among Labor M.P.'s,
particularly those with shaky seats. One of them said recently, ''We don't have
much of a chance with Michael.''

In that context, the Bermondsey by-election quickly took on new importance.
Several newspapers, including The Sunday Times, said that if Mr. Tatchell was
beaten, or even if he won by a narrow margin, a challenge to Mr. Foot would be
inevitable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 26, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LABOR'S DEFEAT IN LONDON WEAKENS PARTY LEADER

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Feb. 25


Labor Party officials said today that the party's crushing defeat in Thursday's
by-election in a London dock district had weakened Michael Foot's position as
the party's leader.

The Labor candidate, Peter Tatchell, a 31-year-old left-winger, received fewer
than half as many votes as the victor, Simon Hughes, the candidate of the
Liberal-Social Democratic alliance. Labor had held the seat, in the Bermondsey
district south of the Thames, for 60 years. and it had been considered one of
the half-dozen safest Labor seats in England.

Voters interviewed by the BBC as they left the polling places gave as their
primary reasons for backing Mr. Hughes, a 31-year-old lawyer, the prolonged
infighting within the Labor Party as well as Mr. Tatchell's militancy. Labor's
share of the vote plummeted from 63.6 percent at the last general election in
May 1979, to 26.1 Thursday, the largest swing in recent decades.

Mr. Foot, a 69-year-old former journalist who has served in Parliament since
1945, issued a statement during the night in which he said, ''I am staying as
leader of the party because I was elected to do the job, to lead the party to
victory at the next election.'' He conceded that the by-election defeat was a
sharp setback but insisted that ''Bermondsey will be won back for Labor at the
general election.''

Pressures to Quit Are Mounting

That election is expected in June or October of this year or in the following
spring, and Labor tacticians are hoping the pattern of Ashfield will be
repeated. In a by-election in that constituency in April 1977, the party lost a
seat it had previously won by 22,000 votes, but in the 1979 general election the
seat was easily regained.

But the pressures on Mr. Foot to quit are mounting. Most established Labor
politicians, particularly those with marginal seats, expressed gloom about the
party's prospects. Mr. Foot inspired little confidence before the Bermondsey
voting and he now appears to inspire even less. Mr. Foot at first refused to
endorse the candidacy of Mr. Tatchell, who came to England from Australia in
part to avoid military service in Vietnam, but he later retreated from that
stand and finally issued statements of support for him. Mr. Foot's early
denunciations of Mr. Tatchell and his subsequent about-face were cited by
several senior figures as the beginning of what they called the debacle that
engulfed the party Thursday.

Since he became Labor leader in 1980, Mr. Foot has repeatedly failed in his
attempts to reconcile the quarrels between the party's militant left wing, of
which Mr. Tatchell is a member, and its more moderate, more traditional right
wing. More than a dozen members of Parliament from the Labor right have defected
to the Social Democrats, and those who have remained feel themselves under
siege.

For the new party and its Liberal allies, the victory at Bermondsey constituted
a badly needed shot in the arm. It was the alliance's first victory in a
thoroughly working-class, inner-city constituency, and its first capture of a
previously Labor seat.

Three previous by-election victories came at the expense of the Tories.

New Party's Standing Rises

Mrs. Shirley Williams, the Social Democrats' president, said the result proved
that Labor would ''never form a government again.'' David Steel, the Liberal
leader, commented: ''This is not a victory.  It is a complete rout.''

The alliance's standing in the national polls, which has been depressed since
the war with Argentina over the Falkland Islands distracted public attention,
can now be expected to rise, and it will make an all-out effort to win the
forthcoming by-election at Darlington in northeast England. But most politicians
believe it still has a long way to go before re-establishing itself as a
contender for power.

Mr. Foot's future will depend to a great extent on the union leaders who helped
him to power in the first place. The key man in the coming weeks will probably
be Moss Evans, the head of Britain's most powerful union, the Transport and
General Workers. He voiced support for Mr. Foot as recently as last week, but
there were unconfirmed reports today that he planned to meet Mr. Foot soon to
discuss the leader's future.

According to some reports, most of those in the Labor shadow cabinet have
already concluded that Mr. Foot should resign. They believe, it is said, that
only Denis Healey, the 65-year-old deputy leader, is capable of rallying the
party for a general election.

Plan Reportedly Formulated

The Times of London said today that a plan had been formulated under which Mr.
Foot would step down, to be replaced by Mr. Healey, who is a right-winger. The
deputy's job would then go to Neil Kinnock, 40, the party spokesman on
education, who is a left-winger acceptable to much of the right. He is widely
considered a future contender for prime minister.

According to The Times, the plan calls for the unions to pledge in advance to
back Mr. Healey after he takes over as acting leader. That would be necessary to
block an attempt by Tony Benn and the left to supplant him when a conference is
called to confirm his accession to the leadership.

Mr. Healey, a shrewd and experienced political infighter, has publicly supported
Mr. Foot. But in private conversation with politicians and others, he has made
it plain he is ready to take over. He told one friend, ''If I don't make it in
the next six months, I never will, but I must tread lightly.''

The trouble with the reported plan is that the left will almost certainly fight
to keep Mr. Foot in power. They dislike Mr. Healey personally and ideologically,
and, although Mr. Foot has moved to the center since becoming leader, he is
instinctively a left-winger.

Tribune, the weekly newspaper of the left, said in an editorial that getting rid
of the leader would solve nothing. It added: ''The problem runs much deeper. The
sad truth is that he is at the head of a regime which is ideologically and
politically impoverished.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Simon Hughes

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT SEEKING $60 MILLION MORE IN AID TO SALVADOR

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 965 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26


The Reagan Administration, worried about the ''discouraging'' military situation
in El Salvador, is seeking an extra $60 million in arms aid for the Central
American nation this year, according to State and Defense Department officials.

The $60 million, if approved, would be in addition to the $26 million already
authorized by Congress this year and would be used to send more ammunition,
rifles, and helicopter spare parts to El Salvador, the officials said.

According to a key Congressional aide who is usually sympathetic to
Administration policy on El Salvador, the decision to seek additional assistance
led to friction between the State Department and the Pentagon over the issue of
when to request it.

'A Tactical Blunder'

The Congressional aide said the Pentagon was seeking the immediate increase in
aid to El Salvador, while the State Department had sought to delay the request
until later this year.

''To bring this issue up now was seen as a tactical blunder because this is
absolutely not the time to emphasize the military needs,'' said the
Congressional source. ''To ask for more money now is just going to poison the
debate and take everything away from the positive things that the Salvador
Government is actually accomplishing.''

A Defense official said he was ''not aware'' of any friction. A State Department
spokesman said the department did not comment on the workings between the
Defense Department and the State Department.

Weinberger Pushes for Aid

State Department officials indicate, however, that the matter has apparently
been settled, and the White House will seek the additional aid quickly.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger told a House panel this week that ''one
way or another,'' the United States is ''going to get into El Salvador $60
million, I think, as soon as possible.''

Because Administration officials expect considerable Congressional opposition to
the planned increase in military aid to El Salvador, the precise method by which
the help would be introduced remains a source of some discussion, according to
the State Department officials.

Mr. Weinberger indicated earlier in the week, in testimony before the House
Foreign Affairs Committee, that the Administration was considering the use of
money from a special discretionary fund set up in 1961 to be used by the
President ''to provide emergency military assistance to foreign countries.'' The
fund has been used over the years in Vietnam, Cambodia, Thailand, Liberia and in
El Salvador twice in 1981.

The use of the fund does not require Congressional approval, and is therefore
appealing to the Administration, according to the State Department officials.
However, Mr. Weinberger, as well as officials at the State Department and the
Pentagon, indicated late in the week that the use of the fund was only one of
several options.

Other ways of handling the increased aid request would need some form of
Congressional action. For example, ''reprogramming'' military assistance from
other countries to El Salvador would need the approval of appropriations
committees. Another device that could be used, a ''supplemental'' aid measure to
the current budget, would need overall Congressional approval.

Although the Administration had requested $63.3 million in military aid for El
Salvador in 1983, only $26 million was authorized by Congress, which has voiced
considerable opposition to the military assistance program in El Salvador. The
$26 million was authorized under the interim funding measure, or so-called
continuing resolution. The Administration is seeking $86.3 million in military
aid for El Salvador for 1984.

The reports that the Administration was seeking additional aid to El Salvador
this year came amid indications that some State Department, Pentagon, White
House and and Congressional officials have grown increasingly uneasy about the
military situation there.

'The Situation Is Worse'

One State Department official involved in formulating American policy on El
Salvador said: ''In military terms, especially over the past month, there's no
sign of improvement on the Government side and some improvement on the guerrilla
side. The general feeling is that the situation is worse than it was several
months ago.''

State Department officials and Congressional sources said that although arms
shortages were a problem facing the Salvadoran military, what especially
hampered Government troops was poor strategy to counter the aggressive tactics
of the guerrillas.

''What is disappointing is that the Salvadoran military has failed to adjust
their tactics,'' said a State Department official.  ''They're still being
reactive rather than active, still not adapting to a guerrilla war.'' He added,
''The situation in the last six weeks has been discouraging.''

The key Congressional aide said the situation in El Salvador was ''upsetting.''
The aide said: ''The Salvadorans are still not taking the initiative. They do
one good thing, and nine things bad. They have not coalesced their strategy into
a plan of action that allows them to deal decisively with the guerrillas.
Coordination and tactics and leadership are just not there.''

On Thursday, the chairman of the Foreign Operations Appropriations Subcommittee,
Representative Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, who has in the past
opposed military assistance to El Salvador, said in an interview that he now has
''an open mind'' on the issue and may support parts of the Administration
program.

Mr. Long recently returned from a trip to El Salvador, where he found the
political situation ''somewhat better'' than he expected, but the military
situation ''depressing.'' Mr. Long added, ''Why aren't all these soldiers, after
being trained, in a better mood to fight?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Defense Secretary Casper W. Weinberger

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIOXIN 'DETECTIVE' WOULDN'T GIVE UP

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS, Feb. 23


The efforts to track down and clean up the dioxin waste feared to be
contaminating scores of sites in Missouri called for skilled environmental
detective work.

The key detective has been Daniel J. Harris, a 41-year-old field investigator in
the regional office of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. He is
credited with reviving and broadening the inquiry long after other Federal and
state officials dropped it. In one result of his work, the Government offered
Tuesday to buy all the homes in the contaminated town of Times Beach, Mo.

His superiors refused to let him be interviewed. His role in the investigation
has been put together from a variety of sources in and outside the agency, in
Missouri and Washington.

He joined the agency in 1971 after two years in Nepal with the Peace Corps. Also
in 1971, a salvage oil dealer, Russell Bliss, dispersed the poison to roads and
horse arenas. He had picked up truckloads of waste containing dioxin from a
chemical plant at Verona, in southwest Missouri.

Tip From a Worker

Mr. Harris's role began in October 1979 when a chemical worker told the agency
the plant had also dumped drums of waste on a farm seven miles away. The plant
made the disinfectant hexachlorophene, and a toxic form of dioxin was one
byproduct.

Mr. Harris found 90 drums, many leaking, of dioxin-laden waste on the Denney
farm in Verona. After other discoveries he got a picture of the disposal
practices of the North Eastern Pharmaceutical and Chemical Company, which
apparently cut every corner. It closed in 1972.

He soon learned that the plant had dumped tainted waste on other farms and
placed 225,000 gallons of waste water in an abandoned sewage ''digester'' on
property owned by Neosho, Mo., 30 miles from Verona. Some of that tainted waste
water had been given to the Waste and Wastewater Technical School in Neosho,
which spilled much of it as it trained students in handling contaminated water.

Fish Found Contaminated

The discovery of dioxin on one farm led the agency to test fish in the Spring
River. They were contaminated. Dioxin was found in lagoons and trenches on the
plant property, now owned by Syntex Agribusiness, a California-based chemical
maker.

Mr. Harris, who is a sanitary engineer, worried most about trying to account for
all the 120 pounds of dioxin believed produced by the plant. All the Agent
Orange sprayed on Vietnam is believed to have totaled 250 pounds.

Doubts persisted about part of 60 pounds dissolved in 20,000 gallons of tarry
sludge and hauled off by the Bliss Waste Oil Company of Ellisville, Mo., in
1971. The hauler had sprayed some on horse arenas and roads in eastern Missouri,
causing animal deaths and some human illness. Soil from one arena, Bubbling
Springs, in Fenton, was used as residential landfill in nearby Imperial.

From the apparent persistence of the chemical near the plant, Mr.  Harris
suspected that the problem in eastern Missouri had not gone away. He wondered
why nobody had tried to account for all the discarded dioxin. He began to pull
together reports and, in April 1981, urged new tests at the arenas and
homesites. He accurately predicted that hundreds of samples would have to be
tested. He called for additional laboratory resources. In an April 20 report to
Washington he wrote, ''In the absence of a 'how clean is clean number,' we are
almost forced to search as diligently as possible.'

The agency was then reorganizing under President Reagan. Its dioxin team replied
that few resources were available and suggested Syntex look into the problem.
Syntex was not responsible for generating or dispersing the toxin; it only owned
the property.

Mr. Harris persisted. But it was not until May 12, 1982, that the agency
completed plans to sample the arenas and the residences. Tests were made at
Times Beach and proved positive.

Last summer he visited Judy Piatt, former co-owner of one of the contaminated
stables, who kept detailed records from 1971. Her information proved invaluable.
She is bitter. She tried to make it available to officials a decade ago and no
one would listen.

When a list of sites under investigation recently found its way prematurely to
the press, Mr. Harris called her to ask if she had given that information. Mrs.
Piatt says she replied, ''Yes, about 10 years ago.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Winners of Polk Award For Journalism Named

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 37, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 349 words


Long Island University has announced the winners of the 35th annual George Polk
Awards in Journalism.  Two correspondents of The New York Times, Thomas L.
Friedman and David K. Shipler, shared the award for foreign reporting for their
coverage of the Israeli invasion of Lebanon. And Richard Halloran of The Times
won in the national reporting category for articles on Department of Defense
planning for a possible nuclear war.

A special award was given to Rod Nordland of The Philadelphia Inquirer for his
dispatches from Southeast Asia describing the plight of the peoples of East
Timor, Vietnam and Cambodia.

The awards were established by Long Island University in 1949 to honor the
memory of the CBS correspondent who was killed the previous year while covering
the Greek civil war.

These other awards were announced last week by the university: Regional
Reporting - Jim Henderson of The Dallas Times Herald for a series, ''Racism in
the South.'' Metropolitan Reporting - Doug Cumming of The Journal-Bulletin of
Providence, R.I., for a series, ''Ticket to Ride, the Commuter Airlines.'' Local
Reporting - David Johnston and Joel Sappell of The Los Angeles Times for their
articles on police spying in Los Angeles.  Magazine Reporting - Roger Rosenblatt
of Time for ''Children of War,'' a portrait of youngsters in five war-torn
nations.  Financial Reporting - Phillip L. Zweig of The American Banker for his
reports on the collapse of the Penn Square Bank.  Criticism - Stanley Kauffmann
of The New Republic for his film reviews.  News Photography - Robby Castro of
The Associated Press for his photograph of an Israeli soldier and a wounded
Syrian soldier in Lebanon.Network Television Reporting - CBS News for ''CBS
Reports: Guatemala.'' Local Television Reporting - Dick Gelfman, Theresa
Crawford and John Surrick of WBAL-TV, Baltimore, for ''Between the Loans,'' a
series on the victimization of consumer borrowers.  Documentary Television -
Andrew Stern, writer and producer of ''How Much Is Enough: Decision Making in
the Nuclear Age,'' shown on the Public Broadcasting System.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FROM THE BOER WAR BRUCE BERESFORD TURNS TO TEXAS LIFE

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2022 words


''Ihave a feeling it really doesn't matter what other films I make,'' says Bruce
Beresford. ''I'll always be introduced as Bruce Beresford who made 'Breaker
Morant' ''

Despite this prognosis of a lifetime of fruitless competition with himself, the
Australian director who made the highly acclaimed 1979 film about the court
martial of Australian troops during the Boer War has continued to make films.
And the latest of them, ''Tender Mercies,'' starring Robert Duvall, Tess Harper
and Allan Hubbard, is scheduled to open Friday at Loews Tower East.

Based on a script by Horton Foote, ''Tender Mercies'' tells the story of a
divorced country and western singer tossed up on a tide of alcohol at an
isolated gas station-motel in Texas, where he meets the young widow of a soldier
killed in Vietnam and her son. In time, they constitute a new family.

'' 'Tender Mercies,' '' Mr. Beresford says, ''takes three people who had to come
to terms with major changes in their lives. The boy had to accept and come to
terms with his father's death. Throughout the film, he shows more and more
curiosity about his father. The arrival of another man in the house makes him
curious about the one who's gone.

''In the case of the woman, she's got to come to terms with the fact that she's
starting another life with another man. And the thing I tried to put into it,
though she's happy, she's always wondering what it would have been like if the
other one had not died, if he had come back from the war.

''And he,'' says Mr. Beresford of Mac Sledge, the character played by Mr.
Duvall, ''has got to come to terms with the fact that his career is gone and his
life has got to be lived on a totally different basis. And he has to enter into
two new relationships.''

Though ''Tender Mercies'' will be received by many Americans as Mr. Beresford's
first effort since ''Breaker Morant,'' the fact is that it is his third.

''I already had a contract in Australia to make two more films,'' the
42-year-old Mr. Beresford says as he accounts for his career since ''Breaker
Morant.''

The first of the films, ''The Club,'' dealt with a soccer club and was exhibited
in a number of theaters on the West Coast in 1980. The second, ''Puberty
Blues,'' based on a novel of school life by a 15-year-old girl, has never been
seen in the United States, though Mr. Beresford describes it as a financial
success - ''much more so than 'Breaker Morant,' '' he notes. ''It was a lot like
a cleaned up 'Porky's,' he says, adding, ''Not so cleaned up, but a bit more
tasteful.''

In the meantime, ''Breaker Morant'' was giving rise to a steady flow of scripts
from the United States. ''I'd say at least 150 over a period of a couple of
years,'' Mr. Beresford says, ''quite a lot of them very good.''

''I was attracted to the idea of working outside Australia. After all, I'd done
10 feature films in Australia. I was attracted to the idea of working on a
bigger budget and with an American distribution setup. I never had a budget in
Australia of a million dollars,'' he says, and American distribution, he notes,
is ''efficient and worldwide. As a filmmaker you want your films to be shown.''

One day in August 1980, he recalls, the script of ''Tender Mercies,'' dispatched
by the film's American producers, Philip and Mary-Ann Hobel, arrived at the home
Mr. Beresford shares with his wife and three children in Sydney. ''Quite often
scripts used to lie around for weeks before I'd get to them,'' he says. But this
one he opened immediately.

''Well,'' Mr. Beresford says, ''I read it and just went straight to the phone
and rang up and said, 'If you really wan't me to do it, I'll come and do it.''

''We turned to Bruce,'' says Mr. Hobel, who has been associated with his wife
for many years in making documentary films, ''because we loved 'Breaker Morant.'
Now a lot of people liked 'Breaker Morant.' What we saw in 'Breaker Morant' is
what we like as filmmakers ourselves - an attention to the environment, a
straightforward presentation; it's almost a documentary approach.''

For Mr. Beresford, ''Tender Mercies'' held a number of appeals.  ''I'd never
read a script that showed an aspect of American life which was anything like
that,'' he says. ''Most of the films I've seen which show rural life in America
showed people as being generally very brutal - almost any of the Deep South
movies.

''Here was a script that told a story about a group of people whose
preoccupations were very ordinary, who went to church on Sunday, who didn't
murder each other. And yet I thought it made an absolutely fascinating drama.''

But he wasn't quite certain that the script reflected reality. So he told the
Hobels, who are making their feature film debut with ''Tender Mercies,'' 'I want
to come over and see if this is all true, because if it's not really a true
picture of what it's all like, it wouldn't be right to make it.''

The upshot was a trip to Texas with Mr. Foote, the screenwriter who had won an
Academy Award in 1963 for ''To Kill a Mockingbird,'' in which Mr. Duvall had
appeared. ''He took me around those little Texas towns,'' Mr. Beresford says,
''and I saw straightway the thing was absolutely dead accurate.''

Filming on ''Tender Mercies,'' whose cost Mr. Hobel puts at $5 million, began in
Waxahachie, Tex., on Nov. 2, 1981 and ended Dec.  23, 1981. ''I start planning
from the moment I get the script,'' says Mr. Beresford. Initially the process is
subconscious, and in the case of ''Tender Mercies,'' which seems to possess a
texture constructed not only of the words of the script and the movements of the
actors but of silence, the play of light, and the rhythms of the scenes, Mr.
Beresford disclaims any grand conception. ''It was nothing other than what you
read in the script,'' he says. ''What I do with each film that I make, I
storyboard the entire film before I begin - I do a little drawing of every shot
in the entire movie.

''I have to find my locations first. I can't go somewhere and start shooting. It
doesn't work. I find the locations, work with the production designers and get
plans of all the rooms so I know where all the windows and doors are. Then I
work out every camera angle for the entire film.''

When filming begins, Mr. Beresford brings his drawings on the set.  ''I can show
the cameraman what I want. It gives me more time to work with the actors.''
Nevertheless, he maintains, ''What makes a film work is not the dialogue and the
acting. ''You can have a most magnificently acted film and it doesn't work
because the acting can be photographed from the wrong angle. What a lot of
people do is they just photograph it, they don't direct it.

''I'm not just talking about myself. When you get a really great director,
someone like John Ford, take him at his very best, say in a film like 'My
Darling Clementine,' what's so masterly is the lens that he uses, the groupings
of the people, how he stands them in the frame. That's crucial.

''One of the crucial things in a film for any director is choreographing the
action. A lot of directors say to the actors, 'Well, what are you going to do?'
''

Mr. Beresford comes by his filmmaking methods by a route leading back to his
boyhood in a rural town outside his native Sydney. ''I was crazy about films,''
he says. ''Always.''

He remembers seeing every movie that played the local theater - one during the
week and two on Saturdays. ''I was absolutely determined to make movies,'' he
says.

As for his parents - the former Lona Warr, a housewife, and his father, Leslie
Beresford, a commercial traveler who first sold handpumped washing machines to
farmers in the Australian bush country and later became a salesman of wine - ''I
think they thought it was a passing phase.''

But at 13, he persuaded his father to buy him a movie camera and began making
shorts. He would gladly have studied filmmaking at the University of Sydney when
he entered in 1959, but no such courses existed, nor, he adds, did an Australian
film industry. Neverthless, there was a film society, and Mr. Beresford joined
it and continued to make films while studying philosophy.

''The day I graduated (B.A., 1962) I caught the boat to England,'' he says.
Lacking union membership, he found no film work. Instead, he did odd jobs, such
as laying drains, until he answered an advertisement for a film editor to work
in Nigeria. ''I didn't even know where Nigeria was. But I was desperate to get
some work. I was amazed when I finally got a letter with a ticket enclosed
telling me to fly to Nigeria and the job was mine.''

As an editor in a government film unit in Enugu in eastern Nigeria, Mr.
Beresford rapidly succumbed to boredom, and as a remedy joined a black theater
company, where he directed and acted in plays. ''I played the missionary,'' he
said. ''It was good. I learned a lot about acting and I made a lot of friends.''

When civil war threatened, Mr. Beresford returned to London and, answering
another advertisement for someone to make low budget experimental films, found
himself working for the British Film Institute from 1966-1971. In the job, he
produced, he directed, he edited, he photographed. ''It really taught me how to
make films cheaply,'' he says. ''I produced an enormous number of films, all
shorts, about 25 to 30 a year, mostly dramatic films.''

His return to Australia was prompted by news that the government was
establishing a board to subsidize movies. Mr. Beresford - his wife, Rhoisin
Harrison, an Irish-born graphics designer, eight months pregnant - hurried back:
''I turned up with a script and said give me the money and I'll make it.''

The film, made for $250,000, was, he says, ''The Adventures of Barry McKenzie,''
a comedy about a naive Australian abroad. Though it was a big success in
Australia and England, he says, it was a mistake for someone who had serious
ambitions.

''It was such a broad comedy that the critics tore it apart,'' Mr.  Beresford
says. ''There was me trying to get myself established as a very artistic
filmmaker, and I virtually wrecked my chances with my very first film.''

Mr. Beresford says he handled the problem very badly. ''Because I then went
ahead and made a sequel.'' Actually, the film he was eager to make was ''The
Getting of Wisdom,'' based on a novel he had read at 14 and stored away as a
future film - about a teen-age girl from the outback in a snobbish Victorian
school for young ladies. ''The sequel only further convinced everybody I was a
kind of lunkhead,'' he said. But fortunately, a producer offered him the script
of ''Don's Party,'' about an election night party, and he did it. It was a
critical and commercial success that won Mr. Beresford the best director award
in Australia in 1976 and enabled him to make the much-praised ''Getting of
Wisdom'' in 1977.

As for Breaker Morant, Mr. Beresford stumbled on a reference to him in a
newspaper during a visit to his parents in the town of Richmond in New South
Wales, where Morant had written for the local newspaper. Mr. Beresford realized
that his story would make a movie, but it seemed to him that a movie with the
Boer War as a background would be prohibitively expensive. But then he came
across a play about the court martial, which narrowed the action, and he used
the play as the basis for a script. The movie won 11 Australian film awards,
played at Cannes and established the reputation Mr. Beresford competes with.

With ''Tender Mercies'' behind him, he is in Israel, scouting locations for his
next movie, about King David, a $16 million project for Paramount that is
scheduled to keep him occupied until September. ''Once again'' he says, ''it's
got an absolutely wonderful script. I think we've gotten away from all of those
old cliches of Hollywood biblical movies.''

And when it's finished, Mr. Beresford will go back to Australia to make another
movie.  Actually, competing with the Bruce-Beresford-who-made-''Breaker Morant''
doesn't really daunt him at all. ''I'd like to actually finally die directing a
film,'' he says. ''Every time I read a film director died on the set I think:
'Lucky bloke.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rainer Werner Fassbinder photo of Robert Duvall
photo of Bruce Beresford

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING AIDE OFF TO SOVIET TO RENEW TALKS

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Feb. 27


Qian Qichen, a Deputy Foreign Minister, left today for the Soviet Union to
resume talks aimed at establishing more normal relations between Moscow and
Peking.

Mr. Qian, who also traveled with Huang Hua, who was then Foreign Minister, to
the funeral of Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, last November, has been
the special envoy heading the Chinese side in the consultations. He was seen off
at the Peking airport today by the Soviet Ambassador, Ilya S. Shcherbakov, and
by other Chinese Foreign Ministry officials.

In the second round of the talks, which Peking refers to as consultations, the
Chinese side is expected to press the Russians to end their support for the
Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia as a first step in improving Peking's ties
with Moscow.

Soviet support for the Vietnamese in Cambodia is one of three obstacles that
Peking asserts is obstructing the normalization of relations between the two
countries. The other two obstacles are the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan
and what Peking says is a Soviet military buildup along China's frontier with
the Soviet Union and Mongolia.

Cambodia Conflict Continuing

Privately, some Chinese officials have said that the relaxation of tensions with
the Soviet Union should begin in Cambodia, where Vietnamese forces have been
trying to crush remnants of the former Pol Pot regime recognized by Peking.

On Saturday, People's Daily, the Communist Party newspaper, criticized as ''a
fraud'' Hanoi's latest offer to withdraw some of its ''volunteers'' from
Cambodia and again blamed the Soviet Union for Vietnam's presence there.

''The so-called volunteers are none other than the barbarian aggressors sent by
the Vietnamese authorities four years ago with Soviet support to cross the
Vietnamese-Cambodian border, capture Phnom Penh and then occupy the whole of
Cambodia,'' the newspaper article said.

China has indicated that it would accept a neutral and nonaligned Cambodia under
a coalition headed by the deposed Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who spends part of
his exile living in Peking as a guest of the Chinese Government.

The Soviet Union gave a hint last month that it preferred to deal with the
disputes over the Chinese-Soviet border at the new round of consultations, which
are expected to begin in Moscow this week.

A commentary in the Soviet foreign affairs weekly New Times in January accused
China of obstructing better relations by pressing claims to parts of Soviet
territory and using this pretext to generate Chinese hostility toward the
Russians. The charge, which evidently surprised Chinese officials, was seen as a
move to divert Peking's attention from its more difficult demands for an end to
Soviet involvement in Afghanistan and Cambodia.

Soviet Accused of Distortion

China replied through its magazine World Affairs that it was making ''no
territorial claims whatsoever'' on the Soviet Union. It also accused the Kremlin
of distorting the Chinese position in the border dispute.

Chinese officials reported privately after the first round of talks, which went
on for 17 days last October, that no progress had been made in moving toward
more normal relations.

Last November, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang reiterated Peking's position that any
improvement in relations depended on whether Moscow moved to eliminate its three
''threats'' to China's security.

While Chinese officials seem pessimistic that the new round of talks will be any
more fruitful than the first, Peking has agreed to the consultations with Moscow
as part of its effort to stake out a more independent foreign policy that will
deal equally with both the United States and the Soviet Union.

----

Qian Arrives in Moscow

MOSCOW, Feb. 27 (Reuters) - Qian Qichen, the Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister,
arrived in Moscow today for a second round of talks aimed at improving
Chinese-Soviet relations, the official press agency Tass reported.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Brooklyn's Boys of TV

BYLINE: Dave Anderson

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words


THE title was appropriated by the author Roger Kahn from the phrase of a poet.
Dylan Thomas once wrote, ''I see the boys of summer in their ruin...'' But the
title of Roger Kahn's book continues to define a certain team in a certain time
- the Brooklyn Dodgers of three decades ago. At its spring training base in Vero
Beach, Fla., now, the Dodger organization talks of the coming baseball season
being the 25th anniversary of the club's arrival in Los Angeles. But to anyone
who remembers those Dodgers, the club's emphasis is backwards. It's the 25th
anniversary of the Dodgers abandoning Brooklyn.

In baseball or any sport, most famous teams gradually separate, if not
disintegrate. But the phrase has kept the Boys of Summer tied together.

They don't see one another that often. But they are always thought of as a
group. Mention one and you mention the others. Baseball oldtimers talk about the
1927 Yankees as having had a similar group identity, but only a few are still
alive.

Now those Boys of Summer have been spliced together for a charming and
compelling two-hour television special produced and written by Marty Bell.

As they talk of their time, they are seen occasionally in old black-and-white
film as they were then, but mostly as they are now.  Pee Wee Reese inspecting
bats in the Louisville Slugger factory. Duke Snider broadcasting a Montreal
Expos game. Roy Campanella being lifted out of his wheelchair into the front
seat of an automobile.  Carl Furillo acknowledging he has leukemia. Carl Erskine
swimming with his retarded son. Preacher Roe showing how he doctored his
spitball. Joe Black at his desk as a Greyhound bus executive. Clem Labine
putting an arm around his son who lost a leg in Vietnam.

In the decade since Roger Kahn revisited the Boys of Summer for the book, Jackie
Robinson has died. So has Gil Hodges, so has Billy Cox.  Even so, Jackie
Robinson remains the most dominating personality on the TV show, just as he was
on the team. More than anyone else, Jackie Robinson gave those Dodgers their
identity as the ''Jackie Robinson Dodgers,'' the first integrated major league
baseball team.  But in one of Roger Kahn's lines that is repeated on the show by
the host, Sid Caesar, nobody went to Ebbets Field for sociology.

''I don't know what made it different,'' Pee Wee Reese says on the show of
having played in Brooklyn then, ''but it was.'' One element that made it
different was the rivalry with the New York Giants, who later went to San
Francisco for the 1958 season as passengers in Walter O'Malley's covered wagon.
Two teams in the same league in the same city a subway ride apart who played 22
games against each other every season. That's a rivalry.

''We hated the Giants,'' recalls Carl Furillo, ''we just hated the uniform.''
After the 1956 season, the Dodgers dared to trade Jackie Robinson to the Giants
for Dick Littlefield, a left-handed pitcher, and $30,000, a fairly substantial
sum then. But rather than report, Jackie Robinson retired from baseball; the
deal was canceled.

''Of all people, the Giants,'' remembers Pee Wee Reese with a sneer. ''I'd have
been disappointed if he'd gone. Glad he didn't go.''

Another element that made it different was that, until 1955, those Dodgers lost
four World Series to another neighbor, the Yankees.  ''Billy Martin, now he was
a mediocre hitter,'' Carl Furillo says of the Yankee second baseman who batted
.500 with a record 12 hits in the 1953 World Series. ''Pretty good second
baseman, but a mediocre hitter. Yet when he played us in Ebbets Field, I think
he hit two doubles or two triples into right-center field.''

In old film, Carl Furillo is seen fielding balls at Ebbets Field off the
scoreboard and the angled right-field wall.  ''They used to give a suit to
anybody who'd hit that sign,'' Pee Wee Reese says, referring to the Abe Stark
clothing sign at the base of the scoreboard. ''But Furillo played right in front
of it. Nobody ever hit it.''

Some of the Boys chide Duke Snider, now a Hall of Famer, for not having been an
even better player.  ''I once asked him, 'Why don't you charge those ground
balls?  These guys don't even hesitate at second base,' '' Pee Wee Reese says.
''He said, 'I was an infielder when I was younger and I hated those ground balls
and I still hate 'em.' ''

''He could've been greater,'' Clem Labine says.  ''I think Clem's right,'' Duke
Snider says.  Preacher Roe, now doing public relations for a West Plains, Mo.,
bank after years of owning a food market there, stands in his backyard with a
baseball as if he suddenly needed to throw his spitball for a strike.

''When you touch your hat,'' he says, ''that's when you could get it and put it
on your hand.''

But like the book, much of the show is concerned with what makes the men, for
better or for worse.  Of Clem Labine's search for the love of his son. Jay
Labine's resentment of living in his father's shadow as a youngster almost
slashes the TV screen when he says, ''I didn't pitch for the damn Dodgers, I'm
me.'' As he talks about it, Clem Labine weeps.

Of Joe Black, married five times, being with his 12-year-old daughter as she
practices long jumps in the Arizona heat.  ''Men see their children 3 years
old,'' he says. ''The next time they look they say, 'I didn't know you were 14.'
'' Of Carl Erskine, now the president of an Indiana bank, trying without success
to teach his retarded son, Jimmy, to say, ''No, thank you'' to others instead of
grunting. One day Jimmy did something that merited a spanking.

''I took him upstairs,'' Carl Erskine says, ''He looked at me. He said, 'No,
thank you.' '' Of Roy Campanella, smiling in his wheelchair as he remembered the
auto accident on a slippery street near his Glen Cove, L.I., home that ended his
Hall of Fame career before he could resume it in Los Angeles.

''I wanted to play in the Coliseum,'' he says, referring to where the team
played before Dodger Stadium was completed. ''I never saw a left-field fence
like that.''

Roy Campanella works in community relations for the Dodgers in Los Angeles now.
But even 25 years later the Boys of Summer have never really left Brooklyn, and
they never will.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jackie Robinson

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 1, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA'S NEWER IMMIGRANTS CHOOSING SUBURBS OVER CITIES

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1447 words


At the Original Coney Island in downtown St. Paul, Frances Arvanitas, a native
of Greece, is in her 54th year of serving hot dogs to a neighborhood that once
teemed with European ethnic families but is now home to bands of native, but
homeless, poor.

On the plains of northern Colorado, Anthony T. Tu, a biochemistry professor at
Colorado State University in Fort Collins, is one of a growing number of
Chinese-born scientists who have risen to prominence in this country in recent
years.

The span between Mrs. Arvanitas and Professor Tu illustrates not only the
difference in origins of immigrants of the early 20th century and of recent
years but also a remarkable change in where and how America's foreign-born now
live and work.

Except for large coastal cities, such as New York, San Francisco and Miami, most
newer immigrants no longer congregate in large central American cities. In the
country's vast interior, where most of the population lives, they more often
live in suburbs or small communities. A sizable proportion are professionals who
hold good jobs and have melted easily into suburban living with the comfortable
white middle class.

Newly analyzed figures from the 1980 census, providing new insight on the
dramatic rise in immigration shown by earlier data, indicate that there are now
almost as many foreigners living in the suburbs as in the central cities, a
change from previous decades. And while the big coastal cities still contain the
highest percentages of foreigners, their suburbs are not far behind.

America's suburbs, which provide far more jobs and higher incomes over all than
the central cities, are, in fact, more accessible to immigrants than they are to
most native blacks and many Hispanic people born in this country.

Census figures, compiled from the long form that one in every five residents was
asked to fill out, show that, in 1980, 6,609,830 immigrants were living in
central cities of metropolitan areas, while 6,367,836 were in the suburbs.

The 1980 census disclosed previously that immigration rose sharply in the
1970's, ending a prolonged decline. In 1920, 13.2 percent of the population of
106 million was born in another nation. That percentage dropped every decade
until it reached 4.7 percent of the country's 203 million people in 1970. But
the 1980 count showed that almost 14 million people, or 6.2 percent of the
population of 226 million, were born in another country.

Authorities on immigration and ethnic groups say the popular notion that the new
immigrants are largely illegal Mexican aliens and other poor Latins and Asians
is a myth. Illegal entry of poor foreigners has increased greatly in recent
years, and many poor foreigners avoided census takers in 1980.

Official estimates show a larger number of legal immigrants, who have come
increasingly from southern Europe, Asia and Latin America.  According to Charles
B. Keely of the Center for Policy Studies at the New York-based Population
Council, laws and regulations enacted in the last two decades, ''in substance
and especially in operation, favor the educated and wealthy who can maneuver
themselves or hire guides to take them through the bureaucratic jungle and into
the United States.''

One of the 'New Immigrants'

Mrs. Arvanitas, a small woman of considerable age, is one of the many millions
of immigrants who came to this country early in the century from eastern and
southern Europe, many of them Catholics and Jews. Their presence aroused fears
and hostilities among the old immigrants from northern Europe and led to the
imposition of immigration quotas and literacy tests.

Mrs. Arvanitas said her late husband, Nick, also a Greek immigrant, opened the
Original Coney Island on St. Peter's Street in 1923, and it remains much the
same today. At lunch, the scene resembles an Edward Hopper painting, a 1929
turret-topped refrigerator behind the counter and rough-hewn men with sad,
eroded faces sitting on oilcloth-covered stools, staring out the window.

The window looks out on the ruins of an attempt to build an Old World
civilization in an American city - acres of empty space where there were stores
and tenements, a boarded-up hospital, a soup kitchen for the homeless and a few
new nondescript commercial buildings of the kind that dot freeways farther
southwest, in Dallas. All that remains of what was intended is the graceful,
two-spired Assumption Catholic Church whose parishioners live in outlying areas
and drive in to worship.

In a number of industrial cities that once were home to millions of blue-collar
immigrants, such as Cleveland, Detroit and Baltimore, the percentage of
foreigners has declined steadily in recent years, while their suburbs now
contain more foreigners, in both numbers and percentages.

In Cleveland, for example, many ethnic neighborhoods of second-and
third-generation Europeans have moved almost en masse to the suburbs, and the
new immigrants tend to settle there rather than in the central city. In 1980,
there were 84,960 people of foreign birth in the Cleveland suburbs, as against
33,347 in the city.

Most coastal cities offer a different picture. In 1980, 53.7 percent of Miami's
residents were foreign-born, as against 30.6 percent in its suburbs. Despite the
recent influx of poor Latins, Miami's metropolitan area has been enriched by the
arrival of middleclass Cubans, starting in the late 1950's, and others with
entrepreneurial and professional skills.

Oldest 'Melting Pot'

In New York, the city with the longest history as a ''melting pot,'' 23.6
percent of its population in 1980, or 1,670,269 people, was foreign-born, as
against 13.5 percent in the city's suburbs. And the increasing presence of
foreigners with the means and ability to work their way through the
''bureaucratic jungle'' of Federal immigration regulations is helping revive a
number of the city's old neighborhoods and contribute considerable skills to its
work force.

In San Francisco, 28.3 percent of the population was foreign-born, as against
12.3 percent in the city's suburbs. In Los Angeles, the comparative figures are
27.1 percent and 19.5 percent. In fact, 15 percent of California's population of
27 million was of foreign birth, and it is there that most of the increased
numbers of Asians are pouring into the United States.

From 1970 to 1980 the number of immigrants from six countries - China, the
Philippines, Japan, India, South Korea and Vietnam - almost doubled. From
California they have found their way into thousands of communities in the
fast-growing states of the southern and mountain West, many of them entering
education, research, medicine and business.

Professor Tu, an expert on snake venom who was educated at National Taiwan
University, Notre Dame, Stanford and Yale, is a leading example. In recent
years, he and about 20 other Chinese scholars found jobs on the faculty of
Colorado State. In an area of 150,000 people, foreigners remain a small
minority, but their numbers more than doubled in the past decade.

Asians Outnumber Blacks

In 1980, Asians outnumbered blacks 1,364 to 627, and the majority are either in
the professions or are owners of businesses ranging from restaurants to karate
schools.

Professor Tu, a naturalized citizen, writes books, lectures at leading
universities and travels around the world on various assignments for the Federal
Government and private foundations. One of his daughters was a White House
intern. A picture of her with President Carter hangs on his office wall along
with reminders of Professor Tu's Chinese ancestry. He likes to compare his own
experience with that of the coolies brought here as forced labor to build the
railroads in the 19th century.

He said both the college and the community were open to Asians, except for
administrative jobs on the faculty. He attributed this barrier both to language
barriers and to lingering prejudice among the faculty.

The experience of recently arrived Asians in conservative American communities
such as Fort Collins bears out a contention of Stephan Thernstrom, professor of
history at Harvard University. He says they are being assimilated in the first
generation, rather than in the second and third generations, as was the case
with immigrants early in this century.

''The ethnic revival of our time is perhaps best seen as the last gasp of groups
nearing extinction,'' Professor Thernstrom said in a paper prepared for the
American Assembly of Columbia University, ''The prophets of the ethnic revival
feel secure enough in their Americanism to assert they want their differences
noticed and tolerated as well.''

----

Next: Mobility in America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Third of four articles on how population changes are affecting regions
around the country.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: chart on changes in foreign-born population (page A21)
photo of Dr. Anthony Tu (page A21)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 1, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 756 words


Nixon in Georgetown

As President, Richard M. Nixon never cared much for Georgetown, a trendy section
of the capital that, in Mr. Nixon's view, symbolized the politics and social
style of the Kennedys. It is not known whether Mr. Nixon has changed his view,
but he did slip into the heart of the area on Sunday to be guest of honor at a
private stag dinner at the home of Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of
Oregon.

Among the guests were Howard H. Baker Jr., the Senate majority leader; James
Evans, chief executive officer of Union Pacific; John McMillian, chief executive
officer of the Northwest Energy Company; Tom Cousins, an Atlanta real estate
developer, and former Democratic Senator J. William Fulbright. News of the
affair is mystifying to some Washingtonians who had never thought of Senator
Hatfield as being particularly close to Mr. Nixon. In fact, he and Mr.
Fulbright, who was chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, were
leading critics of the Nixon Administration's prosecution of the war in Vietnam.

Richard S. Rolf, a spokesman for the Senator, said that Mr.  Hatfield, despite
his political differences with Mr. Nixon, ''values very highly the President's
experience in foreign affairs and what he has to say about issues.''

Reagan Movie Week

W ith President Reagan in California this week, playing host to Queen Elizabeth
II and working around his ranch, Washington television viewers will be treated
to some scenes from his celluloid past that promise sweet diversion from the
predictable news coverage of the President riding his horse, the President
chopping wood and the President waving at television cameramen.

WDCA, a local station, is devoting its noon program slot this week to several of
Mr. Reagan's movies, some of them forgettable: ''John Loves Mary,'' ''Brother
Rat,'' ''The Hasty Heart,'' ''One for the Book'' and ''She's Working Her Way
Through College.''

To promote its Reagan Movie Week, the station has been running tantalizing film
clips alternating between Mr. Reagan the President and Mr. Reagan the actor.
There is, for example, Mr. Reagan boozing it up, and shouting ''Holy mackerel''
just before he passes out.

For the record, none of these scenes were shot in or around the White House.

Follow-Up Report

A s reported in this space last week, Paul N. Thayer, in his first appearance
before a Congressional committee as Deputy Secretary of Defense, predicted that
his candor might not sit well with some Administration officials. He was right.

Last Wednesday, in response to a question asking for his personal opinion of the
Reagan tax cut plan, Mr. Thayer said he thought it would be wise to delay the 10
percent cut scheduled to take effect July 1.

At 8 the next morning, Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan was on the telephone
to Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, angrily protesting what he saw as Mr.
Thayer's effort to publicly undermine the Administration's tax policy.

Mr. Regan is reported to have told Mr. Weinberger: ''Listen, I have personal
opinions about the military budget, but I don't express them in public.''

Administration insiders know that Mr. Regan privately believes that military
spending could be cut considerably more than the President and Mr. Weinberger
are proposing.

A Suggestion Rebuffed

T he suggestion by a senior Justice Department official that telephone
conversations between top business executives be banned unless they are tape
recorded has had two results thus far: The department immediately disowned the
suggestion and local gossips began grinding out new telephone company jingles.
One example: ''Reach out and handcuff someone.''

William F. Baxter, the department's antitrust chief, has long been suspicious of
telephone calls between top business executives, but even his associates were
startled to hear him publicly suggest that chief executive officers should be
required to tape their telephone conversations. Mr. Baxter made the remark the
day the department filed price-fixing charges against American Airlines and its
president on the basis of a taped telephone conversation. Business executives
called Mr. Baxter's suggestion ''unconstitutional'' and ''ridiculous.''

The Justice Department acted swiftly to disavow Mr. Baxter's proposal, issuing a
statement saying: ''Mr. Baxter's views are most definitely not shared by the
Attorney General or any other policylevel officials of the Department of
Justice. His views are not those of the Justice Department or the
Administration.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 1, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
SALVADOR HEATS UP

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 837 words


That trial balloon flown from Air Force One, as it took President Reagan to
California to meet Queen Elizabeth, was plainly intended to set off debate on
the question whether more American advisers should be sent to El Salvador, with
an expanded role on behalf of the Government in its civil war with insurgents.

Many of us with long memories think that that way lies Vietnam; others will say
that this is a conditioned reflex, rather than independent thought about a
different situation. In any case, as long as Mr. Reagan is even considering such
a step, public and Congressional debate is entirely necessary.

Even as it seems deliberately to have sought such a debate, however, the
Administration also seems to be contemplating an end run around Congressional
opposition to its plan to increase military assistance funds for El Salvador.
Last week, for example, the Secretary of Defense, Caspar Weinberger, told a
House committee that ''one way or another'' the Administration is ''going to get
into El Salvador $60 million, I think, as soon as possible.''

That's the amount of military assistance - for ammunition, rifles and helicopter
spare parts - Mr. Reagan wants to send to El Salvador, on top of the $26 million
Congress has authorized for fiscal 1983. In addition, he's requesting $86.3
million in military assistance for fiscal 1984.

Rather than face a rough debate on El Salvador, and possibly losing a
supplemental appropriation vote in the House, the Administration is reported to
be considering two other options:

* Taking the $60 million from a special Presidential fund set up in 1961 ''to
provide emergency military assistance to foreign countries.'' This would not
require Congressional approval, though it would surely produce hot Congressional
debate.

* ''Reprogramming'' the $60 million from funds already approved for military
assistance to countries other than El Salvador. This would require the approval
only of the Appropriations Committees, rather than of the full House and Senate,
though opponents could try to work up both houses to a Congressional ''veto.''

Either procedure would be legal; either would also be unwise. If the Vietnam
experience has one lesson to teach more powerfully than any other, surely it is
that intervention in such risky and ambiguous foreign situations ought not to be
undertaken without the support and understanding of Congress and the public to
which it is sensitive. Finding means to circumvent Congressional opposition, in
such cases, may be shrewd short-term politics; in the long run it may also be
self-defeating.

In 1964, for example, in the middle of a Presidential campaign in which he was
supposedly the ''peace candidate,'' President Johnson sent Congress the
so-called ''Tonkin Gulf Resolution.'' North Vietnamese patrol boats had attacked
American destroyers in the Gulf of Tonkin and Johnson had replied with an air
strike. The resolution, which Congress had little political choice but to pass
in such circumstances, authorized him ''to take all necessary measures to repel
any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further
aggression.''

In the years to come, Johnson cited this resolution (''the functional
equivalent'' of declaring war, according to Under Secretary of State Katzenbach)
as Congressional authority for the third-largest war in American history - the
bombing of North Vietnam, 500,000 ground troops in South Vietnam, vast air and
sea armadas.  Members of Congress who had voted for the resolution with no idea
of approving such a war came to feel manipulated and deceived. Johnson's tactics
in getting the resolution passed without saying how it would be used thus became
a major source of Congressional suspicion and hostility toward his conduct of
the war.

President Reagan is not considering anything on that scale.  Nevertheless, a
refusal to face up to Congressional opposition and an open debate on the
Salvadoran issue now could backfire later.  Representative Michael Barnes of
Maryland, the chairman of the House Subcommittee on Latin America, said after a
Congressional leaders' meeting with Mr. Reagan that many members of the House
questioned ''what we're already spending'' in Salvador, and would raise more
questions before they voted for a ''big increase.'' They have a right to
answers, and are likely to be angered by any circumvention of that right.

Even tougher questions, of course, should be asked about the consideration being
given to more advisers with an expanded role - which sounds suspiciously like
combat - in the Salvadoran civil war.  If there is ''a Soviet threat throughout
the region'' -which the Administration has vainly tried to demonstrate for two
years -are advisers to the ineffectual and incipiently right-wing Salvadoran
Government the best way to respond?

If a military response to the claimed threat must be made, can a few additional
advisers really make it? Wouldn't they be the first of many more? If that's a
Vietnam reflex, so be it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 2, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

2 U.S. AIDES SAY SALVADOR FACES AN ARMS 'CRISIS'

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


Administration officials told Congress today that El Salvador faced a ''crisis''
and could run out of military supplies in 30 days unless the United States
provided an additional $60 million in military aid.

At the same time the two officials -Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs and Nestor D. Sanchez, Deputy Assistant Defense
Secretary for Inter-American Affairs - insisted that ''major national
interests'' of the United States were at stake in El Salvador. Should the
Salvadoran Government be defeated by the guerrillas, the officials said, the
result would threaten other nations in Central America as well as Mexico and the
Panama Canal.

''We understand the concern of those who remember the specter of Vietnam that
the war in El Salvador is being 'Americanized,' '' said Mr. Sanchez, who
appeared before the House Foreign Affairs Committee's panel of Western
Hemisphere Affairs. ''But Vietnam was 10,000 miles away. El Salvador is a
contiguous region right at our doorstep. San Salvador is closer to Washington,
D.C. than is San Francisco.''

Increase in Fighting Reported

According to reports from El Salvador, the war in the countryside has
intensified in the past four to five weeks. Guerrillas, in a tactical and
psychological triumph, seized the southeastern city of Berlin, but were later
driven out by a large force of Government troops. Both sides suffered moderate
casualties. Two weeks ago sharp fighting erupted in the strategic northeastern
town of Suchitoto.

At the same time, President Reagan sent the chief United States delegate to the
United Nations, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, to El Salvador and other nations in the
region. Administration officials said Mrs.  Kirkpatrick returned with a gloomy
report on El Salvador that emphasized the nation's precarious military
situation. It was Mrs.  Kirkpatrick's report that apparently led to the
Administration's concern about the need for emergency arms aid.

In their appearances the two officials - as well as State and Defense Department
spokesmen earlier in the day seemed to back away from comments made Monday by a
senior White House official that the Reagan Administration was seriously
considering increasing the number of United States military advisers in El
Salvador beyond the selfimposed limit of 55.

The comments, aboard Air Force One as President Reagan flew to California,
stirred concern in Congress.  Today, on Capitol Hill and elsewhere,
Administration aides sought to blunt the anxiety, and officials made it clear
that no major increase in United States military personnel was under
consideration.

Mr. Enders, under questioning from the House panel, said the average number of
advisers in El Salvador last year at any time was 37, and the United States
would now try to use the ceiling of 55 ''more effectively.''

''There's no current intention to go beyond 55, but we will look at it after we
fully utilize existing ceilings,'' said Mr. Enders, who is the highest-ranking
official at the State Department dealing specifically with Central America.

No Combat Role for Americans

Mr. Enders said of the American advisers: ''There is no change contemplated in
the nature of their activities. We do not have military advisers now, people who
go out in combat, and we are not going to have military advisers in the future.
We have trainers.''

Mr. Sanchez said that the United States was now at a ''critical juncture,'' and
that the additional $60 million in military aid was urgently needed in addition
to the $26 million already authorized by Congress this year.

''There is a crisis,'' said Mr. Sanchez. ''There has been a high level of
fighting over the last two or three months. The real crisis is that we have run
out of money in order to supply the Salvadoran military for the present and in
the future.''

''Depending on the amount of ammunition expended,'' Mr. Sanchez said, ''they
could be down to less than 30 days.'' Both officials noted that although the
Administration had initially requested $63.3 million in military aid for El
Salvador in 1983, only $26 million had been authorized by Congress under an
interim funding measure called a continuing resolution. This figure, Mr. Enders
said, was ''not adequate'' and ''largely exhausted.''

'Haunting Vietnam Analogy'

In the last month, Mr. Enders said, ''a lot of guerrilla initiatives have been
taken.'' During the hearing, Mr. Enders and Mr. Sanchez fended off some acid
questioning by Representative Gerry E. Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts, who
said at one point that there was a ''haunting Vietnam analogy'' to the
Administration's comments about El Salvador.

Asked by Mr. Studds if the ''domino theory'' was the rationale for El Salvador
policy, Mr. Sanchez replied that the region ''is our strategic front yard.'' He
said the rebels' plan was ''not only to establish a Communist government in El
Salvador and consolidate their position in Nicaragua, but also the rest of
Central America, Guatemala, Honduras.''

''Yes, if you want to call it a domino, their plans certainly indicate that's
what they want to do,'' said Mr. Sanchez.  Mr. Enders said: ''The Vietnam
analogy is really false. We are not escalating little by little. Nobody has
suggested sending in military advisers,'' again making a distinction between
''trainers'' and combat troops.

Mr. Enders emphasized that ''major national interests of the U.S.  are at stake
if we allow a government that is reforming itself into a democracy to be knocked
off by guerrillas.''

''No government in the isthmus will be safe,'' said Mr. Enders.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 2, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA INSISTS TAIWAN'S FATE IS NO BUSINESS OF U.S.

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 624 words

DATELINE: PEKING, March 1


China denied today that its commitment to a peaceful solution of Taiwan's future
was a condition for ending United States arms sales there and accused President
Reagan of distorting the communique on the issue signed last August by China and
the United States.

The Chinese Foreign Ministry also released a ''new'' proposal to Vietnam
offering to discuss improving relations after Hanoi began a phased withdrawal of
all its troops from Cambodia. The offer, which Vietnam seemed unlikely to
accept, appeared timed to enhance Peking's image at the new round of
Chinese-Soviet consultations in Moscow and the forthcoming summit meeting of
nations professing nonalignment in New Delhi.

Both matters were raised by Qi Huaiyuan, the director of the ForeignMinistry's
information department, at a briefing for foreign newsmen here. Mr. Qi's
criticism of Mr. Reagan followed a protest sent to the American Embassy and a
critical commentary by the New China News Agency last week.

The Chinese challenged Mr. Reagan's contention in an interview with the weekly
magazine Human Events that there was a linkage between Peking's policy of
peaceful reunification with Taiwan and Washington's promise to phase out its
arms deliveries to the Nationalist regime on Taiwan.

The Foreign Ministry spokesman said: ''I wish to stress here that the Taiwan
question is an internal affair of China and we brook no foreign interference in
how China solves the Taiwan question so as to achieve the reunification of the
motherland.

''If China's peaceful solution of the Taiwan question is taken as a prerequisite
for the gradual reduction and cessation of United States arms sales to Taiwan,
it would amount to recognition of the United States' right to interfere in
China's internal affairs indefinitely. The Chinese Government and people can
never agree to this.''

Peking and Washington have conflicting interpretations of the communique that
was signed Aug. 17 after long negotiations to end tensions over American
military sales to Taiwan.

In one section, the communique noted that China had on two formal occasions
announced that it would strive ''for peaceful reunification of the motherland.''
In a subsequent section, the communique said the United States, taking China's
position into account, ''intends to gradually reduce its sale of arms to Taiwan,
leading over a period of time to a final resolution.''

China has since objected to the contention that the two aspects are linked.
While it has publicly discarded its old commitment to a military takeover of
Taiwan, it has insisted that this is unrelated to its demand that the United
States stop supplying arms to Taiwan.

The Chinese spokesman also expressed unhappiness over Mr. Reagan's comments
before the American Legion on Feb. 22, where he stressed friendship with Taiwan.

''The Chinese people deeply deplore his remarks,'' Mr. Qi said.  Today's
appearance by Mr. Qi was the first of what the Foreign Ministry has said will be
periodic press briefings for foreign reporters, who have asked for more regular
access to officials.  Today's briefing involved the reading by Mr. Qi of
statements on selected issues, with no questions allowed.

The ''new'' five-point proposal to Vietnam on Cambodia seemed to be the one that
was made to the Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Leonid F. Ilyichev, when the
first round of Chinese-Soviet consultations started here last October. It said
that Vietnam should announce its unconditional withdrawal of troops from
Cambodia and that the Soviet Union should end its support of the military
occupation.

After the first batch of Vietnamese troops left Cambodia, the proposal said,
China would resume talks with Vietnam to normalize their strained relations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 2, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET-CHINESE TALKS ARE RENEWED IN MOSCOW

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 563 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 1


Soviet-Chinese talks resumed here today as part of an effort to end two decades
of hostility.  The meeting of delegations at the level of deputy foreign
ministers - Leonid F. Ilyichev of the Soviet union and Qian Qichen of China -
marked a resumption of a discussion that began in October when Mr. Ilyichev
spent three weeks in Peking.

Although both sides occasionally have seemed intent on prodding the United
States by holding out the prospect of an improvement in Soviet-Chinese
relations, the talks were renewed in a wary atmosphere.

Officials on both sides expect progress to be slow, with no dramatic concessions
on the difficult issues.  The difficulties were underlined by China's issuing a
statement in Peking on the Cambodian question, which is one of the issues in the
talks. The statement called for Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia and an end
to Soviet support for Vietnam's activities there, and offered to discuss
normalization of relations with Hanoi once the first contingents have been
pulled out.

Soviet Position Is Stated

The position of the Soviet Union, Vietnam and the Vietnameseinstalled Cambodian
Government in Phnom Penh is that the Vietnamese will leave once outside
interference, meaning Chinese support for the anti-Vietnamese rebels in
Cambodia, ceases.

The other issues that China has listed as standing in the way of normalization
with the Russians are their intervention in Afghanistan and their troop
deployments along the Chinese border.

On these issues, too, there appear to be major obstacles. The Soviet Union has
affirmed its intention of keeping its troops in Afghanistan until the insurgency
against the Soviet-installed Afghan Government in Kabul ends.

On the Soviet-Chinese border issue, both sides have raised the possibility of a
mutual' pullback, but neither side seems willing to make the move until the
general atmosphere has improved.

An additional difficulty has arisen in recent months over the Soviet Union's
SS-20 medium-range missiles that are at the core of its dispute with the West
over missiles in Europe.

Concern Over Missile Issue

Chinese officials have voiced concern that missiles that are removed from the
European part of the Soviet Union as a result of an agreement with the United
States could be redeployed east of the Ural Mountains, which form the border
between Europe and Asia, and enhance the nuclear threat against China.

President Reagan has said that the United States will not seek an accord that
shifts Soviet missiles from Europe to Asia, but statements by Soviet officials
have done little to allay Chinese and Japanese concerns.

The Soviet position is that any SS-20 that is traded for a cutback or
cancellation of planned new American missile deployment in Europe could be
dismantled or moved eastward. Chinese officials insist that any Soviet missiles
removed from Europe be destroyed.

Despite these and other differences, both Moscow and Peking have made it plain
that they intend to persevere with the bid for better relations.

Soviet-Chinese trade and other contacts have been picking up and the trend is
expected to quicken. Apart from the direct benefits that the two nations would
derive from a reduction of tension, they appear to value the dialogue for the
leverage that the prospect of improved ties could give them in their relations
with the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 2, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 59 words


''We understand the concern of those who remember the specter of Vietnam that
the war in El Salvador is being 'Americanized.' But Vietnam was 10,000 miles
away. El Salvador is a contiguous region right at our doorstep. San Salvador is
closer to Washington, D.C.  than is San Francisco.'' - Nestor D. Sanchez, Deputy
Assistant Defense Secretary. (A1:5.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 2, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ADDITIONAL BUSES EASE COMMUTERS' WORRIES

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. GEIST, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 498 words

DATELINE: RIDGEWOOD, N.J., March 1


At 7 A.M. apprehensive commuters began lining up here today at the Linwood
Avenue bus stop on Route 17. In less than 10 minutes, the line stretched to 70
people, and one commuter shook his head, uttering what others seemed to be
thinking: ''This is bad, this is bad.''

An opportunist rolled up in a maroon, nine-passenger van, offering rides to
Manhattan for $5. But despite misgivings about bus service and the
entrepreneur's low price - $1.35 more than a one-way bus ticket - he had only
one taker.

Many of the commuters normally take the train, and they were driven to the Short
Line stop by spouses pressed into service for the emergency and still wearing
bathrobes.

Talk along the line centered on forming car pools for what many believed would
be a long strike, on who was to blame for the walkout by NJ Transit conductors
and trainmen, on where they could legally park near the stop or park and get
away with it, and on how in the world to use a New York City subway system that
many of them had not ridden for years.

Neighbors Drive in Together

''I have no idea how to get downtown from the bus terminal any more,'' said Paul
Kruse, a Ridgewood resident who normally takes the train and PATH to a downtown
Manhattan law firm.

''I'll probably wind up in Brooklyn,'' said Rick Wey, who also rides the train
and PATH from his home in nearby Waldwick to Wall Street. He and a neighbor, Joe
Mastrogiacomi, drove together to the bus stop after deciding that traffic into
New York would probably be a headache and parking would be worse.

Suddenly, from around the bend, a bus not only appeared, but actually stopped -
setting off a scramble reminiscent of efforts to board the last helicopter out
of Danang, South Vietnam. Then another bus arrived and another and another until
there were six, vacuuming the sidewalk clean.

Surfeit of Seats

Many of the buses had been added because of the strike and bore names the Short
Line riders had not seen before - Colonial Coach, International - and some with
no names at all. Others were older Short Line buses that appeared to have been
taken out of mothballs.

Three more buses pulled up as the six were loading, only to depart when the
drivers realized their services were not needed.  Where five minutes before the
commuters had jammed aboard the first bus, they were now sauntering on and off
buses, standee status suddenly beneath them.

For the next hour, buses arrived every few minutes, holding lines at the stop
even shorter than normal. The same was true at other stops in the area served by
an NJ Transit bus line, where groups of two and three boarded buses at 8 A.M.

Some of the commuters had listened to traffic reports on car radios as they
drove to the bus stops, reports that traffic at the tunnels and the George
Washington Bridge was nothing extraordinary. It set some of them to wondering
just what had become of the hoards and others to thanking -variously - God and
luck and even transit officials.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of N.J. commuters in Paramus

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 258 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 1983 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'TENDER MERCIES,' ROBERT DUVALL AS TEXAN

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 744 words


WHAT better proof can there be of the distinctiveness of Australian film-making
than ''Tender Mercies,'' a film by Bruce Beresford that manages to be thoroughly
Australian though it features Texas settings and an American cast? Mr.
Beresford, the director of ''Breaker Morant,'' has brought a hauntingly spare
look to this story, which is set on a prairie as endless and barren as
Australia's. And the characters are as silent and unyielding as the landscape.
Indeed, ''Tender Mercies'' has a bleak handsomeness bordering on the arty, but
it also has real delicacy and emotional power, both largely attributable to a
fine performance by Robert Duvall. Mr. Duvall's versatility seems to know no
limit; in his role here as an over-the-hill country singer, he creates yet
another quietly unforgettable character.

Mr. Beresford, working with less stiffly moralistic material than he did in
''Breaker Morant,'' has a lighter, easier touch this time. ''Tender Mercies,''
which was written by Horton Foote and opens today at Loews Tower East and other
theaters, concerns a defeated-looking drunk who shows up at a remote, ramshackle
motel one day and stays. At first, he lingers because he is broke and has
offered to work off his debt to the pretty proprietor, Rosa Lee (Tess Harper).
Soon he is staying for Rosa Lee herself, and without much ado or conversation,
they are married. The gaunt, hollow-eyed Mac (Mr. Duvall) proposes this while
helping Rosa Lee with her vegetable garden. Lonely, impoverished Rosa Lee says
yes with almost more gratitude than excitement or surprise.

Only later does she learn that Mac used to be Mac Sledge, a famous country
singer who drank himself out of a career at the top, and whose former wife was
the still-successful country singer Dixie Lee (played by Betty Buckley, who
doesn't much look or sound like a country star, but whose powerhouse voice makes
any such discrepancies seem negligible). It's not clear whether Rosa Lee has
heard of any of them before, but she hasn't had much time in her life for
anything as frivolous as country music or its gaudy celebrities.

Though Mac's subsequent recovery of his strength would seem to lead toward a
musical as well as a spiritual comeback, Mr. Foote's screenplay has its focus
elsewhere. It follows Mac's relationships with his former wife, his daughter,
his new bride and her son, weaving them into a sadly contemporary vision of
family life and heading toward a final note of affirmation. This is a small,
lovely and somewhat overloaded film about small-town life, loneliness, country
music, marriage, divorce and parental love, and it deals with all of these
things in equal measure. Still, the absence of a single, sharply dramatic story
line is a relatively small price to pay for the plainness and clarity with which
these other issues are defined.

''Tender Mercies'' highlights Mr. Duvall, who is so thoroughly transformed into
Mac that he even walks with a Texan's rolling gait, but it also features some
superb supporting performances. Ellen Barkin, who was so good as the young wife
in ''Diner,'' is even better as Mac's spoiled and troubled daughter, and Miss
Harper brings a beautifully understated dignity to the role of a new wife who is
not much older than her stepchild. Wilford Brimley is solid and durable as a
music-business functionary, and Allen Hubbard does a convincing job as Rosa
Lee's young son, whose father died in Vietnam. A great point is made of this,
and it's probably one big issue more than a little film like ''Tender Mercies''
can handle. Like its laconic characters, the film itself seems to have more on
its mind than it can manage to say.

''Tender Mercies'' is rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''). It contains
some strong language.

Tale of Two Wives
TENDER MERCIES, directed by Bruce Beres ford; written by Horton Foote; director
of photography, Russell Boyd; edited by William Anderson; music by various
composers; produced by Philip S. Hobel; released by Universal Pictures. At Loews
Tower East, 72d Street and Third Avenue. Running time: 93 minutes. This film is
rated PG.

Mac Sledge . . . . . Robert Duvall
Rosa Lee . . . . . Tess Harper
Dixie . . . . . Betty Buckley
Harry . . . . . Wilford Brimley
Sue Anne . . . . . Ellen Barkin
Sonny . . . . . Allan Hubbard
Robert . . . . . Lenny Von Dohlen
Reporter . . . . . Paul Gleason
Lewis Menefee . . . . . Michael Crabtree
Reverend Hotchkiss . . . . . Norman Bennett
Larue . . . . . Andrew Scott Hollon


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of Robert Duvall

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE QUESTION ABOUT SALVADOR: WHY A CRISIS NOW?;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1391 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


The Reagan Administration is in a mood of crisis over El Salvador.  Salvadoran
officials share Washington's concern about how the war against the guerrillas is
going, but not the sense of urgency, which seems to have grown out of the
Administration's way of reacting to a crisis some officials saw coming months
ago. The military situation in El Salvador deteriorated in the guerrilla
offensive of January and February, which provoked few public expressions of
concern by the Administration at the time. However, a recent nine-day trip to
the region by Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the United States delegate to the United
Nations, at President Reagan's request led to what officials said was anxiety in
the White House.

Congressional critics say that, in dispatching Mrs. Kirkpatrick to El Salvador,
Mr. Reagan received exactly what he expected to hear: that the military
situation was deteriorating and that the Salvadorans needed more arms. Mrs.
Kirkpatrick has a reputation within the White House as an articulate and shrewd
diplomat with a hard-line approach against dealing with the left, especially in
Latin America. But White House officials say even President Reagan was caught by
surprise at the depth of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's concerns about possible guerrilla
advances in Central America.

Guerrilla Takeover Feared

Mrs. Kirkpatrick told President Reagan and Congressional leaders that not only
was the Salvador military situation bleak, but that Government officials,
educators, journalists and businessmen in such nations as Venezuela, Costa Rica,
Panama and Honduras were fearful that a guerrilla takeover in El Salvador would
lead to stepped-up insurgent activity across all of Central America.

''Kirkpatrick came back with a different story than what people had been saying
to the President,'' an Administration official said. ''It may be that nobody
ever talked to the President like this, but she did.''

President Reagan and his national security adviser, William P.  Clark, have been
gloomy about the situation in El Salvador for the last year, officials said.
There have been consistent reports from the Central Intelligence Agency and the
Defense Department that the Salvadoran military leadership was largely failing
to respond to the advice of American military advisers, who have advocated
hit-and-run tactics and night maneuvers to defeat the insurgents. Moreover,
officials said, the loss of weapons and the expenditure of bullets, artillery
and helicopter spare parts were eating up United States aid far more quickly
than expected.

Even before the most recent series of guerrilla attacks, Mr. Reagan and Mr.
Clark, as well as State and Defense Department officials, had for months told
Congressional leaders that the $26 million in military aid authorized for El
Salvador for 1983 was inadequate.  Administration officials noted that in 1982
the United States provided $82 million in such aid and that the request for 1984
is $86.3 million. This year, the Administration had initially requested $63.3
million, but under the interim funding measure known as the continuing
resolution only $26 million was authorized.

Figure 'No Great Surprise'

''The Administration has known for several months that this was an inadequate
level of funding, that they would have to ask for more,'' said a ranking House
aide. ''The fact that Weinberger let slip the $60 million figure came as no
great surprise but it brought it out in the public and it started the ball
rolling.''

On Feb. 22, in an appearance before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Defense
Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger was asked about the Administration's plans for
more military aid to El Salvador. ''I understand it is $60 million,'' said Mr.
Weinberger. Some Congressional aides said Mr. Weinberger's disclosure was a slip
of the tongue and it revealed, for the first time, that the Administration was
actually seeking an additional $60 million in military aid.

On the same day, President Reagan, having heard Mrs. Kirkpatrick's report,
stepped to the rostrum at the American Legion's annual conference and said,
''The specter of Marxist-Leninist controlled governments in Central America with
ideological and political loyalties to Cuba and the Soviet Union poses a direct
challenge to which we must respond.''

According to Administration officials, the situation in recent days evolved
rapidly because the White House sought to blunt opposition from members of
Congress to the aid request. Mr. Weinberger had initially indicated that the
additional funds would come from a special discretionary fund set up in 1961 for
use by the President ''to provide emergency military assistance to foreign
countries.'' It was made clear at once to the White House that the use of these
funds, which needs no Congressional approval, would provoke anger on Capital
Hill, where lawmakers recalled that the fund was used in Vietnam.

Report Has Strong Impact

In an attempt to fend off Congressional opposition, Mr. Reagan called in a group
of senior legislators from both parties on Monday.  The first official called by
Mr. Reagan to brief the visitors was Mrs. Kirkpatrick and her report - that the
nations in the region were frightened about the deteriorating military situation
in El Salvador and its impact on nearby nations - apparently had a strong
impact.

According to White House officials, the dominant role in the handling of United
States policy on El Salvador has shifted in recent months from Thomas O. Enders,
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, to Mr. Clark at the
White House. With this change, officials say, has come a stream of gloomy
reports about the military situation in El Salvador from Lieut. Gen. Wallace H.
Nutting, the commander in chief of the United States Southern Command in Panama,
which oversees Salvador operations.

Administration officials have been especially troubled by intelligence showing
that guerrillas are now being supplied continually by helicopter and light
aircraft from Nicaragua. The guerrillas, the officials say, have no shortage of
weapons, mostly American-made M-16's, Soviet and East German demolition
equipment and American-made mortars. There is concern that not only may some of
the American weapons have been captured from Government soldiers, but that they
may also have sold some on the black market.

Uneasy Over Pope's Visit

In addition to their nervousness about the military situation, White House aides
are uneasy about the visit of Pope John Paul II to Central America, including El
Salvador, and the impact of his calls for reconciliation in the region.

Behind this concern is the persistent urging of European Socialists, Latin
American officials and Congressional critics for some form of negotiation with
the guerrillas. In recent months, Administration sources said, ranking officials
have discussed various options, including the possibility of pressing for a
''dialogue'' with the guerrillas and dealing with the crisis in a ''conciliatory
fashion.''

Officials say this option, offered by some State Department officials, has
apparently been ruled out by Secretary of State Shultz as well as Mr. Clark and
Mrs. Kirkpatrick. Mr. Shultz said two weeks ago that the Salvadoran insurgents
were ''creating hell'' with Soviet-supplied weapons and that the United States
would never support negotiations allowing them to ''shoot their way'' into the
Government.

Publicly, the Administration says it opposes negotiations unless the guerrillas
lay down their arms and enter the democratic process, or participate in
elections, which the insurgents refuse to do.  Privately, officials say the
possibilities of a ''dialogue'' remain if, for example, Central American or
European Socialists are able to participate in talks and attract anti-Government
figures and some key political leaders of the guerrilla movement who may not be
staunch Marxists into the ''democratic process.''

''Whether or not a crisis exists depends on your perception,'' said a
Congressional aide involved in Salvador policy. ''A crisis exists because enough
people perceive a crisis exists. It could have been perceived a month ago. The
military situation has been going downhill for a while and it's just right now,
when the Administration, wants more aid, that we have this crisis.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Casper Weinberger and Gen. John W. Vecsey Jr.

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN BEING WARNED AGAINST BYPASSING CONGRESS ON SALVADOR AID

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 616 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


Congressional leaders of both parties plan to advise the White House against
acting on its own in giving more aid to El Salvador and to ask Congress for the
money.

This would provide the opportunity for a full debate, with what the leaders said
would be a doubtful outcome.  ''At best, economic and military aid programs have
little support around here,'' said Representative Clement J. Zablocki, Democrat
of Wisconsin, who is chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee.

The Congressional leaders said they feared White House action, with its echoes
of the Vietnam War. They said they expected Congress to insist that American
advisers not be permitted to enter combat zones.

Negotiations Are Demanded

Two Republican lawmakers, Senator Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon and Representative
Jim Leach of Iowa, introduced legislation that would direct President Reagan to
use all military aid for humanitarian purposes if the Salvadoran Government
refuses to negotiate to settle the conflict with the insurgents.

In another development, a State Department official said a prediction that the
Salvadoran Government would run out of arms in a month was based on a
hypothetical situation involving heavier combat than is now under way.

The official, William Schneider Jr. who is Under Secretary of State for Security
Assistance, told the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on international
security that the kind of combat he was talking about would develop, for
example, ''if Nicaragua decided to invade with a 40,000-man army.''

On Monday, Thomas O. Enders, an Assistant Secretary of State, and Nestor D.
Sanchez, a Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, told Congress that El Salvador
would run out of arms in 30 days unless it got $60 million in aid.

Salvadoran officials, asked about the comments, said there was no danger of
running out of ammunition.On the issue of the American advisers, John Hughes,
the State Department's spokesman, said today the number would be raised to the
self-imposed limit of 55 from an average of 37 over the last year.

Once this maximum is reached, he said, ''that would be the time to look at the
possibility of going beyond that.'' At the Pentagon, an official said a plan was
under consideration to have advisers train Salvadoran troops in the field. He
said the advisers would be sent only into safe zones and would not be placed in
a position where they would be involved in combat. Thus far they have been doing
their training around San Salvador, the capital.

Despite the denials about changing the role of advisers, the specter of Vietnam
marked Congressional comment.

'Calling Everyone a Communist'

''The similarity to Vietnam is so close it is almost uncanny,'' said
Representative Clarence D. Long, Maryland Democrat and chairman of the Foreign
Operations subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee. ''There is the
unwillingness of people to fight, incompetent corrupt leadership, and calling
everyone a Communist.''

Representative Michael D. Barnes, another Maryland Democrat, who is chairman of
the Inter-American Affairs subcommittee of the Foreign Affairs Committee, said:

''There is one very strong Vietnam analogy: the way they have been financing the
war. It has not been subjected to the normal legislative process. They have
either reprogrammed funds or used emergency funds.''

President Reagan met with Congressional leaders on Monday to seek a consensus on
how to provide the additional $60 million. There are three options. He can draw
on $75 million in emergency funds; he can ask the Appropriations Commitee to
reallocate funds, or he can ask for a supplemental appropriation, which would
require a vote in Congress.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DIOXIN IS REPORTED IN FISH IN WIDE AREA OF MICHIGAN

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: EAST LANSING, Mich. March 3


A research project has found the poison dioxin at levels far higher than
recommended for human consumption by the Food and Drug Administration in certain
fish taken from lakes and rivers throughout southern Michigan.

In many cases, according to the unpublished Michigan State University graduate
project, the levels of contamination were shown to be far higher and more
widespread than state tests conducted over the last five years had indicated.

The researchers cautioned, however, that the sample was limited and the evidence
more than three years old. They added that new studies would be needed to
confirm the unexpectedly high contamination readings before their findings could
be considered conclusive.

The contamination was found in the edible fillets of carp and suckers, which
feed off the bottoms of lakes and rivers, after they were tested for the
contaminant 2,3,7,8, tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, or TCDD. The chemical is an
impurity that arises in the manufacturing of defoliants and other products.

First Found in 1978

The researchers wanted to find out whether a Dow Chemical Company plant on the
Tittabawassee River in south central Michigan was responsible for contaminating
waters downstream from the plant, as charged in 1978 by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency. Fish contaminated with dioxin believed to have
come from the plant were first found that year.

In their study, Prof. Matthew J. Zabik and a graduate doctoral candidate who
carried out the research, Swiatoslov Kazcman, retested water near the Dow plant
along with water in numerous other lakes and rivers to serve as a stardard of
comparison.

Instead of settling the 5-year-old controversy over the Dow plant, however, they
found TCDD in sample fish taken from waters throughout the heavily populated and
industrialized southern part of Michigan.

In some cases, according to their research, dioxin levels were higher in fish
upstream from the Dow plant than below it, while in other more northern streams,
including the Au Sable, a celebrated trout stream, the researchers could find no
traces of the poison.

Levels Varied in Same Spots

Indeed, different fish taken from identical locations also showed varying
degrees of dioxin, from relatively high contamination to none at all.

Professor Zabik accordingly cautioned that the fish samples were old, taken in
1979, and the traces of dioxin were so small, measured in parts per 1,000
billion, that further studies and validation were needed before there would be
cause for concern.

The university research gained immediate and widespread attention, however,
because of the dioxin contamination of soil and refuse in Times Beach, Mo., in
far greater concentrations than found in the Michigan fish.

''We are talking about extremely small amounts, parts per trillion instead of
parts per billion in Times Beach. '' Professor Zabik commented in his crowded
laboratory at the Pesticide Research Center, ''but our findings involve the
edible portions of fish; at Times Beach the contamination is in the soil, which
would have to be absorbed throught the skin.''

The F.D.A. Standards

The Food and Drug Administration has reported that fish containing less than 25
parts per 1,000 billion of dioxin is fit for general human consumption; that
fish containing from 25 to 50 parts should be eaten not more than twice a month
by residents, and that fish contaminated by more than 50 parts per 1,000 billion
should not be eaten at all.

Professor Zabik and Mr. Kazcman reported that they found traces of TCDD ranging
from 17 to 586 parts per 1,000 billion in fish from 22 of the 56 sample sites
throughout Michigan's lower peninsula, with most of the findings in the range of
100 to 200 parts.

The study's results have been shown to the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources, where a scientific source said that its reported levels of dioxin
were far higher than expected. But he, like Professor Zabik, warned against
taking the study as conclusive.

Studies done by Department of Natural Resources of fish from waters around the
Dow plant, for example, showed levels of about 70 parts per 1,000 billion, while
the university study found one case of a fish with 287 parts per 1,000 billion
five miles upstream from the chemical plant, which is at Midland.

There has been no controlled testing of dioxins on humans, Professor Zabik said
today, but in animals it has been linked to birth defects, liver and brain
defects, and cancer.

The contaminant is present in herbicides manufactured by Dow, including the
defoliant Agent Orange, which was made at the plant in the Vietnam War. Dow
Chemical has maintained, since it was first accused of contaminating the
Tittabawassee and Saginaw rivers downstream from its plant, that the dioxins are
also the product of combustion and may arise from natural causes as well as in
the manufacturing process.

Professor Zabik took this same position today. ''It could be coming from
industrial or municipal incinerators, or coal burning power plants,'' he said.
''Some studies show it coming from catalytic converters on cars.''

The study was undertaken with the help of the state Department of Natural
Resources and Dow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Required Reading;
El Salvador and Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 123 words


Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., Republican of Tennessee, in remarks to reporters
before the Senate convened on March 2, 1983: ''El Salvador is not Vietnam. The
situations are entirely different. The objectives are entirely different.
Vietnam was a country in Southeast Asia that had a tradition of conflict. El
Salvador does not have a tradition of conflict.''

''American advisers are indeed advising in El Salvador. They are not in the
combat zone.'' ''I don't say whether El Salvador stands or falls is of grave
concern to the United States. But the stability of the region is of vital
concern to the interests of the United States. There's a far more credible
argument for the domino effect in El Salvador than there was in Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 749 words


Spring? Not Just Yet

Longtime Washington residents -natives are as scarce here as bashful Congressmen
- maintain there are three sure signs of the arrival of spring in the capital,
all much more significant than the lunch-hour exodus of coatless Government
workers on the first sunny midday.

The first harbinger was confirmed yesterday when the First Baptist Church Senior
High Handbell Choir of Jefferson City, Tenn., played Handel's ''Water Music''
and ''Maple Leaf Rag'' on the steps of the Capitol. Technically, the first
spring musicale there was provided by the Shippensburg (Pa.) State College Band
last Saturday, but the lawmakers were not in session to listen. As the weather
warms, bands from all over the country will play the steps.

Spring's other two key indicators have not yet manifested themselves although it
appears they are imminent. The shad are not yet running in the Potomac; shad roe
that have just surfaced on local restaurant menus, fishermen say, is imported
from farther south where the annual upriver migration has already begun.

The third test is critical: Spring is only official in Washington when a fresh
flower appears between the V-forming fingers of the statue of Churchill in front
of the British Embassy on Massachusetts Avenue. The snowball that rested there
briefly during the February blizzard is gone, but the vernal signal has not
blossomed.

Trainers, Not Advisers

Under official State Department nomenclature, the Americans in El Salvador to
give military advice to the Government are ''trainers.'' The old term
''advisers'' has been ruled out as being reminiscent of Vietnam.

On to Fort Drum

The legendary efficiency with which the Pentagon responds to comments by members
of Congress, particularly those on the Armed Services committees, appears to
have been honed to an even keener edge by recent challenges to the military
budget.

Rumors began circulating three weeks ago that a proposed movement in March of
3,000 infantrymen from Fort Riley, Kan., to Fort Drum, N.Y., for two weeks of
training was to be canceled for reasons of economy. The news was released to the
press on Feb. 25, but Representative David O'B. Martin, whose upstate district
includes Fort Drum, was not notified by the Army, in advance or at the time.

Mr. Martin, a second-term Republican named to the Armed Services Committee only
in January, became angry, more because of what he regarded as Pentagon
discourtesy than because of the prospective loss of Federal money for his
district. He telephoned Army Secretary John O. Marsh, summoning him from a
Senate hearing to express his displeasure. Four days later, the Army announced
that the Kansasbased infantry battalion would be going to Fort Drum after all,
but about two weeks later than previously scheduled.

Two for One

Historical Footnote: Fifty years ago today, John Nance Garner of Texas became
the first and only man ever to preside over both the House of Representatives
and the Senate on the same day. He began March 4, 1933, as Speaker of the House,
and then was sworn in at noon as Franklin D. Roosevelt's first Vice President
and took his place on the Senate rostrum later that day.

An Informal Poll

The politics-watchers of Washington have an unquenchable thirst for polls. No
matter how small or unscientific the sample, how obscure the issue or how
distant the election, the cognoscenti catch up each fragmentary report of public
opinion and search it for portent.

Take the balloting conducted by Martin Plissner, political director of CBS News,
and his wife, Susan Morrison, assignment editor of the ABC News Washington
Bureau, at their annual party for reporters and political operatives. There were
60-odd votes cast last weekend, and some definitely portentous results.
Predicting the Presidential nominees, the sample went for the conventional
wisdom: On the Republican side, 41 for President Reagan, 9 for Vice President
Bush and 7 scattered. On the Democratic side, 35 for Walter F. Mondale, 12 for
Senator John Glenn and 10 scattered.

More detailed analysis showed that of those who predicted a Reagan nomination,
26 thought the President would be re-elected and 11 thought he would lose. Among
those who predicted Mr. Mondale's nomination, however, 12 thought he would win
election and 21 thought he would lose. This despite the fact that the partygoers
divided almost evenly, 29 to 26, in predicting a Republican victory in 1984,
whoever the candidates might be.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: WHEN TO MARKET A BOOK

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words


ROBERT LUDLUM doesn't have a new book this month, but his next book will
probably be published in the month of March. Why? Because he has long been
published in March, so why break up a winning combination?

Joe McGinniss's coming ''Fatal Vision'' was originally scheduled for publication
on Aug. 30, but at the author's request it was moved up to Aug. 29. Why? Because
the book tells the story of Dr. Jeffrey MacDonald, the former Green Beret
officer who was convicted on Aug.  29, 1979, of killing his pregnant wife and
two children.

''Patrick: 16 Centuries With Ireland's Patron Saint'' by Alice-Boyd Proudfoot
and the paperback edition of ''A Portrait of the Irish in America'' by William
D. Griffin are both being published on - when else? -March 17, St. Patrick's
Day.

''Antoinette Brown Blackwell,'' a biography by Elizabeth Cazden about an early
champion of women's rights, will be published by the Feminist Press next week.
Why next week? Because it's Women's History Week.

Except for seasonal books, most books are still published without regard to day,
week or month, usually within a year after the completed manuscript arrives at a
publishing house. This allows time for editing, design and manufacture, and time
also for the manuscript to be considered by book clubs and magazines.

Why a Date Is Chosen

But many books make their official appearance on dates that, depending on one's
point of view, are either meaningful or idiosyncratic:

Jerry Lewis wanted the publication date for ''Jerry Lewis: In Person'' switched
from Sept. 7, 1982, to Sept. 13 because 13 is his lucky number.

Jean Auel's ''Clan of the Cave Bear'' was published Sept. 10, 1980, and became a
best seller; hoping for an encore, her ''Valley of the Horses'' came out exactly
two years later -and it, too, is a best seller.

The first of Dumas Malone's six volumes on Thomas Jefferson was published on the
anniversary of Jefferson's birth, April 13, and the last was published July 4,
the anniversary of his death.

''Scruples'' and ''Princess Daisy'' were both published March 9, two years
apart, but Judith Krantz wanted her next novel published on her birthday.
Therefore, ''Mistral's Daughter'' bore a Jan. 9, 1983, publication date -even
though it was shipped to bookstores last October and critics were encouraged to
publish reviews as early as mid-November.

Allowing for Shipping Time

The usual practice is to set a publication date some four to six weeks after
finished copies are expected, in time to ship them to bookstores. But as
''Mistral's Daughter'' demonstrates, official publishing dates sometimes bear
little relationship to reality.  Consequently, reviewers (who meanwhile have
received bound galleys or finished books well in advance of publication) do not
always feel bound to honor them. The New York Times Book Review occasionally
reviews a book as soon as it is on sale in bookstores if it has major news value
or is of special literary importance.

Prepublication publicity can also force a shift in plans. Harvard University
Press had set a mid-April publication for Derek Freeman's ''Margaret Mead and
Samoa,'' but after all the recent publicity the date was moved to March 28.
''The Vatican Connection'' by Richard Hammer was published last September rather
than October, as scheduled, after the Vatican bank figured prominently in the
news.

''We try to accommodate an author,'' said a Random House spokesman, ''but we're
not anxious to withhold publication because you can't control the competition.''


Staggering the Schedule

Whenever possible, publishers stagger their publication schedules.  ''We try not
to have two first novels or two literary books published within a month, in
order not to put too much of a burden on our sales people or on reviewers,'' a
spokesman for Harper & Row said.  Some houses also try to avoid publishing
unknown authors in the fall, the prime publishing season. This was well
illustrated when Warner Books sent mailgrams to reviewers last summer saying
that publication of ''Dear Stranger'' by Catherine Kidwell, scheduled for Sept.
20, 1982, had been rescheduled for Feb. 9, 1983. ''As you may have noticed,''
the mailgram said, ''the fall season is crowded with a lot of works of fiction
by the old masters - Updike, Greene, Sheldon, Robbins, Fast, Michener, just to
name a few.''

A number of publishers consider January and February good months for attracting
reviewer attention to unknowns, while some houses like the odds on publishing a
book in August -when, one publishing official said, ''reviewers might be more
likely to be looking for a good novel to review.''

But some books seem locked into a particular date. ''Love'' by Dr.  Leo Madow
was published last month on Valentine's Day. Little, Brown began its
Metropolitan Opera Classics Library series six months ago with the publication
of ''Der Rosenkavalier'' to coincide with the ''Live From the Met'' public
television broadcast of the opera. On Jan. 31, the 15th anniversary of the Tet
offensive in Vietnam, Yale University Press published an updated, abridged
edition of ''Big Story,'' a study of press coverage of the event by Peter
Braestrup.

Finding Cause for Tie-In

With a little effort, some sort of tie-in can be found for almost any book. For
example, the publicity release for Robert H. Boyle's ''Acid Rain,'' scheduled
for publication April 1, notes that the date ''is also the traditional opening
day of the trout fishing season in New York State,'' and goes on to describe Mr.
Boyle as ''a serious student of acquatic biology.'' A biography of the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was published last summer on the anniversary of the slain
civil-rights leader's ''I have a dream'' speech. ''It wasn't a 10-year
anniversary,'' a spokesman for the publisher said, ''but it gave us something to
peg our news release and publicity on.''

Sometimes it's necessary to improvise. ''Duke'' by Pat Stacy, with Beverly
Linet, will be published June 13, rather than June 11, the anniversary of John
Wayne's death, because June 11 is a Saturday, and Atheneum does not publish on
weekends. Nor does anyone else. But that doesn't prevent many publication dates
from falling on weekends just the same. ''The Ballad of John and Yoko'' was
published last Oct. 8, one day before the date of John Lennon's birth - but only
because the birth date fell on a Saturday, and Doubleday always publishes on
Friday.

Finally, some publication dates are clearly chosen in the spirit of ghoulish
humor: When ''Astrology: Science or Superstition'' was published last August, it
came out on Friday the 13th. And ''Devil's Work,'' a mystery by Margaret Yorke
published last October, came out on Halloween.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. MAY INCREASE SALVADOR ADVISERS

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, March 4


President Reagan, warning that other nations in the hemisphere ''would follow''
if El Salvador falls to leftist rebels, said today that he might increase the
number of American military advisers in El Salvador, but would not use them in
combat.

The President said the United States ''may want to go beyond'' the present limit
of 55 United States military advisers used for training purposes in that nation.

''In no sense are we speaking of participation in combat by American forces,''
the President said in remarks before the Commonwealth Club.

'No Parallel With Vietnam'

''I can give you assurances and there is no parallel whatsoever with Vietnam,''
he declared in response to a question from the audience.  But a moment later he
said of the leftist insurgents:

''If they get a foothold, with Nicaragua already there, and El Salvador should
fall as a result of this armed violence on the part of the guerrillas, I think
Costa Rica, Honduras, Panama, all of these would follow.''

Mr. Reagan emphasized his estimate that ''50 percent of everything we import
comes through the Caribbean, the Panama Canal.'' ''It is vital to us that
democracy be allowed to succeed in these countries,'' he said.

Calls Salvador Situation Critical

Mr. Reagan, whose Administration has lately described the situation in El
Salvador as critical, said the people there ''have no sympathy whatsoever toward
the rebels, who are armed, who are trained by countries such as Cuba, and others
of the Iron Curtain countries.''

''We believe the Government of El Salvador is on the front line of a battle that
is really aimed at the very heart of the Western Hemisphere, and eventually at
us,'' the President said, prompting applause from a luncheon gathering of
several hundred business and civic leaders at the San Francisco Hilton Hotel.

Alluding to complaints from critics that the Government of El Salvador commits
severe abuses of the rights of its citizens, the President said, ''Sure there
are things to be corrected down there, but we are working on them.''

As the President spoke, groups of demonstrators waited outside the hotel to
shout their disapproval of his policy on El Salvador.  In the last week
Administration officials have made a point of expressing increasing concern
about the way the war in El Salvador has been going. The military situation is
deteriorating, they said, and El Salvador needs more arms.

Concerning the American military personnel in El Salvador, Mr.  Reagan said:
''What we mean by expansion is that we have a limit of 55 of our military
personnel, only for the sake of training. They need that training. So far, we've
only averaged 37 of those 55 positions to be filled and right now, there are 45.
We may want to go beyond that 55, but in no sense are we speaking of
participation in combat by American forces.''

(According to the United States Embassy in El Salvador, 10 more American
advisers arrived in that country in the last week, bringing the present total to
53.)

President Reagan's contention that there might be a chain reaction of toppled
governments in the hemisphere was his strongest direct comment of recent weeks
on the situation.

Disappointment on Lebanon

In other comments, the President said ''we're doing everything we can to speed
up'' the departure of foreign troops from Lebanon.  ''We are, I must say,
disappointed by the length of time it is taking and by the haggling in the
negotiations,'' he said.  Mr. Reagan added that lately there had been ''some
reason for optimism'' reported by Administration negotiators. But he did not
give details on this, and he emphasized his concern with the view of ''moderate
Arab nations'' that negotiations with Israel were dependent on troop withdrawal
and the restoration of full sovereignty to Lebanon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR ARMY'S TROUBLES;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 953 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, March 2


El Salvador needs better battle leadership, personal motivation and field
training as much as it needs ammunition, helicopters and guns, according to
American and Salvadoran officials here.

The Salvadoran Army, like the military in much of Latin America, has had more
political than battlefield experience; it has never fought a sustained military
campaign. This army is now fighting a 9-to-5, five-day-a-week war against
guerrillas who are active 24 hours a day, seven days a week.

An American officer recalled that on a recent visit to a combat unit he was
briefed by its commander and executive officer. He then talked to some junior
officers. When he returned to his helicopter to leave, he found the commander
and his executive officer in civilian clothes waiting for a lift back to the
capital. It was Friday evening.

Cuban Aid Not Seen as Big Factor

Military aid from Nicaragua and Cuba is not a key factor in the Salvadoran
guerrillas' campaign, according to an experienced intelligence officer. Many of
the guerrillas' arms have been captured from the Salvadoran Army, the national
guard and the police. Some weapons bought by the guerrillas have been traced to
the stocks left in Vietnam by the United States, the officer said. He added that
no Warsaw Pact weapons had been identified, although a stock of Sovietmade
mortar fuses had been discovered in the possession of the guerrillas.

There is no parallel, this officer insisted, between the Salvadoran insurgency
and the Vietnam War. The scale of outside aid to the guerrillas is far lower
than that sent to the North Vietnamese, he said, and there are no signs of troop
reinforcements entering from Nicaragua. He conceded only that some officers
might have joined the insurgents from Nicaragua and that medical evacuation to
Nicaragua continued.

Taking advantage of terrain that is ideal for guerrilla warfare - heavily
forested mountains and plains - the rebels have grown bolder in recent weeks.
American and Salvadoran officials said that in some operations last month the
rebels held their ground against Government troops for the first time, if only
for short periods.

Trying to Cripple Economy

The insurgents' objectives, as American officers see them, are to cripple an
already ailing economy and to separate the four provinces east of the Lempa
River from the rest of the country, creating a ''liberated'' zone.

Interviews with American officers and diplomats and with Salvadoran officials
and politicians leave a strong impression that unless the army accepts changes
in its promotion procedures and logistical arrangements and adopts more
aggressive tactics, the initiative will remain with the guerrillas.

''Unless the army leadership wakes up,'' a Salvadoran said, ''the United States
can send $60 million or $600 million in military assistance and the effect on
operations will be minimal.''

With few exceptions, Americans here said, Salvadoran officers have little grasp
of antiguerrilla doctrine and tactics. One American estimated that there were
three ''good'' colonels in the army, although he added that there were many
capable lieutenant colonels.

Praise for Some Junior Officers

United States military advisers have found that many junior officers understand
the tactics necessary to stifle the insurgency.  But they are not at the command
level where they could put their ideas into practice.

The army's present promotional system depends on time in grade. An officer,
however able, is not considered suitable for promotion until he has served a
specified time as a lieutenant or captain. American officers believe this system
needs to be scrapped, and about 200 lieutenants should be promoted immediately
to captain.

American military and diplomatic sources agree that the army's primary task is
to upgrade the quality of the officer corps. They urge stronger links between
officers and troops and believe that if the latter see that officers will do
everything troops are asked to do, the soldiers will understand and follow.

Faulty Logistical Arrangements

But the Americans say some officers at brigade and battalion level still do not
appear to understand that they're at war.  Some of the army's logistical
arrangements verge on the farcical, American officers say. A commander taking
his unit on an operation buys as much food as he thinks it will need. If the
operation takes more time than he expected, the men go hungry.

Another pressing need is for more battalions trained in the United States or by
Americans, according to Salvadoran and American military sources. Only 3,800 men
out of a total force of 22,000 are now American-trained. The need is for more
immediate reaction battalions, such as the three now operational and successful.

Americans estimate the insurgents' combat strength at between 5,000 and 7,000
men.  ''We need more trained battalions, not more American advisers,'' a
prominent Salvadoran politician said.

Need a More Aggressive Doctrine

Between 75 and 80 percent of Government forces, including the army, national
guard and police, are in static positions guarding bridges, hydroelectric plants
and industrial installations or patrolling highways.

United States advisers have tried to implant a more aggressive doctrine. But one
said the army did not now have the capacity to follow American advice. If it
had, he said, the army would have gone on the offensive after last year's
elections when there was a good chance of success.

''They'll fight all right if they're well led,'' an American said.  ''Look what
they did to the two guerrilla columns that headed for the bridges after they
left Berlin last month. They caught them and clobbered them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of American Advisers in El Salvador (Page 4)

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Team to Visit Hanoi

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 42 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, March 4


A four-member American military team will arrive in Hanoi on Wednesday for
''technical discussions'' on Americans missing in Vietnam, a Pacific Command
spokesman said today. The team will leave Hanoi on March 12. The visit is the
second of its kind.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LABOR PARTY WINS AUSTRALIAN VOTING

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 909 words

DATELINE: CANBERRA, Australia, Sunday, March 6


Robert Hawke and his opposition Labor Party ousted the eight-year-old
conservative Government of Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser in national elections
Saturday.

It was only the second Labor Party victory since 1949. Mr. Hawke, a former
high-ranking union official, became leader of the opposition only a month ago.

By early today, with three-quarters of the votes counted, the Labor Party
appeared to have won 64 seats in the 125-member House of Representatives. Mr.
Fraser's coalition Government appeared to have won 39 seats, with 22 still
undecided. It was expected that the 64-seat Senate would remain evenly divided
between Labor and Mr.  Fraser's Liberal-National coalition, with the balance of
power held by the Australian Democratic Party led by Senator Don Chipp.

Promise to Create Jobs

In the campaign Mr. Hawke promised increased government spending to create jobs,
enhanced welfare benefits and tax cuts.  The last Labor Party Government was
headed by Gough Whitlam who, after three years in power, was defeated by Mr.
Fraser in 1975.  Mr. Hawke, who will take office as Prime Minister early next
week, said at a news conference Saturday night: ''I commit myself, I commit our
government, to undertaking from this moment the task of national reconciliation.
We have a magnificent country. If we all work together, we can see, I believe,
no bounds to what we can do.''

''We're not going to move quickly,'' Mr. Hawke added. ''I believe that what the
people of Australia want from the incoming government is calmness, a sense of
assuredness.''

The likely head of the Treasury under Labor, Paul Keating, predicted in an
interview that within six months the new government will have made ''substantial
inroads into both inflation and unemployment.''

Inflation Running at 11 Percent

With inflation running at 11 percent and unemployment more than 10 percent, it
was Australia's troubled economy that, in the view of analysts here, gave Labor
much of its edge over the Liberal-National Party coalition of Mr. Fraser.

Repeatedly throughout the often bitter four-week election campaign, Mr. Fraser
charged that any government formed by Mr. Hawke would be controlled by the
unions and would adopt disastrously expensive government programs.

But the electorate was clearly ready for a leadership change. Mr.  Hawke, a
former head of the Australian Council of Trade Unions who enjoyed an immense
popularity even before becoming opposition leader, promised to ''bring Australia
together.'' In the campaign he said the first major initiative of his government
would be to hold a national economic conference consisting of labor, government
and employees to try to work out cooperative domestic policies.

Little Debate on Foreign Affairs

There was little discussion of foreign affairs in the campaign, and the Labor
government was not expected to attempt any major changes.  A moderate who has
been sharply critical of the Soviet Union, Mr.  Hawke has indicated that he
would maintain Australia's close ties, including its defense treaty, with the
United States. But the Labor Party platform, adopted last year, and various
statements by the party's leaders indicate that a Labor government will diverge
from the United States on some issues.

The Labor Party has called for the gradual termination of exports of uranium
ore. Australia, which has roughly 25 percent of the non-Communist world's proven
reserves of uranium, embarked last year on a feasibility study with a European
consortium for building a uranium enrichment plant. Analysts give that project
little chance of getting under way under Mr. Hawke's government.

In Favor of Aiding Vietnam

The Labor Party has also opposed Australia's participation in the Sinai
peacekeeping force and it is in favor of resuming economic aid to Vietnam, a
policy that is in direct conflict with that of the United States.

The Labor Party, however, has given no sign that it opposes the existence of
three space communications installations operated by the United States jointly
with the Australians. Nor has it objected to the use of Australian ports by
American naval vessels or the training of American B-52 pilots over Australian
territory.

A United States Embassy official here, asked before the voting what the
consequences of a Labor victory would be for American relations with Australia,
said, ''We wouldn't expect any major change in the relationship, but on some
specific issues both sides are going to have to work harder at it.''

During the campaign, William Hayden, who was Labor's shadow minister for foreign
affairs, said in an interview published in the local press, ''We are part of the
association of Western nations.'' Mr. Hayden added, ''Nonetheless, I believe
there is room for Australia to be more assertive and independent in the views it
puts on a range of matters.''

'A Clear Mandate'

Mr. Hawke said at his news conference that Labor's large margin of victory
represented ''a clear mandate.'' The Labor Party seems to have won virtually
every marginal seat in the country.  The only region where Labor Party support
diminished was Tasmania, where the party opposes the building of a hydroelectric
dam on the Franklin River. The dam is supported by most Tasmanians, but it was
vigorously fought during the campaign by environmental groups elsewhere in
Australia.

In his television statement Saturday night Mr. Hawke said the dam would not be
built.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert and Hazel Hawke with crowd

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MRS. KIRKPATRICK URGES U.S. TO ADOPT LATIN MARSHALL PLAN

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 5


Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the United States delegate to the United Nations, said
today that Washington should initiate a major economic aid program for Central
America similar to the Marshall Plan in Europe after World War II.

At the same time Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who has played a key role in shaping the
Reagan Administration's policy toward Central America, said the region's leaders
had voiced anxiety to her about ''the very large Soviet effort influencing the
region.'' She said the leaders also expressed concern about ''subversion,
terrorism and guerrilla warfare'' by the Nicaraguan Government.

''They fear Nicaragua's goals and they fear systematic subversion by way of
terrorism and guerrilla subversion,'' Mrs. Kirkpatrick said in an interview.
''They believe there's a plan, and El Salvador is the focus of it today.''

It was Mrs. Kirkpatrick's report to President Reagan, after a Feb.  3-12 trip to
the area, that led the Administration to seek an additional $60 million in
military aid to El Salvador and undertake a reassessment of the United States'
policy toward the region, according to officials. Mrs. Kirkpatrick met with the
leaders of Panama, Costa Rica, Honduras, El Salvador and Venezuela.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick, seated in her sixth-floor office at the State Department, said
a Vietnam analogy to the situation in El Salvador ''is mistaken, it doesn't
apply.'' She said that ''perhaps the most relevant analogy'' to Central America
and the Caribbean should be the Marshall Plan. ''That's because the Marshall
Plan constituted a response to a regional problem that was simultaneously
economic and social and military,'' she said. ''That was a highly successful use
of American strength.''

''I don't know why the Cubans should be relied upon to bring literacy to Central
America,'' Mrs. Kirkpatrick said.  She added that the Reagan Administration
should ''consider seriously providing development assistance'' on the scale of
the Marshall Plan in order to thwart Soviet-backed ''subversion'' in the region.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick, although saying she did not use the words ''Marshall Plan'' in
her meetings with President Reagan, indicated that she told him of the region's
need for major economic aid to thwart potential guerrilla advances. Although
recent reports have said Mrs. Kirkpatrick focused on the region's military needs
in her talks with Mr. Reagan, she indicated today that she conveyed what Central
American leaders told her, and that her personal recommendations centered
heavily on the economic needs of Central America.

'Consequence,' Not 'Cause'

''My trip was not the cause of a higher level of concern by the President,'' she
said. ''My trip was a consequence of the President's concern.'' Mrs. Kirkpatrick
used relatively muted terms in describing the conflict in El Salvador.

''I don't think it's that dicey,'' she said of the military situation. ''The
fact that they need more military assistance to sustain their effort against the
guerrillas doesn't mean the war is going very badly. It just means that there's
a very sustained effort on the other side and in order to respond to that they
need assistance.

''As long as the Government in El Salvador can sustain its own internal
divisions, and as long as the levels of our military assistance are comparable
to what we've been providing, there isn't any danger of losing the war,'' she
added.

'That's for the Birds'

Mrs. Kirkpatrick said reports of her trip ''overemphasized the military.'' She
added: ''I am not at all an expert on military affairs. Tass said I spent most
of my time in Honduras visiting military installations. That's for the birds. I
didn't spend any time visiting military installations there.''

Mrs. Kirkpatrick said she had told President Reagan, after speaking to
officials, labor leaders, journalists and educators in Central America, that
there had been an increase in the level of anxiety about Soviet, Cuban and
Nicaraguan ''subversion'' and cultural influences.

''There is this very widespread concern about the level of Soviet long-range
investment in the region and the low level of apparent U.S. interest and
involvement,'' she said.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick said the leaders in the region voiced repeated concerns about
the military balance in Central America. ''What they talked about was the
systematic importation into Nicaragua of heavy armaments, unique in the
region,'' she said.

''It's hard for us to think very seriously about a Nicaraguan military threat,
but the fact is Nicaraguan military power outstrips any other military
establishment in the region,'' she said.

She said the region's ''longer range problems are economic, educational and
cultural,'' and the United States has offered ''nothing like'' the fellowships
and other programs provided by the Soviet Union. Generous development and food
aid should mark United States involvement, she said.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick said: ''The United States has attempted to use American
strength to influence events many times since World War II.  One of those times
was in Vietnam. Obviously we did badly in Vietnam, with its very high human cost
and very high social cost. On the other hand we used American strength with a
greater degree of success, and perhaps the most relevant analogy now is the
Marshall Plan.''

The program, under Gen. George C. Marshall, helped rebuild Europe after the war.
Mrs. Kirkpatrick noted that at the time Greece, Italy and France were facing
unrest and disorder. ''There can be successful uses of American strength and
resources,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jeane Kirkpatrick

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NONALIGNED PARLEY BEGINS TOMORROW

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Prime Minister Pham Van Dong of Vietnam is welcomed to New Delhi by
India's Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi, as he arrives to attend a five-day
conference of nations describing themselves as nonaligned. Because the seat
assigned to the Vietnam-supported Cambodian Government is challenged by
insurgents led by Pol Pot, the conferees have decided to leave it empty until
1985.  Associated Press

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JERSEY BILLS SEEK $75 MILLION FOR JOBS PROJECTS

BYLINE: By JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 53, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 599 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, March 5


A total of $75 million would be provided for projects intended to ease
unemployment and increase property values under a pair of bills passed by the
New Jersey Assembly.

The money would be allocated by the Commissioner of Commerce and Economic
Development with Legislative agreement. The bills would provide grants and loans
of up to 50 percent of the cost of approved public works and locally sponsored
private development projects in 287 of the state's 567 municipalities, excluding
more affluent towns.

The measures, sponsored by Senator Gerald R. Stockman, Democrat of Trenton, were
amended before their passage Thursday and will be returned to the Senate for
agreement on the changes before being sent to Governor Kean for his approval.

The Assembly session was interrupted for the marriage of Byron M.  Baer,
Democrat of Englewood, and Linda J. Pollitt, his legislative aide. The lawmakers
recessed for champagne and cake before the ceremony was performed at a nearby
hotel. Governor Kean and members of his staff joined the informal reception.

During a round of congratulatory speeches on the floor of the house before the
recess, Dean A. Gallo, Republican of Parsippany and minority leader of the
Assembly, said to Mr. Baer, ''Your committee meetings might not take so long,
now that you've got somebody to come home to.''

The state government took these other actions:

Housing

A bill that would enable the Housing Finance Agency to initiate a $50 million
program to convert such unused nonresidential structures as factory buildings to
multiple dwellings was passed by the Democratic majority over Republican
opposition in the Assembly. The measure, the Old Buildings, New Neighborhoods
Act, moves to the Senate for study and debate.

Microwave Transmissions

Mr. Gallo and Assemblywoman Leanna Brown, Republican of Parsippany-Troy Hills,
introduced a resolution calling for a study of the effects of microwave
transmissions on health and asking Governor Kean to impose a moratorium on the
construction of transmission towers.

Veterans' Benefits

Veterans of the Vietnam War would be entitled to five years of free tuition at
New Jersey colleges under the terms of a bill released from the Assembly Higher
Education Committee. The bill, sponsored by Angela L. Perun, Democrat of
Plainfield, would enable qualified veterans to study tuition free at the state's
six public colleges, county colleges, the University of Medicine and Dentistry,
the Newark College of Engineering and the graduate and law schools of Rutgers
University.

Highway Funds

Governor Kean announced that the United States Department of Transportation had
approved his request to ''de-designate'' a portion of Interstate 95 and make
$246.4 million in Federal money earmarked for the highway available for other
projects.

Tax Study

The Assembly gave final passage and sent to Mr. Kean a bill creating a 25-member
commission to study the tax system and recommend changes early next year.

Pac-Man Move

The Assembly approved, 62 to 1, a resolution ''condemning'' Warner
Communications for shifting most of the the manufacture of its computers as well
as Pac-Man and other video games from the United States to Hong Kong and Taiwan.

The move will result in the loss of 1,700 jobs, according to Assemblyman
Christopher J. Jackman, Democrat of West New York, who said, ''We should send a
message that we're not going to buy their tapes anymore.''

Assemblyman Charles L. Hardwick, Republican of Westfield, was the lone
dissenter, saying, ''International trade is a two-way street.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MIME'S PIED PIPER RETURNS

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1131 words


Offstage with Marcel Marceau, it is impossible to get a word in edgewise. The
man who helped revive and propagate the moribund art of pantomime almost talks
his head off when in private. He can be gabby in English, French, Italian,
Spanish and German. The torrent of words is understandable from someone who has
remained mum on stage for almost 40 years while perfecting what Mr. Marceau
calls ''silent acting.'' Absent from Broadway since 1975, he opens Wednesday at
the Belasco for a six-week run.

The creator of ''Bip'' - the white-faced clown who wears a battered stovepipe
hat crowned with a red flower - has, however, crisscrossed the United States 20
times on tours as long as six months and visited every other continent. He has
done up to 300 performances a year since Broadway catapulted him to
international celebrity in the theatrical season of 1955-56. He repeatedly says
that New York, its drama critics and audiences, made him. Above all, Mr. Marceau
has carried on a reciprocal love affair with students the world over, from
Peking to Poughkeepsie, inspiring a whole generation of whitefaced street mimes
beginning in the 1960's. University towns are ''must'' stops on his itinerary.

This compulsive bird-on-the-wing alighted briefly the other night at a Manhattan
hotel. He had been that morning in California and was headed the next morning
for Arizona. Mr. Marceau will be 60 years old March 22.

At first he appeared pale, frail and exhausted, draped like a wet noodle over
the arm of a sofa. But soon his bony frame seemed electrified with energy, his
eyes blazed, his hands flew, he leaped up to stalk around the coffee table, he
emptied a pitcher of orange juice in great gulps - and he talked. Mr. Marceau
has the habit of answering his own questions, sweeping aside the questions of
others in the rush of his narrative and referring to himself in the third
person, for which he apologized.

Mr. Marceau spoke of his clown, Bip, as ''Don Quixote, torn on the battlefield
of life between comedy and tragedy.'' He is convinced that his interpretations
have grown much deeper and more complicated over the years, evolving from the
simple pantomimes of his youth ''into the virtuosity of Schubert's lieder, in
which I create with my body elements of people, objects, society, the cosmic
world, elliptic time....'' A look of awe stole over his face and his voice
trailed off, very briefly, as he contemplated the cosmic world. Then he plunged
on.

He promised a whole batch of fresh ''mime dramas'' in his Broadway show,
including the fall of an angel bored in heaven, Bip and a dating service, Bip,
star of a traveling circus, Bip in Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, and, most important
for the pantomimist, ''Bip Remembers.'' The last long number is a look back at
the peaks and valleys of Mr. Marceau's own life: his ''loves, deceits, hopes and
dreams in a violent world. I will not reveal the end,'' he said, gritting his
teeth.

The name ''Bip'' was inspired by ''Pip'' of Dickens's ''Great Expectations''
because it was catchy and easily remembered. Mr.  Marceau explained that he
substituted the ''B'' because the original name pronounced in French sounds like
''pipe.'' One of his most famous pantomimes is the capture of an imaginary
butterfly. To illustrate its fate, Mr. Marceau laid his left hand palm-up along
the sofa arm, convulsively closing his fingers into a fist and then opening
them, more and more slowly. ''It moves people because it is like a heartbeat,
and then - Tac!'' he said. The fingers snapped open and stopped. He looked at
them. ''It is the fragility of life, it is death,'' he said.

He has never defined mime better than when he said, ''Pantomime is the art of
expressing feelings by attitudes, and not a means of expressing words through
gestures.'' The essence of that art was poignantly distilled in his own ''Youth,
Maturity, Old Age and Death,'' which he first presented here in 1955. In four
masterful minutes or less - folded fetus-like into himself, unfolding and then
folding again - he captured the yearning, joy and sorrow of a life's whole span.

Mr. Marceau does not expect to do the piece again this time, ''at least until
the critics go away, or they will say, 'Oh, the old Marceau is back.' '' His
repertory now includes 100 numbers from which he selects each performance's
offerings. The choice often changes from night to night depending on his mood.

His seventh one-man show in Paris last November and December, a prelude to
Broadway, received ecstatic notices; ironically, his fellow Frenchmen have seen
less of him over the last decades than Americans, although he heads a school of
mime in Paris. His second wife, Anne Sicco Marceau, teaches there. There are two
daughters, 11 and 7, by that marriage, and two sons in their 20's by Mr.
Marceau's first wife, Huguette.

He believes that his ''greatest recognition'' has come from the young people of
America. ''The hippie movement, the flower children, saw something wonderful in
mime,'' he said. ''I still get 200 letters a month from kids. But you cannot
learn the craft of mime by putting on a white face and sketching gestures in the
air. Silent acting encompasses dramatic feeling, poetry in motion, acrobatics.
What Marcel Marceau does is the essence of theater.''

He is very proud that, encouraged by his example, schools of mime have sprung up
all over the world. ''When I began, I do not think there were mime schools
anywhere except in Paris. It was an art that had almost died out by the end of
World War I,'' he said. ''There is no art form that can survive without a
school. Eighty pupils from 20 different nations are enrolled for three years in
my school.''

He is writing his autobiography. That is, he is trying to write it. It is called
''My Silent Outcry.'' But, Mr. Marceau said, ''I am suffering from writer's
block. I am so far behind schedule that Random House, my publishers, are furious
at me. But what can I do? I play 300 nights a year.''

Onstage, Mr. Marceau works with two young pantomimists who present his numbers:
Jonathan Lambert, who is from Dublin, and Jean-Jerome Raclot, a Parisian. Both
were trained at the Marcel Marceau International School of Mime Drama of Paris.
Both were born in 1958, only three years after Mr. Marceau made his breakthrough
on Broadway to international fame.

If he has changed and deepened, so have his American audiences - ''You are not
what you were in the 50's,'' he said. ''You have traveled. You are much more
aware, more sophisticated. You have had Vietnam.''

The telephone rang. Mr. Marceau sprang to answer, furiously beckoning his
departing visitor to remain for one more anecdote. He cupped his hand over the
receiver, and blurted out: ''I have so much still to say. Alas! Au revoir!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Marcel Marceau

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DANCE VIEW;
SHOULD DANCE TRY TO COMPETE WITH WORDS?

BYLINE: By Jack Anderson

SECTION: Section 2; Page 18, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1287 words


Recent programs by the Charlie Vernon Performance Company of Chicago and Johanna
Boyce and Performance Group involved dances to words, as well as to music. That
alone made them slightly odd for, whereas no one objects to dancing to music,
dancing to texts is considered suspect in some circles. Yet dancers keep on
doing it.

Modern dancers have long set works to quotations from novels, plays or poems
spoken either by the performers themselves or by offstage or recorded voices.
Martha Graham turned to the poetry of Emily Dickinson in ''Letter to the
World,'' Doris Humphrey used a poem by Federico Garcia Lorca in her ''Lament for
Ignacio Sanchez Mejias,'' the late Valerie Bettis was particularly fond of
blending movement with poetic texts and, in the past few seasons, Margaret Beals
has danced to Edna St. Vincent Millay and Sylvia Plath.

Such efforts are often scorned by dancers and theorists who deplore ''literary''
dance and uphold a vision of ''pure'' dance. Yet even abstractionists use words
at times. Merce Cunningham's ''How to Pass, Kick, Fall and Run'' is set to
anecdotes by John Cage, and the choreographer's ''Roadrunners'' occurs to
readings of Chinese legends. But since, in these cases, text and dance have
nothing to do with each other - in fact, their juxtapositions result in
deliberately comic incongruities - nobody could brand them ''literary.''

Choreographers may also write their own texts or create verbal collages from a
variety of sources. Meredith Monk's multimedia spectacles have frequently had
texts and Kenneth King dances to abstruse scientific (or, possibly,
pseudo-scientific) texts. These days, as an increasing number of choreographers
seek to reintroduce thematic material into their works and at the same time try
to avoid the dogged literalism that plagued the weakest examples of ''literary''
dance, it is likely that there will be further explorations of the possibilities
of dancing to words.

Yet texts may cause problems and there are reasons for being suspicious of them.
Music can drift over a listener in a wash of sound. But texts usually demand to
be followed more closely. Even nonsense texts must be followed to some degree so
that one can always be sure that they are indeed nonsensical. And if a text is
too complex, or too amusing or exciting, it may divert attention entirely away
from the stage action.

Words differ from music in still another way: no one doubts that words mean
specific things, whereas estheticians have long argued over what, if anything,
music means. Possibly to the annoyance of some of these thinkers, convention has
decreed that certain kinds of music can symbolize certain emotional states. Thus
flowing legatos may represent tranquillity, while jagged rhythms and grinding
dissonances may indicate agitation. But words go beyond this.

A dance may show a man and woman embracing. Sighing violins may help emphasize
that they are in love. But a text can tell us that John is a millionaire's
long-lost nephew, while Mary flunked algebra three times in high school. Some
choreographers may welcome such specificity as a means of adding thematic
richness to productions.

One of the most extreme examples of such a use of texts was Yvonne Rainer's
''Inner Appearances,'' a solo of 1973 in which Miss Rainer did nothing but push
a vacuum cleaner across the floor while a text projected on a screen related the
multitude of things she supposedly was thinking. Here, Miss Rainer deliberately
sought to combine banal movements with complex words. However, a text can also
overwhelm movement in a way the choreographer did not intend.

Last year, movement was overwhelmed by text in Johanna Boyce's ''Incidents (in
Coming of Age).'' Like many of Miss Boyce's finest works, ''Incidents'' blended
autobiographical reminiscences with social and political commentary and, in
addition to dancing, the production included slide projections of Miss Boyce's
family home in a Vermont college town, quotations from psychoanalytical and
sociological textbooks and excerpts from letters to and from Miss Boyce's
brother, who served as a soldier in Vietnam. The movement Miss Boyce devised was
often gamelike, her dancers playing both supposedly innocent childhood games and
more dangerous adult games of passion and violence.

''Incidents'' was always interesting. Yet the movement was never quite as
interesting as the text and slides. Choreography thereby became almost
subservient to words and pictures.

However, in her new ''With Longings to Realize,'' presented a few weeks ago at
the Bessie Schonberg Theater, Miss Boyce managed to make text and movement equal
partners. There was quite a lot of movement, in fact, and the choreography
emphasized twisting, rolling, hunching, crawling, sliding, tossing and turning.
This was a restless dance and one soon learned from an accompanying text spoken
both by the performers and by recorded voices that it depicted mental, as well
as physical, restlessness.

The text consisted of anecdotes concerning states of yearning, frustration and
grief, and among the subjects of these stories were problems of growing up,
parental pressures, the death of a friend and the plight of a young musician
with a hearing disorder. The stories proceeded by free association and the
movement could be termed bodily free association. In addition to words and
movement, ''With Longings to Realize'' had a repetitive, but gently melancholy,
musical score by Richard Munson that suited the work's introspective quality.
This was a dance of mulling and pondering.

So are many other dances to texts. Whereas choreography inevitably shows the
body at work, the addition of a text can imply that the bodily action we see is
a metaphor for the mind at work. The pieces that Charlie Vernon offered on his
program at the Theater of the Riverside Church were very much concerned with the
mind at work.

The strangest and most compelling of them was ''The Little Dream Dances,'' a
solo in which Mr. Vernon, wrapped up in a sheet, writhed on a bed and tumbled on
the floor to a recorded monologue about the peculiar things that can pass
through the mind in dreams or when one is on the edge of sleep. These fancies
also had their grim aspects for, at times, the text suggested that Mr. Vernon
was, or had been, a soldier. And when the piece ended with a gunshot, it was
impossible to tell whether that shot was real, remembered or imaginary. One
could not even be sure whether the character Mr. Vernon was portraying was now
supposed to be alive or dead.

Mr. Vernon's group works also related movement to thinking. In ''Dances of
Identity'' he set thought patterns dancing by combining sequences of tight and
relaxed movement with both theoretical statements about self-image and personal
reminiscences. While anthropological statements about a foreign culture's dances
were read aloud in ''Dances From Many Lands,'' the cast did hops and fidgets
that conceivably represented an outsider's notion of alien rituals.  Yet, at
other times, the dancers became fretful as voices spoke of how longings and
desires can remain trapped, unrealized, inside one.  And these scenes implied
that such situations are known in all cultures and that it is impossible for
anthropological theorizing alone to convey their poignancy. Once again, a union
of choreography and text managed to externalize internal states.

These dances by Miss Boyce and Mr. Vernon demonstrate that it is possible for
dance and words to work together. But they can do so only if choreographers are
exactly sure just what they want to accomplish through verbal and nonverbal
means. And actions in such dances must always speak as loudly and eloquently as
words.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Johanna Boyce Performance Group members

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR 'CRISIS' SHARPENS THE DEBATE OVER POLICY

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1155 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHATEVER their differences going in, Congressional leaders coming out of a White
House briefing on El Salvador last week were uniformly grim. ''The President
made it clear that there is a serious problem in the region, that the national
interests of this country are deeply involved in the outcome of that struggle,''
said the Senate majority leader, Howard H. Baker Jr. And Senator Henry M.
Jackson, Democrat of Washington, said the crisis extended beyond El Salvador;
the guerrillas could threaten all of Central America and Mexico too.

It could be argued, perhaps, that both men were predisposed to such conclusions.
But even a frequent Administration critic, Representative Michael D. Barnes, the
Maryland Democrat who heads the Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on the Western
Hemisphere, said the situation was ''deteriorating very rapidly.''

The alarms startled many in Washington - and more than a few in El Salvador,
where officials denied things had reached crisis proportions. It was as if a
smoky nuisance fire had suddenly been declared out of control. Recent news from
El Salvador, although undeniably bad, had not seemed much worse than during most
of the last two frustrating years. The Salvadoran military had suffered
setbacks, but most analysts thought these were largely psychological.

Perhaps, Congressional aides suggested, Mr. Reagan was turning up the heat to
offset any call by Pope Jean Paul II for reconciliation and an end to fighting
during his Salvadoran visit today. The Administration opposes a widely advocated
proposal for Government negotiations with the leftist guerrillas. Or maybe Mr.
Reagan was simply pulling out all the stops in an effort to get $60 million in
added military aid from Congress, where the Administration has been on the
defensive because of El Salvador's uncertain progress on human rights and land
reform.

Whatever the weight of these factors, a more basic reason for the uproar in
Washington may lie in the way the White House appears to be managing foreign
policy. For example, in arguing forcefully for $60 million in added military
aid, a ranking Pentagon official, Nestor D. Sanchez, said the Salvadoran forces
were within 30 days of running out of ammunition. Two days later, Under
Secretary of State William Schneider Jr. scored a direct hit on that argument:
The 30-day estimate was based on ''a hypothetical characterization'' such as an
invasion by Nicaragua ''with a 40,000-man army,'' which no one considered
likely.

Evidence that Central Americans have grown disenchanted with United States
policy came in an initiative by Costa Rica, Honduras and El Salvador for an area
conference to explore new methods of achieving peace. The United States would be
pointedly excluded because it was seen as an obstacle to consensus in the
region.

Then there were the conflicting reports over additional American military
advisers for the sagging Salvadoran army. Coming first from an anonymous White
House official on Air Force One as President Reagan flew to California, the
adviser story was alternately knocked down and resuscitated all week.

While Secretary of State George P. Shultz has joined in the campaign for
additional military aid, last week's sequence suggested that key players making
Salvador policy were Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief delegate to the United
Nations, and William P. Clark, the national security adviser and an old friend
of the President. Mrs.  Kirkpatrick brought back an especially gloomy assessment
from her recent trip to El Salvador. She and Mr. Clark conducted the briefing
that so discouraged Congressional leaders - and promptly provoked Congressional
criticism.
Domino Theory Revisited

Discussion of who was running foreign policy, strong suggestions that the
Administration might finance military aid from Presidential funds that need no
Congressional authorization, and warnings of a domino effect if El Salvador
should fall to the leftists gave critics ample openings to invoke memories of
Vietnam.

''I wonder how many of us stop to consider that San Salvador is closer to
Washington, D.C. than is San Francisco, California,'' Mr.  Sanchez testified
last week.

''Like at the time of Vietnam, the Administration has a credibilty gap about as
wide as the Grand Canyon,'' said Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of
Brooklyn, a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. ''Last month they
were optimistic, saying the light was practically at the end of the tunnel. This
month they're pessimistic, saying the end is at hand unless we take emergency
action,'' he went on. ''So what do we have? A hype.''

White House, State Department and Defense officials emphatically denied such
accusations. Regardless of the seriousness of the situation in El Salvador, what
to do about it seemed no clearer to Capitol Hill than to the White House. ''A
lot of people on the Hill don't like the Administration's policy, but they don't
particularly want to see the guerrillas taking over either,'' said a
Congressional aide. ''The problem is how do you find a mechanism that would
result in a policy that would resolve the dispute.'' Despite rhetoric about
pressing for ''social changes'' and political and economic advances - as opposed
to military victory - liberals in Congress have not offered a strategy of their
own. Its contradictions and setbacks notwithstanding, the Administration at
least has a clear goal and seemed determined to pursue it: getting the $60
million out of Congress.

Not least confused by the pronouncements from Washington have been the
Salvadorans themselves. In October, Ambassador Deane R. Hinton stunned
Salvadoran businessmen with what appeared to be a State Department-approved
statement that said rightist extremists were as much a destabilizing threat as
leftist guerrillas. Mr. Hinton threatened an end to military aid unless the
rightist ''mafia'' halted its murderous activities. But soon an unnamed White
House official said Mr. Hinton had gone too far. State Department officials were
shocked by the White House reaction. Again, high State Department officials
recently proposed - and the White House disowned -seeking dialogue with the
guerrillas, while continuing to fight the war.

The embarrassments were not limited to military policy. The Administration was
plainly upset when word leaked out that it was urging the Salvadoran Government
to advance Presidential elections from March 1984 to October of this year. The
Salvadoran authorities reminded Washington's armchair strategists that the fall
rainy season would be an electoral inconvenience, but they dutifully agreed to
vote in December. The Administration had sought a ''surprise'' announcement to
coincide with the Pope's visit. This project ''was put together by Band-Aids,''
an Administration official said. Said another, ''There are a hell of a lot of
conflicting impressions being given off about El Salvador.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: chart of US aid to Central America

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
WHY ARE WE IN VIETNAM?

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 848 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, March 5


Two U.S. officials were explaining why the Reagan Administration had pressed the
Government of El Salvador to hold an early election.

''The longer you give people to politic,'' one said, ''the less likely they are
to get down to the business at hand'' -fighting the guerrillas.

''Look,'' the other said, ''we're trying to bolster a government that has a lot
wrong with it, and we need to nudge it in the right direction.''

The place is different, but the attitudes are familiar: Uncle Sam knows best,
we'll show these little people how to fight and how to govern. A memory comes
back - Lyndon Johnson talking about ''Asian boys'' and how well they would do
with American help. Today it would be ''Latin boys.''

Vietnam is in the air, and everybody knows it. It is there in the crescendo of
alarm about El Salvador coming from President Reagan and his men, in the crisis
talk of dominoes falling and ammunition running out and the need for more
military aid and more U.S.  advisers.

But Vietnam was a disaster for the United States: a largely selfcreated
disaster, as hawks and doves agree. And El Salvador will be worse if the United
States inflates that struggle into The Crisis of the West and tries to apply
Vietnam tactics there.

Treating El Salvador as the frontline against Soviet Communism is inappropriate
on basic factual grounds. Every student of the place says that the war has
indigenous origins, in a long history of economic tyranny and political
oppression by a small ruling oligarchy. Of course the rebels are cheered on by
Cuba and Nicaragua and have had help from there. But the Reagan Administration's
claim that a flow of foreign arms to the rebels is the main problem is dismissed
by informed people on the ground.

The military correspondent of The New York Times, Drew Middleton, has been in El
Salvador. He does not underestimate Communist threats, and he spoke with
Americans and Salvadorans who do not. The report that he filed the other day saw
the problems of the war as internal.

''Military aid from Nicaragua and Cuba is not a key factor in the guerrillas'
campaign,'' Mr. Middleton wrote, ''according to an experienced intelligence
officer. Many of the guerrillas' arms have been captured from the Salvadoran
Army, the National Guard and the police... The scale of outside aid to the
guerrillas is far lower than that to the North Vietnamese, the officer said, and
there are no signs of troop reinforcements entering from Nicaragua.''

The Salvadoran Army and auxiliary forces are far less interested in fighting the
guerrillas than in killing civilians. The State Department, holding its nose to
certify progress on human rights, said recently that ''only'' 5,000 civilians
had been butchered last year. Most of those were killed by government forces.
Yet in all these years not one soldier, not one official has been convicted of a
single one of the thousands of murders.

There was an example last month, reported by the Associated Press from a place
called Las Hojas, where Indian peasants run a farm cooperative. Local
authorities said army soldiers had shot 18 peasants, including two children -
and the farmers accused local landowners of organizing the killing. The
Government said it would investigate.

What can American arms and advisers accomplish in a country like that? The
problem is essentially political. And when bombs do not cure the political
illness, what will follow -more bombs? The Vietnam hawks say we made our mistake
in not attacking North Vietnam even more massively than we did. Is the solution
here to bomb El Salvador back to the Stone Age?

President Reagan heatedly denies that Americans may become involved in the war.
''In no sense are we speaking of participation in combat by American forces,''
he said in San Francisco. But weak as we Americans are in historical memory, we
have not forgotten how we were slipped into the Vietnam War.

The Reagan Administration has in fact tried to slip its El Salvador policy past
Congress, using emergency and reprogrammed funds instead of the regular
legislative process, because it is afraid of public opinion. But Congress is not
going to be fooled.

The growing feeling in Congress is that political negotiations are the only way
out of the Salvador quagmire. It was the strength of that feeling that led
Secretary of State Shultz to try to put it down with uncharacteristic crudity.
The rebels, he said, are trying ''to shoot their way'' into power. Yes - and the
Government of El Salvador shot its way in, and stays in by shooting its people.

There is a focus in Congress for the rising concern. It is a bill introduced by
two Republicans, Senator Mark Hatfield of Oregon and Representative Jim Leach of
Iowa, that would redirect all U.S.  military aid to El Salvador to humanitarian
purposes unless the Salvadoran Government agrees to negotiate with the
insurgents. The President will resist, but perhaps Congress will rescue him from
himself. ''There is no parallel whatsoever with Vietnam,'' the President said
yesterday. Congress should see that he is right.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK TALK

BYLINE: By Judith Appelbaum

SECTION: Section 7; Page 39, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


Going It Alone in N.Y.C.

The voice on the phone one recent wintry day was jubilant: ''We've just had our
first million-dollar month,'' Tom Doherty declared. Mr.  Doherty, who runs Tor
Books, a mass market paperback house he founded in 1980, is one of several
intrepid individuals who have left top positions inside large New York
publishing companies within the past few years to start small firms of their own
in midtown Manhattan.

Does it make sense to set up a little house in the big city when hard times have
industry giants running scared? Mr. Doherty thinks it does, and so do Thomas
Congdon of Congdon & Weed and Esther Margolis of The Newmarket Press, who
founded their firms in 1979 and 1980, respectively, to publish trade titles.

The Only-Top-Titles Tenet. Mr. Doherty began his publishing career as a sales
representative for Pocket Books, rose to become national sales manager of Simon
& Schuster, moved to Grosset & Dunlap as publisher of its paperback lines in
1971 and launched Tor three years ago with $864,000 he borrowed from the veteran
book packager Richard Gallen.

''Let's only do books that would have been lead titles where you used to work,''
he told his new firm's editors, Jim Baen and Harriet McDougal. With a staff of
six and the help of freelancers, he now issues six or more titles a month, most
of them by ''proven authors,'' and he keeps overhead low so he can spend more on
packaging, advertising and promotion.

This month, Tor's releases include ''Targets'' by Donald E.  McQuinn, a novel
about Vietnam that was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize; ''The Obsession of Sally
Wing,'' a chiller by Russ Martin, and ''Twilight World,'' science fiction by the
Hugo Award winner Poul Anderson.

Access to the Audience. Tor Books are distributed to booksellers through
Pinnacle and Warner Books, and the firm also does business with schools, which
order hundreds of thousands of copies of its cartoon collections for book fairs.

''We're paying our loan back faster than we promised; we're doing twice as much
business this year as last, and we're having a great time,'' Mr. Doherty says.
In his view, entree to the mass market is not a problem for new houses, and his
sales manager, Ralph Arnote, agrees. ''It takes special talents to succeed,''
Mr. Arnote cautions, ''but wholesalers are responsive. They've seen that small
publishers' books can sell.''

The Mixed-Media Method. Like Tom Doherty, Esther Margolis and Thomas Congdon
rose through the ranks at large houses before founding their own firms. Miss
Margolis started out as secretary to the promotion director at Dell and then
moved to Bantam, where she eventually ran the promotion, advertising, publicity
and public relations departments and became a senior vice president. Mr.
Congdon, who got his first job at The Saturday Evening Post and then joined
Harper & Row as a book editor, moved to Doubleday and later to Dutton, where he
became editor in chief and then got his own imprint.

Because she sees publishing as an integral part of the communications industry,
Miss Margolis created Newmarket Press as a division of a company she calls
Newmarket Publishing and Communications that packages books and other products
and develops programs for television and other media. Individual investors
financed her enterprise, and Scribners handles production and distribution for
the firm, whose six spring / summer releases include ''So Long, Daddy,'' a novel
by H.B. Gilmour; ''Making Tootsie,'' a film study by Susan Dworkin; and ''The
Healing Touch,'' a reprint of one of Newmarket's first titles, ''Dr. Michael
Fox's Massage Program for Cats and Dogs.''

If she were advising others who are interested in starting new houses, Miss
Margolis would tell them that being independent ''gives you an extraordinary
understanding of how the business really works.  Either you end up making money
or you end up a more valuable employee for someone else. You can't lose.''

Beauty and the Better Way. Mr. Congdon, who strives to make his line of books
physically beautiful, distributes through St. Martin's Press. Recently, with the
help of Peter Weed, he refinanced his firm because changing French fiscal
policies had caused its original backer, Jean-Claude Lattes, to pull out. Mr.
Weed, who was formerly an editor at Dodd, Mead and has now lent his name to Mr.
Congdon's company, is associate publisher.

This season's 16 Congdon & Weed titles include ''Takes,'' New Yorker pieces by
Lillian Ross; ''Kyril,'' a thriller by John Trenhaile, and ''Hammett,'' a
biography by William F. Nolan.

''It's been an inspiring year,'' says Mr. Congdon, who published Russell Baker's
best seller, ''Growing Up,'' in 1982. ''I enjoyed myself when I worked in large
houses, but I knew there had to be a better way. I find this a wonderful way to
publish and a wonderful time to be small.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE G.O.P.: A PARTY IN SEARCH OF ITSELF

BYLINE: By Steven V. Roberts; Steven V. Roberts reports on Congress and politics
for The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 31, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7010 words


In the morning of the State of the Union address, President Reagan and his aides
ere briefing Republican leaders on their new program. One of those attending the
White House session was Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada, and after almost an hour
of talk he became alarmed. ''I never heard the reality of unemployment raised
except in passing,'' he recalled later.

Senator Laxalt is close to the President, and blunt with his advice, and he told
the meeting that he was ''really bothered'' by a recent incident in Minneapolis,
where 12,000 unemployed workers applied for 200 jobs. Others complained that the
story had been orchestrated by local unions, but the Nevadan felt differently.
''If that was orchestrated by the unions, then the people I saw interviewed on
television were excellent actors,'' he said. ''They had the ring of truth. This
is middle-class America, people who want to work, and are out of work. Plain
political and moral reality dictates that we address the problem.''

The debate in that White House briefing room symbolizes a broader battle within
the Republican Party, a battle that pits ideological conservatives against more
practical politicians and legislators. In an important sense, the party divides
between those who dismiss the workers in Minneapolis as tools of the union, and
those who say they represent a problem that must be addressed. How that battle
is resolved could have enormous implications for the party and the nation's
political life for the rest of the decade. In the short term, the struggle
centers on the mind of Ronald Reagan, and on the legislative agenda he and his
allies will pursue in the new Congress. In the long term, the struggle will
determine the future of the Republican Party. Who will lead the party, and in
what direction, after Mr. Reagan leaves the scene? Will the party be able to
solidify the gains it made in 1980, when some leaders talked confidently of a
permanent ''realignment'' of the party balance and a new Republican majority? Or
will the Republicans lapse back into the role of permanent understudy to the
Democrats after a few turns on the stage in place of the injured star?

American parties are vast, loosely organized coalitions, not ideologically
cohesive units on the European model, and as Robert M.  Teeter, a Republican
poll taker, put it, ''The tent's so big, you always have internal struggles.''
Richard S. Williamson, the White House liaison with state and local governments,
added: ''Parties are constantly in search of their own soul.'' What makes this
battle more important and more intense than most such battles is that the
Republicans control the Senate as well as the White House, and thus have major
responsibility for running the Government for the first time in a quarter of a
century. ''It was easy to be a united minority; we didn't have to answer for
anything,'' noted a Republican aide in the House. ''Now we have to answer for a
national agenda, and it's very difficult to do that.''

The battle for the Republican future has been described as a contest between
conservatives and moderates. Liberals seem to be an endangered species in the
G.O.P., almost as rare as Democrats who identify with Jimmy Carter. But in an
important sense, the conflict is not really ideological, since most of the
current and potential leaders cluster in a rather narrow band on the political
spectrum somewhere right of center, say about the 40-yard line.

The struggle really centers more on strategy than on ultimate goals, and the
fissures cut across each other in confusing patterns: ideologues versus
pragmatists, optimists against realists, those who scorn political calculation
fighting those who welcome it. Probably the major clash is between Republicans
who insist on maintaining certain principles and policies, no matter what, and
those who say the party's job is to govern the country, even if that means messy
compromises and imperfect solutions.

So far, President Reagan has been trying to straddle both horses at once, but
the strain is beginning to show. His budget calls for standby taxes, but no
change in his basic three-year tax package; job training, but not job-producing
Government efforts; a slowdown in defense, but no real change in his massive
military buildup. To many listeners from both parties, the President's State of
the Union address sounded soggy, almost soporific. For a generation, Mr. Reagan
has basically given one speech, the paean to free enterprise that he first
started refining as a good-will ambassador for General Electric and developed
into an effective political document during his years as Governor of California.
What he delivered on Jan. 25 amounted to only the second basic speech of his
political lifetime, and as he grudgingly acknowledged the value of government
intervention in the economy, the President seemed monumentally uncomfortable and
unenthusiastic.

Accordingly, the direction in which Mr. Reagan will lead the party remains
uncertain. So is his decision whether to run again next year. What is certain is
that the race to succeed Mr. Reagan, whenever he steps down, has already begun
in earnest. It is also clear that the Republican brouhaha could rival the
Democrats' well-known penchant for fratricide. John P. Sears, once the
President's campaign manager and now a Washington lawyer, voices a common
feeling when he says: ''Reagan is in charge of a broad group in the party. Once
he's no longer running, no one can replace him.'' Peter Hart, a prominent
Democratic poll taker, adds gleefully: ''It will be a bloodbath that I will be
delighted to watch.''

Until Mr. Reagan drops the other shoe, his potential successors are trying to
restrain their eagerness - but only barely. In the early weeks of the new year,
Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the majority leader, announced that he
would not seek a fourth term in 1984, in order to give himself running room for
a Presidential bid.  Senator Robert W. Packwood of Oregon went prospecting for
support in New England. Leaders of the New Right said they might not support Mr.
Reagan again, and contemplated backing Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina for
President, either on the Republican ticket or a thirdparty slate. Vice President
Bush took off on a European mission that could enhance his credentials as a
foreign policy expert.Senator Robert Dole seemed to be in the middle of every
legislative battle, from Social Security to taxes to food stamps, burnishing his
image as an effective legislator who can get things done.  Representative Jack
F. Kemp of New York, who campaigned vigorously for Re-publicans during the fall,
was assiduously adding to his stock of political chits. Senator Laxalt gained
greater public visibility by taking a new job as general chairman of the party
and its chief public spokesman. The Great Mentioner, that vaporous but
influential Washington sage, was popping up with some additional names, from
Senator William L. Armstrong of Colorado to Gov. James R. Thompson of Illinois.
And all this with the first party caucuses in Iowa still a year away.

These Republican machinations are not taking place in a vacuum. The two major
parties interact constantly, borrowing ideas and tactics, giving shape to each
other the way a head shapes a pillow.  Accordingly, the fate of the Republicans
will he heavily influenced by what the Democrats do. For a while, the G.O.P.
dreamed of a leftward adventure by the Democrats that would leave the middle
ground unoccupied. Those hopes were clouded by the decision of Senator Edward M.
Kennedy to pull out of the Presidential race, and his announcement was mourned
by Republicans who saw him as the perfect ''bogeyman,'' the one candidate who
could horrify their party enough to keep it united. Richard M. Scammon, a
well-known election analyst, said: ''If the Democrats erect a monument it should
be to a noncandidate - Kennedy. He enabled them to stay in the middle.''

The party that Ronald Reagan eventually bequeaths to his successors does possess
considerable strengths. For one thing, the Republicans have understood, far
better than the Democrats, the changing character of political parties. As the
traditional, locally based parties eroded under the hammer blows of modern life
-suburbs, television, education - the G.O.P. created a whole new animal, a
national party that turned the political world on its head. It was organized
from the top down, not the bottom up, and its threads of allegiance were knotted
together by computer banks, not precinct captains. Aggressive marketing
techniques turned the party into a money-making machine, and Richard N. Bond,
the deputy chairman of the Republican National Committee, said: ''We're in
really good shape mechanically. In gross dollars, the money we raise in the next
election cycle is going to be awesome.''

Institutionally, the Republican Party is in good shape despite Ronald Reagan,
not because of him. The President came to partisan politics late in life, and he
has always been a lone wolf, more devoted to promoting his own ideas and
ambitions than the interests of his party. Accordingly, Mr. Reagan has played
down the role of President as party leader, and has shown little concern for the
inner workings of the complex organism that is the modern mass political party.

The health of the Republican Party is really a testament to Bill Brock, who took
over as party chairman after the Watergate humiliation and did a superb
rebuilding job. The President's disinterest in the party structure was
demonstrated by his choice to succeed Brock - Richard Richards, an obscure party
functionary from Utah who almost disappeared during his two years in the job.
The decision to replace Richards with Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr., the Nevada state
chairman and a close associate of Senator Laxalt, reflected White House concern
for the political future of Ronald Reagan, not the Republican Party.

In recent years, the Republicans have been the more dynamic party, producing
ideas, attracting recruits and conveying a sense of purpose. As a result, the
party has exerted more influence over the national agenda, and has shaken the
Democrats' domination of the political dialogue. As John Sears observed: ''The
crucial thing in politics is who getsto say what's wrong with the country, and
what should be done about it. That's up for grabs now, and that hasn't been true
for 50 years.''

The best ideas of one party are often absorbed by the other, a process that
blurs battle lines and frustrates purists, but generally guarantees the health
of the system. As a result, many Democrats sound like warmed-over Republicans
these days: hesitating to propose new spending programs without finding a way to
pay for them; talking about the needs of capital as well as labor; accepting
larger defense budgets and the premise that America must rebuild its military.
In addition, the Republicans showed remarkable resiliency in the elections of
1982. While they lost 26 seats in the House, they retained control of the
Senate, captured the governorship of California, and almost pulled off a major
upset in New York. Ben J.  Wattenberg, co-author of ''The Real Majority,'' an
influential political analysis in the early 1970's, said of the Republicans'
performance in 1982: ''They survived. That tells you something about the potency
of their ideas.''

Finally, the same polls that show slippage in Mr. Reagan's approval rating do
not show a corre-sponding surge for the Democrats. ''If the people believed that
the Democrats could solve our problems, I'd be very concerned,'' said
Fahrenkopf, the new chairman of the Republican National Committee. ''But they're
not saying that.''

Yet for all these brave words and hopeful signs, the Republican Party is
blanketed today by a thick fog of confusion, a miasma of missed opportunities.
Two years after Richard B. Wirthlin, the President's poll taker, talked
confidently about a ''rolling realignment'' that would significantly alter the
political landscape, many Republicans are saying frankly, ''We're blowing it.''
Or as Edward Mahe Jr., a former party official and current campaign consultant,
put it, ''We are rapidly getting to the point where we're making Jimmy Carter
look good, and I never thought that would be possible.''

''We've snatched defeat from the jaws of victory,'' lamented Michael S. Johnson,
the press aide to Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the Republican
minority leader. ''We went at our programs and our goals with such fervor in
1981 that we got too far in front of the people who gave us our mandate. As we
moved toward recession and high unemployment, we maintained too much
selfconfidence in the long-term impact of our program. We believed our own
rhetoric, and we forgot to be shortsighted. We didn't demonstrate a basic
sensitivity to the problems that were being created.'' Scholars who study the
evolution of political parties note that genuine realignments have generally
occurred on a 30- to 40-year cycle. Since the Democrats became the majority
party in the 30's, pressures are building along the fault lines that divide the
electorate, and by historic standards, a shift might be imminent. But the major
reason that the Republicans have not been able to trigger this political
earthquake was the one pinpointed by Johnson: the widespread perception that
they lack a ''basic sensitivity'' to the problems of average, working-class
Americans.

''From everything I can see for the rest of the decade, it doesn't look like the
Republicans can became a majority,'' said Prof. Robert L. Peabody, who teaches
political science at Johns Hopkins University. ''To get a true realignment, you
have to get a movement in the electorate, but all the data show that people are
not changing their party allegiance. They voted for Reagan over Carter as the
lesser of two evils.''

Prof. Joel L. Fleishman of Duke University believes that the Republican future
will be determined at least in part by the Democrats. ''To the extent that the
Democratic Party remains a middle party, leaning to the left, it will be hard
for the Republicans to get majority status,'' said Professor Fleishman, the
editor of a new book, ''The Future of American Political Parties.'' ''There are
just alot more poor and moderate income people around who are attracted to the
Democratic Party.''

In Fleishman's view, Reagan has pulled the Republicans to the right, and out of
the political mainstream. ''The party of Ronald Reagan cannot be a majority
party; it's too skewed toward wealth and privilege and corporations,'' the
professor argued. ''I doubt that Americans are extremists one way or another.
When Ronald Reagan was running, he was not perceived to be as ideologically
extreme as he turned out to be.'' The Republican Party dominated the political
scene from the Civil War to the New Deal. The Democratic coalition formed by
Franklin D. Roosevelt did not start unraveling until the 1960's, and in an
important sense it was a victim of its own success. Speaker of the House Thomas
P. O'Neill Jr. is fond of saying that the Democrats hoisted their own
working-class loyalists into the middle class, and gave them the luxury of
becoming Republicans.

This natural political evolution was accelerated by Vietnam and the rise of the
youthful counterculture, which seemed to mock so many of the values held sacred
by traditional Democrats, from church to flag to family. As John Sears recalls,
''The Democrats denigrated the mainstream voter, and allowed themselves to look
so avant-garde that they no longer could be trusted.''

George Wallace saw this chance and took it. So did Richard Nixon, who denounced
hippies and praised ''hard hats'' and sought out disaffected Democrats. ''By
1972,'' notes Kevin P. Phillips, author of ''The Emerging Republican Majority,''
''Nixon was thinking in terms of country and western singers and Polish
archbishops in the White House. He finally understood it.''

Ronald Reagan codified this new appeal to traditional Democrats in a most cogent
and perceptive way, through his campaign litany of neighborhood, work, family,
peace and freedom. With those words, the party of the board room and the country
club reached into the bowling alley and the union hall. Two key voting groups
swung behind the Republicans: blue-collar workers, often urban Catholics from
the Northeast and Middle West; and Southern Protestants, often rural and
religious, who had been Democrats since the Civil War. The Republicans told them
that they would fight crime, end racial disruptions in the schools, restore
respect for the flag, shore up the family, cut taxes and throw the greedy off
welfare. Said one Republican campaign strategist: ''You can't underestimate the
degree of fed-upness there was going into the 1980 election.''

Have the Republicans failed to capitalize on their victory in 1980? Why, as
Prof. Nelson W. Polsby of the University of California at Berkeley put it, is
''the Republican Party busily blowing a golden opportunity, handed it by the
incompetence of Democrats in managing their own affairs?'' The basic answer is
that the Republicans misread the 1980 elections in a number of profound ways.
For one thing, they were too quick to proclaim a party realignment on the basis
of only one election. Richard Scammon, co-author of ''The Real Majority,''
points out that the vote in House races, as opposed to the Presidential
balloting, has stayed fairly steady since 1978, with Democrats winning 51
percent to 56 percent of the popular vote.  Polsby notes that even when the
Republicans were taking control of the Senate, Democratic Senate candidates
outpolled their opponents by a total of almost three million votes. The
professor, author of the forthcoming book ''The Consequences of Party Reform,''
concludes: ''The evidence for party realignment or for the emergence of a new
majority backing the President's program is extremely thin.''

The Republicans interpreted their ''mandate'' as an endorsement of the
full-dress program long nurtured by Mr. Reagan and his conservative colleagues;
but exit polls from 1980 show that 38 percent of the Reagan supporters were
voting against Carter, while only 11 percent were attracted by the Republicans'
conservative agenda. Peter D. Hart, the Democratic poll taker, explains: ''You
weren't getting fundamental shifts in attitude in the 1980 election.  People
sided with the Republicans because they didn't like the Democrats, not because
the Republican Party made sense and they were buying in.''

Public support for Mr. Reagan's economic program was always shallower than the
President and his allies maintained. But the tidal wave of enthusiasm generated
by the President's victory swallowed up doubts and swept everyone along. Looking
back, Richard Richards, outgoing chairman of the Republican National Committee,
explains:

''There was a tendency to think that when we made a decision, certain things
would happen. If we cut taxes or social spending the results would occur as an
exact science. That just ain't so. Everyone who runs for office oversimplifies
what he can and will do, and we did that. But things didn't follow as easily and
routinely as we thought they would, and we've jeopardized our credentials and
our right to lead.''

A growing number of Republicans also believe they are suffering from a
''compassion gap,'' a belief that the party has not done enough to recharge the
economy or alleviate the suffering of the umemployed in the aging industrial
areas of the country. To Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, Republicans who
counsel caution and restraint are ''architects of disaster'' for the party. ''I
don't see how you can go to Indiana and say you're for full employment, and at
the same time say, 'There's nothing I can do about it,' '' said Senator Lugar,
author of a housing stimulus bill that passed Congress last year but was vetoed
by the President. ''There are things we can do about it and ought to do about
it, and if we want to be the majority party, we have to be part of it.''

The Republicans also misread the election as a mandate for a wholesale attack on
government spending and services, long favored by conservative ideologues. But
as Representative Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican whip, put it:
''Americans think of themselves as conservatives; they want government reduced.
But in their hearts they are liberals; they want all the goodies coming in.''

The Administration's most damaging misinterpretation of the 1980 election came
in the area of Social Security. V. Lance Tarrance Jr., a Republican poll taker
in Texas, reports that for the first six months of the President's tenure, more
and more voters were identifying with the Republican Party. Then came the White
House proposal to trim pension benefits. ''Realignment officially terminated in
June of 1981, with the Social Security pronouncement,'' notes Tarrance, who was
monitoring the issue through public-opinion surveys. ''There's been not a single
breath of life in it since.''

The third mistake flowed from the conviction that the social issues, such as
abortion, school prayer and busing, would help cement the swing of Democrats to
the Republican cause. But Republican strategists now admit that abortion is an
emotional issue that ''cuts both ways'' and costs as many votes as it attracts,
even among Roman Catholics. Moreover, it was one thing for voters to identify
with a vague concern about moral decay, quite another to back legislation that
would amend the Constitution or strip the courts of jurisdiction. Here again,
the Reaganites projected the ideological views of their true believers onto the
average voter, and paid for it.

The fourth misreading of the election was more subtle. Because Ronald Reagan won
such a large share of the bowling-alley vote in 1980, the Republicans became
complacent, convinced that these voters had switched permanently. But they
failed to realize how fragile this new-found allegiance really was, and how deep
the ancient suspicions of the Republicans really ran.

''When the Republicans got in,'' said Representative Guy Vander Jagt of
Michigan, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, ''the
image of the Republicans favoring the rich certainly resurfaced. And Reagan
contributed to that, appearancewise, with the new china and all those other
things. Many blue-collar people said, 'The Republicans really don't care about
us.' ''

Where, then, do the Republicans go from here? The struggle will continue on two
parallel tracks, the legislative and the political.  But in the immediate
future, the focus will be on Capitol Hill.

The pragmatist-realist faction of the party starts from the premise that the
Republican resurgence is being choked off by rising unemployment and deepening
despair. And they see no point in staying the course with an iceberg looming
dead ahead.

''If we don't deal with circumstances as we find them, we're not doing our
job,'' Senator Laxalt insisted. ''Two years ago we thought that our tax cut
would stimulate the economy and we would have 6 or 7 percent growth rate by now.
That hasn't happened, so we can't sit there and bury our heads in the sand and
say go away.''

The pragmatists make their base camp on Capitol Hill, and that is no accident.
Midterm elections are specifically designed to produce a report card on the
Administration, to force the entire House and onethird of the Senate to return
home and listen to their constituents. Representative Toby Roth, Republican of
Wisconsin, described the experience this way: ''You get very isolated in
Washington and lose touch. But on the campaign trail you get very realistic,
very quickly.''

Moreover, the terms of 19 Republican Senators are up in 1984, and the party
leadership has absolutely no desire to return to minority status in the Senate.
They would like to re-elect President Reagan and retain the White House, but as
one Senate aide conceded, ''Our No.1 one priority is to keep control of the
Senate.''

To most Republican leaders in Congress, the way to do that is follow Laxalt's
advice and ''deal with circumstances as we find them,'' not as they would like
them to be. This bent toward realism, not always a highly prized characteristic
in Republican ranks, has been accentuated by the experience of the last two
years. Many Congressional Republicans have undergone a remarkable evolution,
from minority to majority, from outsider to insider, from critic to craftsman.
Senator Dole, the consummate pragmatist, expressed what might stand as the credo
of his colleagues when he said, ''We are the majority party; we have to produce
legislation.''

The determination of Mr. Dole and his colleagues to produce practical
legislation, and not just accept White House dictates, is also animated by a
dirty little secret: Many of them never really believed in ''supply-side''
economics, the idea that reduced taxes would stimulate the economy and wipe out
deficits. They agreed with George Bush when he called it ''voodoo economics''
and with Senator Baker when he called it a ''river-boat gamble,'' and now they
feel it is time for the party to cut its losses. They are still conservatives,
rooted in the belief that smaller government is better government. But just as
liberal Democrats have absorbed some basic Republican precepts in recent years,
these Republicans see some good points in the Democratic belief that government
intervention in the economy is right and proper. ''If we continue our hands-off
approach, with government having no responsibility, there's going to be hell to
pay in 1984,'' said Senator Dan Quayle, Republican of Indiana.

As Senator Quayle indicates, the 1984 elections are already dominating thought
processes on Capitol Hill, and the legislative strategy of the pragmatist
faction dovetails with its political belief: The government can only be run, and
elections can only be won, in the broad middleground of the political arena.
''The question in both parties,'' says Ben Wattenberg, ''is who captures the
horse of tough moderation.''

Republicans from the industrial Northeast and Middle West are particularly
alarmed at the ''hands-off'' attitude of the ideological conservatives in the
party, and they say that stronger government intervention in the economy is
absolutely essential if their party is to have any chance of recapturing the
blue-collar Democrats who backed President Reagan in 1980.

''I can't understand all this caution, the feeling that recovery can happen too
soon,'' complained Senator Lugar, the new head of the National Republican
Senatorial Committee. ''In my part of the country it can't happen too soon.''

Senator Packwood of Oregon, the man Senator Lugar ousted from the campaign post,
advances the critique of his party one step further.  He points out that in 1982
Republicans were most popular with white males earning more than $40,000 a year,
and he finds that a very narrow base for a mass party. In speeches around the
country, the Oregonian is preaching that Republicans must make a major effort to
attract women and racial minorities. ''The feeling now is that our party doesn't
care about them, doesn't need them and doesn't want them,'' he said.

Many Republicans who dislike the Senator's manner, and his personal criticisms
of President Reagan, agree with his political analysis. It was no accident that
Mr. Reagan appointed two women to his Cabinet within one week, and praised the
Civil Rights Commission in his State of the Union address.

At times, the Republican battle lines seem drawn across Pennsylvania Avenue,
with the White House on one side and Congress on the other. But there are
important pragmatist moles in the executive branch, just as there are plenty of
ideologues in Congress. The chief pragmatist in the inner circle is clearly
James A. Baker 3d, the chief of staff; and Charles Black, Republican campaign
consultant, describes his role this way: ''Jim Baker knows how this town
operates, and he's quicker to compromise than Reagan or Meese. But
philosophically, there's not a big difference between them.'' 3rd jump

But there is a difference in style and outlook. Baker and his allies are rooted
in the Republican tradition - generally fostered in Ivy League schools and Wall
Street law firms - that government service is a noble pursuit. So they do not
share the burning hostility toward government that motivates many conservatives
from non-Eastern, nonprivileged backgrounds.

The other knock against the likes of Baker is that they are not true Reaganites,
that they originally backed other Republican hopefuls and have not passed the
loyalty test. To pragmatists on Capitol Hill, this makes the Bakerites
invaluable sources of balance and skepticism in the White House, but to the
ideologues, this makes them unreliable, and even treacherous. Indeed, it has
become a part of the conservative canon that the interlopers in the White House
have betrayed the Reagan revolution and caused its downfall. A typical view was
expressed by Lyn Nofziger, the former White House political adviser, who said of
the President: ''He's the victim of people who work for him, who are opposed to
his philosophy.''

That philosophy is the wellspring of the ideological wing of the party. Its
headquarters are in the White House, and its chieftains include Edwin Meese 3d,
the president's counselor; Edward Rollins, the political adviser, and Richard S.
Williamson, the liaison to local governments. But they get strong support from
such lawmakers as Representative Kemp and Senator Armstrong, plus right-wing
activists like Richard Viguerie, who refined the use of direct mail fund raising
to a high art.

This is the group that believes the country must ''stay the course,'' maintain
confidence in the President and his program, avoid ''quick fixes'' and
weak-kneed retreat. Its rallying cry was enunciated recently by James G. Watt,
the Secretary of the Interior, who told a party celebrating the Administration's
second anniversary: ''Let Reagan be Reagan.''

In their view, President Reagan is failing not because he has been too rigid,
but because he has been too flexible. When the President calls for new taxes or
jobs programs, no matter how small, they believe that he is crippling his own
program, fuzzing the differences between the parties, and converting the
Republicans into pale imitations of the Democrats.

To right-wing activists like Robert McAdam, assistant director of the Committee
for the Survival of a Free Congress, any battle fought on economic grounds will
always be won by the Democrats, so there is no use compromising. ''The Reagan
Administration and the Republican leadership in Congress say that nothing is
important but economics,'' McAdam noted. ''But the blue-collar voters say, O.K.,
I'm a Democrat, and if all you want to talk about is economics, I'm better off
with the Democrats. They'll at least guarantee my job.''

Mr. McAdam insists that the Administration must revive such noneconomic issues
as crime and school prayer that motivated the conservative cadres in 1980. Bill
Lee, a campaign consultant for Republicans, agrees, saying, ''You have to
service the coalition.''

When it comes to the economy, the ideologues say that the President and the
Republicans must stick with the original plan, and not alter it in the name of
realism. Rollins sneers that there are ''many Republicans who have been bitten
by the good government bug, who feel we have a responsibility to govern,'' but
he is not one of them. Like many Reaganites, Rollins is mesmerized by the
prospect that if their hero changes course he will be become ''Carterized,'' and
will shrink in stature and will be viewed as weak-willed. Moreover, the
ideologues see Reagan as their best, and perhaps last, chance to enact the
conservative agenda they have been drafting for a generation. And as hopes for
that agenda continue to dwindle, they are getting a bit desperate.

The only answer, goes their argument, is for Reagan to stay firm, draw a clear
distinction between Democrats and Republicans, and try to polarize the
electorate. ''I personally feel,'' said Rollins, ''that the politics of
confrontation is more effective than the politics of compromise. You can't run
on the basis of compromise.''

One of the leading exponents of this approach on Capitol Hill is Representative
Newt Gingrich of Georgia, who says that Mr. Reagan and the Republicans have
already been damaged by too much accommodation and now ''stand for nothing'' in
the eyes of the electorate.  Compromise, he says, ''helps you to govern, but it
collapses your majority. To the degree you try to govern in the short run, at
the cost of destroying your coalition, that's terribly destructive.''

The best example of how these different approaches play out in legislative terms
came last fall, in the fight over the gasoline tax bill. Senator Baker and the
rest of the Republican leadership backed the bill as an imperfect but useful
compromise, a way of providing jobs and showing sympathy for the unemployed
while not increasing the deficit.

The orthodox right-wingers, as Mr. Gingrich implied, are not really interested
in governing, and they used the occasion to abandon the ruling coalition in the
Senate and return to their traditional role of opposition critic. ''When you're
given the power to govern,'' noted Senator Quayle, ''and you don't like
government, you're uncomfortable.''

On principle, the ideologues don't like the higher taxes and greater government
responsibility embodied in the bill. But they also think that the gas tax is the
sort of legislation that can be used to political advantage. Instead of
supporting it as a jobs bill, they opposed it as a tax bill, and cast themselves
in the role of defending the ''little guy'' - the motorist who would have to pay
the new levy.

The word of the year among hard-core conservatives is ''populism,'' and they
share the view of the realists that the Republicans must shed their image as the
party of the rich. But the remedies offered to eradicate that image are
diametrically opposed. The realists say you win the worker's vote by using
government to stimulate the economy and relieve suffering; the ideologues say
you gain friends by reducing government and relieving the tax burden.

In some ways the legislative battle is a preliminary for the main event, the
fight for party leadership in the post-Reagan era. Of course, Mr. Reagan has to
step aside before this struggle can emerge into the open, and the first question
concerns the President's true intentions. Republicans generally agree that the
President would be their strongest and most unifying candidate, and those who
think he will run again argue some variation on the theme that he does, or
should, want to finish the job he has started. However, analysts such as John
Sears see only a ''50-50 chance'' that the President will try for another term,
and their reasons are also familiar: he's too old, he doesn't like the job, his
wife wants to go back to California and their rich friends.

The key variable is the economy, and even a Reagan loyalist like Paul Laxalt
says that: ''If I came to the conclusion that he was a political basket case, I
wouldn't want him to take the party on a kamikaze mission.''

The President is coming under increasing pressure to make his decision by Labor
Day, or even July 4. Even now there is a lot of discreet contingency planning
going on, but it is hard to handicap a race that is still being run in the dark.
Most Republicans agree with Robert Teeter, the poll taker, when he says that
''so much depends on personality, not ideology.'' This is particularly true
since most of the leading contenders come from the pragmatic, or moderately
conservative, camp, and agree on a good many issues. In addition to personality,
Senator Laxalt suggests two other key qualities: tenacity and organizational
skills.

''Running for President,'' he said, ''is a very substantial endeavor. You can
have all the charisma in the world, and run well in your home state, but when
you get on the national track it's a different animal. You have to pass the
credibility test of the national media, and raise a tremendous amount of money
and get out and pray that you sell.''

With Mr. Reagan out of the picture, and even if he stays in, Kevin Phillips
foresees a fragmentation of the party that could produce two splinter efforts: a
right-wing slate headed by someone like Jesse Helms, and a liberal-elite party
headed by John Anderson. Any insurrection of this sort would certainly diminish
the value of the Republican nomination, but there would be plenty of competitors
anyway, and no clear favorite. As Senator Laxalt assesses the situation: ''I
don't see any heir apparent at all. There's no consensus out there. The day of
receiving a blessing and getting the nomination is over.''

Many questions continue to hover over the Republican Party as the 98th Congress,
and the 1984 Presidential race, start to take shape.  The latest struggle for
the future of the Republican Party is just beginning. But as Teeter noted: ''It
is not a struggle that ends some day. It is part of a continuing process that
all political parties go through.'' If Reagan Doesn't Run ice President Bush has
to be considered first among equals in the nomination sweepstakes, should
President Reagan pull out. While he generally represents the pragmatic
conservative wing of the party, even a hard-core Reaganite like Richard S.
Williamson of the White House staff says of Bush: ''On a practical level he's
done an enormous amount. He's helped 150 candidates in the last year, and you
couldn't ask for more.''

In addition to a fistful of I.O.U.'s, Vice President Bush retains the skeleton
of a good organization and an ability to appeal to a wide slice of the political
spectrum. ''Bush is like a chameleon,'' said Representative Jim Leach of Iowa, a
Bush backer. ''People see in him what they want to see, even if it's not always
accurate.'' But Bush also carries a lot of baggage, and the biggest load, at
least potentially, is his ''Hubert Humphrey problem,'' linkage to an unpopular
and discredited President. ''No matter how you slice it,'' says Senator Laxalt,
''the President and the Vice President become Siamese twins.'' Others deride the
Vice President as a ''walking watercress sandwich,'' a relentless preppy with
little appeal to blue-collar Democrats. Peter Hart, a Democratic poll taker,
says that Bush has ''the soul of a Vice President'' and adds, ''I don't know who
George Bush is, or what he's for.''

But then, the same thing has been said of Senator Baker, who is ranked second by
most early oddsmakers. Baker is also more pragmatic than ideological. His
advantage over Mr. Bush is a folksier image and more independence from the
Reagan Administration. And by announcing his decision to leave the Senate, he
managed to proclaim his own Presidential ambitions without dumping on the
current President or appearing overeager. On the negative side, Baker has been
despised by the right wing ever since he supported the Panama Canal treaties.
Moreover, Baker is a superb back-room politician, an inside man doing an inside
job. But as Lyn Nofziger, former assistant to the President for political
affairs, notes, the qualities of a good majority leader - patience, affability,
a knack for compromise -are ''entirely different from the personality and talent
needed to be a good candidate for President.''

The third major candidate from the pragmatic conservative camp is Senator Dole,
the tough guy turned statesman. Dole is a legitimate war hero, and that won't
hurt the chances of a Republican who might have to run against the Democrats'
Senator John Glenn, the former astronaut. Lance Tarrance, a Republican poll
taker in Texas, adds that since economic problems seem so intractable,
ideological candidates seem less viable than more practical, experienced types
like Baker and Dole. For now, however, Baker seems to have the edge over Dole in
their quiet jockeying for the same corner of the party.  Moreover, Dole's
responsibilities as chairman of the Finance Committee will keep him tied to
Capitol Hill, and raising taxes is not exactly the best way to get people to
vote for you.

At this stage, the man most likely to emerge as the candidate of the more
ideological wing of the party is Jack Kemp. The New York Congressman has
traipsed across the country, speaking for local Republican hopefuls, and as
Richard N. Bond, deputy chairman of the Republican National Committee says,
''Kemp has got as many chits as anyone.'' With his football stories, perfectly
waved hair and toothpaste-ad teeth, Kemp exudes a star quality that more prosaic
politicians find hard to match. The most frequently heard criticism of Kemp is
that he is not decisive and that he sometimes seems full of ideas and theories
that do not quite make sense. One of those theories, embodied in the Kemp-Roth
tax bill, which cut taxes by 25 percent over three years, could poison his
chances if the economy does not revive.

Perhaps the one potential candidate who could span both camps with the same
agility as Ronald Reagan is his good friend Paul Laxalt. The Nevadan would
probably inherit a good chunk of the President's following, and since he led the
opposition to the Panama Canal treaties, he has always enjoyed good support on
the right. Yet most pragmatists regard him as an honest broker with a streak of
realism in his makeup. Laxalt has never seemed to hunger for the Presidency, and
he will do nothing to advance his own cause while President Reagan is a
potential candidate. But he was clearly disappointed when he lost the
Vice-Presidential nomination in 1980, and at times it appears that his near miss
has left him with an aftertaste of glory.  When I asked if he ruled out a
Presidential bid, he replied, ''You can't rule anything out around here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan with Vice President Bush and
Senators Howard Baker, Paul Laxalt and John Tower photo of Representative Jack
Kemp photo of Senator Paul Laxalt photo of Senators Robert Dole and Senator
Jesse Helms

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
TENACIOUS LEADER OF THE GREEN PARTY: PETRA KARIN KELLY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: BONN, March 6


Woman in the News

The members of the antinuclear Green Party, which for the first time won seats
in Parliament in today's election, pride themselves on being an ''antiparty
party,'' and they express disdain for the idea of established leaders.

Their Members of Parliament have promised to surrender most of their salaries to
the party, and some will rotate with other Green Party members before their
four-year terms expire.

Yet without the passion and tenacity of one of their new legislators, Petra
Karin Kelly, the Greens might never have become a party in the first place. The
American-educated Miss Kelly has infused the organization, which was founded in
1979 as a loose coalition of environmentalists and pacifists, with her own
strong views on nuclear weapons and nuclear power.

Now, from their parliamentary forum, Miss Kelly and her collegues will be able
to amplify their opposition to the deployment of American Pershing 2 and cruise
missiles in West Germany, and they will be well positioned to hasten the
radicalization of the humbled Social Democrats.

'Little Case of Codes'

''Americans don't appreciate what war is like,'' Miss Kelly, 35 years old, said
in a recent interview. ''There's no one in control any more. Mr. Reagan runs
around with his little case of codes to start a nuclear war, and we say this is
security policy.

''I think they should put the codes in the heart of a child, so Reagan would
have to tear them out to use them,'' Miss Kelly continued. ''We're realistic;
they're insane. If the Pershings are arriving in '83, and we blockade and we get
arrested, that's the price we'll have to pay.''

Miss Kelly does not come from the party's faintly romantic, politically
@untested ecological wing, which gave it early momentum but has since faded in
strength. Nor did she emerge from the smattering of fringe Marxist-Leninist
parties whose alumni exercise growing organizational and ideological influence
within the Greens.

Rather Miss Kelly, the West German-born stepdaughter of a retired American
colonel, learned the bold techniques, if not the content, of her politics in the
United States. Her political heroes are not Marx or Lenin, but Henry David
Thoreau, Martin Luther King and anti-Vietnam war campaigners like Daniel
Ellsberg and the Berrigan brothers.

A 'Tribunal' on Nuclear Arms

With what some have described as a sense of historical audacity and a keen,
highly Americanized knack for public relations, she summoned some of these
Americans to join like-minded Europeans last month in her constituency of
Nuremberg for a ''war crimes'' tribunal against nuclear weapons.

In the city where Nazi war criminals were condemned, Miss Kelly's tribunal drew
strong parallels between Auschwitz and Hiroshima, belabored the United States
for its purportedly aggressive nuclear weapons posture and, in the main, had
little critical to say about the Soviet Union. The event, in the view of some,
was shot through with the Greens' left-wing nationalism that casts West Germany
as victimized by the United States and hobbled by its NATO connection.

Miss Kelly was born in Gunzburg in Bavaria on Nov. 29, 1947. At the age of 13
she moved with her mother and stepfather, Col. John E.  Kelly, to Georgia and
then Virginia, where she went to high school.  As an international affairs
student at American University in Washington, she befriended Hubert H. Humphrey
and worked in Robert F. Kennedy's Presidential campaign.

After graduating, she returned to Europe, took a job in the Common Market
secretariat in Brussels, joined the West German Social Democrats and then, like
many future Greens, grew disillusioned with Chancellor Helmut Schmidt's
moderation and quit the party in 1978.

3.2% of Vote in First Test

The next year, she and a group of environmentalist and leftist groups founded
the Greens and, led by Miss Kelly, the unknown party gained what was widely
regarded as a surprising 3.2 percent of the West German vote in elections to the
largely powerless European Parliament.

Leavened by militants from small Marxist-Leninist factions who gave the party
political sophistication, the Greens continued to grow and, before today's vote,
they held seats in six of the country's 11 state legislatures, including West
Berlin.

Now that they have won seats in Parliament - a goal even Miss Kelly was said to
have privately believed unlikely at the outset of the campaign - the Greens will
turn their attention to mobilizing public opinion against the NATO missile
deployent. Rainer Trampert, a Green leader from Hamburg, has called for ''a
peaceful civil war'' against the weapons.

Since Chancellor Helmut Kohl's conservative coalition has been returned to
office, the Greens' dream of holding the balance of power in the next Parliament
has been pushed aside. But the party has already demonstrated its capacity to
define issues - not only ecological ones -for the rest of the nation.

''The structures in West Germany are very hard to change,'' Miss Kelly said
recently. ''The price you pay for trying is being alone. I think we're a big
shock to the system. And if we don't stay a shock, the experiment has failed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Petra Karin Kelly

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
MEANWHILE BACK IN SALVADOR

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 6


Two years after then Secretary of State Alexander Haig proclaimed El Salvador a
''major test of East-West relations,'' that tortured country is back in the
news.

The murders have continued all along. Nothing much has changed, except that the
rebels seem better organized, trouble has spread through the region, extremists
have dug in on both sides.

At U.S. insistence, elections were held last year. The turnout in war-time
gratified those who say the guerrillas don't have popular support, but the vote
only served to strengthen the hard right and brought peace no nearer.

Now, again with U.S. pressure, the Government has advanced elections for the
President and assembly to December this year.  Washington argues that this will
promote democracy and a political solution. Secretary of State George Shultz
maintains the policy against government-rebel negotiations on grounds that
guerrillas ''should not be allowed to shoot their way into a power-sharing
arrangement,'' but must rely on the Government-run ballot box.

The Administration is less than candid. Two years ago, senior officials
acknowledged privately that reconciliation couldn't be expected until both sides
were forced to the conclusion they couldn't possibly win the war. It might take
seven or eight years, it was said then, and that estimate remains.

Though he claimed ''substantial progress'' for democracy and against Communism
in testimony to the House last week, Assistant Secretary of State Thomas Enders
came closer than before in admitting this expectation of endless fighting and
carnage.

He pointed out that the guerrillas' main units now have the military capability
of a regular army and can continue to wreak havoc on the economy. ''This is what
their strategy of guerra prolongada is all about,'' he said. ''We must
demonstrate that we too can persevere.''

There isn't any reason to think the demand for 1983 elections is based on a
belief that they will settle anything. More likely, the vote is an attempt to
persuade Congress and the public that there is ''light at the end of the
tunnel,'' to recall President Johnson's phrase, so that support for U.S. aid
will continue.

But aid won't bring any more decisive results than elections. It will simply
keep the war going. The alternate proposal of negotiations between government
and rebel forces, however, is probably as much of an illusion as Mr. Enders's
''substantial progress.''

Vietnam, Cambodia, any number of places, should have taught us by now that
die-hard opponents, seeking total power by force, don't negotiate and abide by
compromise.

Gabriel Zaid, an astute Mexican observer of the tricky underside of Salvadoran
politics, has a better suggestion for making a moderate solution possible. His
analysis is also two years old, but time has only confirmed his insights and
predictions.

Writing in the Mexican magazine Vuelta, edited by liberal Octavio Paz, Mr. Zaid
documented his thesis that the real struggle in Salvador is dual, for control of
both fluid coalitions on the revolutionary and government sides.

''Those on the top cannot agree about how to treat those on the bottom,'' he
says. ''This is the conflict that makes Salvadoran blood run.''

Less intransigent, less power-hungry people have wavered from side to side in
the long battle that began with establishment of the People's Revolutionary Army
in 1970, a group formed not of Communists but of ''radicalized Christians from
the petite bourgeoisie.'' The determined fighters are a tiny minority who
haven't hesitated to murder their own comrades in their effort to stay on top,
on both sides.

The slaughter began, Mr. Zaid notes, as their way of putting pressure on the
conciliators precisely to prevent any political compromise. ''The true question
for now,'' he says, ''is how to get those who believe in violence out of the
picture. Each acts to provoke the others.''

''Those responsible ... are the leaders who cannot agree among themselves; in
particular, those who believe in violence, both in power and in the opposition;
and of these, above all the ones in power.''

But it's impossible to purge the bloodthirsty. The momentum of war, driving but
certainly not driven by the many people who yearn mostly for peace, congeals
each side and forces it to tolerate its own monsters as the lesser evil to
disunity in combat.

It is futile to suppose that either military or revolutionary justice can remove
these people who are committed to armed struggle.  The gesture of an occasional
investigation is empty, to placate Americans - not a step in a fruitful
direction.

Yet, until the murderers are gone, there is no chance of moving toward effective
democracy and reconciliation. Mr. Zaid proposes a traditional Latin American way
to get rid of them.

''Grant them a kind of amnesty in exile, to get them quickly out of the country,
even give them money to make it possible. At that point, equal terms could be
offered to those guerrillas willing to accept such terms. A pact could be sought
with the political opposition, disconnecting it from the armed opposition.''

Then elections could have a meaning, and Salvador some hope.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CHANGING VIEWS OF BRINK'S CASE: NARCOTICS ALLEGATIONS EMERGE

BYLINE: By M.A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1798 words


Soon after the Brink's robbery and killings in Rockland County in October 1981,
Federal agents searched a hurriedly abandoned Mount Vernon, N.Y., apartment and
found a green ledger book that they believe is a guide to many expenditures by
the radicals who have been charged in the crime.

There are more than 300 entries in the cryptic ledger, ranging from $200 for
''driving lessons'' to $1,040 for ''clothing vest'' to $15,000 for ''land and
seed.''

From the ledger and other evidence in the Brink's case, including an account by
a key informant, investigators are now offering a more varied and complex
picture of the case than they originally gave.

Some have concluded that much of the money raised by the Brink's defendants in
robberies before the aborted Rockland holdup was used not for political purposes
but for cocaine and other drugs. Moreover, they say, drugs were largely the
impetus for the $1.6 million Brink's robbery, in which two Nyack police officers
and an armored-car guard were killed.

The case was originally portrayed by Federal officials and the defendants in
political terms -as the work of a far-flung, possibly international network of
terrorists aimed at ''the creation of a socialist state'' and ''an end to the
United States Government as we know it,'' as Kenneth P. Walton, deputy assistant
director of the F.B.I.'s New York office, put it at a news conference soon after
the shootout.

But within the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the holdup has increasingly come
to be viewed as a mismanaged effort by a loosely knit group of people whose
motives and interests may have been as divergent as their backgrounds.

In particular, the radical women accused in the case were depicted as often
naive or uninformed about the motivations of some of their associates.

Many questions remain about the allegations concerning drugs, none of which have
been lodged formally. And Federal officials said they did not know how much of a
role the allegations would play at the trial.

But for some of the defendants, said a senior F.B.I. official who asked not to
be identified, ''the purpose of the robbery was to replace money that had been
used for narcotics and to get additional money for more narcotics.''

Drugs Had No Role in Women's Lives

A defense attorney, who also requested anonymity, said drugs had played a
significant role in the lives of some of the defendants but no role at all in
the lives of others, particularly the women.

''This thing is so complicated,'' the attorney said, ''and different people were
in it for different things. Some of it was corrupt.''

Another Federal official who is familiar with the F.B.I.  investigation played
down the drug allegations, saying it was difficult to reconstruct ''what was on
the minds'' of the Brink's defendants. He said that ''$1.6 million would be a
lot of money for drugs.''

In recent months, one informant, Tyrone Rison, has emerged as a major potential
witness for the Federal conspiracy trial scheduled to start March 21. A state
trial stemming from the Rockland crime - five of whose six defendants are
''unindicted co-racketeers'' in the Federal case - may not start before
September.

Although the authorities say Mr. Rison did not participate in the robbery at
Nanuet, they say he has described himself as one of the ''action five'' members
of a ''family'' that planned that crime, stole more than $750,000 during other
East Coast bank and armoredcar robberies since 1976 and freed Joanne Chesimard,
the black militant, from a New Jersey prison on Nov. 2, 1979. Miss Chesimard,
who has not been recaptured, was serving a life term for the murder of a New
Jersey state trooper.

According to lawyers and to Federal officials who have interviewed Mr. Rison,
the lives of the defendants contained a number of unusual elements not yet been
made public.

One defendant, described as a drug dealer both by his close advisers and by
F.B.I. agents, was said to have been operating a call-girl ring, even as his
co-defendants were preaching radical feminism.

Some defendants and their unindicted associates practiced acupuncture as a means
of detoxifying heroin addicts, even as they themselves were said to be
trafficking in cocaine.

Some defendants were chronically behind on their telephone or utility bills or
mortgage payments, even as they or their associates were getting thousands of
dollars in payments and loans recorded in the green ledger, as well as
presenting Miss Chesimard with $50,000 in a Pittsburgh apartment the day after
her escape.

7 Months in Georgia Jail

Mr. Rison, who is 36 years old, turned informant last September, after spending
seven months in a Georgia jail on a charge of robbing the Pineland State Bank in
Metter, Ga., of $5,500 on Dec. 21, 1981.

According to Federal authorities and defense attorneys, the turning point for
Mr. Rison was a Bronx killing on June 2, 1981, that Mr.  Rison said had
disturbed him. As Mr. Rison is said to have described it, he was stuck in a car
whose door was jammed while his companions fatally shot an armored-car guard
outside a bank in a Bronx shopping center and made off with $250,000.

Mr. Rison later told the authorities that he had refused to take part in the
October holdup in Rockland County, which had apparently been planned before the
robbery in the Bronx. Mr. Rison said that, after helping his associates canvass
the Rockland area on three occasions, as early as the summer of 1980, he had
concluded that the route of the Brink's truck was too well protected for a
robbery attempt.

A Georgia defense lawyer who later spoke with Mr. Rison and F.B.I.  agents
recalled either Mr. Rison or the agents saying that, unlike earlier robberies,
the Rockland holdup was to be done for the benefit of ''individuals, not the
cause.''

''Rison knew then that people were using drugs,'' said Robert J.  Costello, Mr.
Rison's attorney in New York. ''But he didn't know how much was going up
people's noses.''

Richard Malone, the District Attorney of Georgia's Middle Judicial Circuit, said
that, after Mr. Rison was arrested in February 1982 in the Pineland bank
robbery, the defendant began to worry about his future.

''He was a quiet man, reflective and careful,'' Mr. Malone said.  ''I remember
him saying, 'If you don't get me, the other side will.' ''

Mr. Rison agreed to cooperate with Federal authorities in exchange for a
recommendation of leniency for himself and his wife, Emma, who was also a
defendant in the Pineland case. Mrs. Rison was released from custody; Mr. Rison
is being guarded around the clock by Federal marshals.

Mr. Rison's connection with some of the Brink's defendants was rooted in his
membership in the Republic of New Afrika, a 15-year-old organization that seeks
to carve out a black nation by ''liberating'' five Southern states.

Perhaps no one was more influential in determining Mr. Rison's political beliefs
than Mutulu Shakur, a 32-year-old Republic of New Afrika activist who is the
only Federal defendant in the Brink's case accused of all 19 criminal acts
attributed to the conspirators.  A defense attorney described Mr. Shakur, who is
now a fugitive, as ''the common denominator'' between the blacks and the whites
in the case.

Mr. Rison - who grew up in Queens, served as an artilleryman in Vietnam in the
late 1960's and later worked as a therapist's aide at Willowbrook, the state
mental institution on Staten Island - is believed to have met Mr. Shakur in the
early or middle 1970's.

''Rison,'' said Mr. Costello, his attorney, ''was like many young people at that
time, looking around for something. If he had been white and from the Midwest,
he would have become a Moonie.''

Mr. Shakur, who is also known as Jeral Wayne Williams, was then an acupuncturist
in the drug detoxification program at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx, which was
shut down in late 1978 after repeated complaints of fraud and mismanagement by
city and state health officials.

In August 1979, Mr. Shakur and others formed a realty corporation that paid
$15,000 and assumed a $25,000 mortgage for a brownstone on the landmark Harlem
block called Strivers' Row. There, at 245 West 139th Street, Mr. Shakur ran a
clinic that, according to the F.B.I., was really the planning center for armed
robberies.

From that address, F.B.I. officials say, the robbers left for Rockland County on
Oct. 20, 1981.  Among those arrested in the chase that followed the Rockland
shootout was Judith A. Clark. Mr. Rison has identified Miss Clark and Silvia
Baraldini as members of a ''secondary team'' of women who drove getaway cars for
the ''action five.'' Besides himself, he told authorities, the five consisted of
Mr. Shakur, Sekou Odinga, Donald Weems and Samuel Smith.

Mr. Costello, Mr. Rison's attorney, said the participants in various holdups
were often selected ''like you choose up a Saturday basketball game - always a
few regulars, and then whoever else was around.''

Mr. Shakur - according to Federal investigators, at least one of his
co-defendants and others - was among the heaviest drug users among those
involved in the Brink's case.

Clinic Phones Wiretapped

F.B.I. agents who wiretapped the Harlem clinic's phones after the Brink's
robbery, while Mr. Shakur was staying away from the building, say they
repeatedly heard orders placed for cocaine by a variety of people.

The Mount Vernon apartment in which the green ledger was found was shared by
Samuel Smith and Yvonne Thomas. Mr. Smith, who evidently wrote the ledger
entries, was killed three days after the Rockland robbery during a wild car
chase with the police in Queens.

Mr. Rison, according to the Georgia lawyer, has described Mr. Smith as a
frequent user of drugs. Miss Thomas, who eventually became a Government
informant, has occasionally asked law-enforcement officials to provide her with
cocaine, authorities said.

Mr. Rison has told the F.B.I. that most of the money from the robberies,
including $500,000 from an Inwood, L.I., armored-car holdup on April 22, 1980,
was turned over to Mr. Shakur, who was usually called ''Doc.''

Federal officials, who are investigating the possibility that as much as
$100,000 was skimmed off, say the money from the robberies went not only for
drugs but for living expenses, including the rental of safe houses for members
of the group planning robberies or hiding from the authorities, and the support
of Mr. Shakur's clinic.

But the ledger, which contains such vague references as $15,000 for ''business''
and $3,500 for ''trip for press,'' does not account for nearly the amount of
money that Federal authorities believe was taken in.

The year in which the entries begin is not clear. They end on Oct.  10, 1981, 10
days before the shootout in Rockland County.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of ledger entry (page B4) photo of Tyrone Tison
(page B4)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A WEEK OF CLOUDS IN THE WEST, NOT ALL IN THE SKY

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 6


President Reagan seemed close to fearless on the subject of the environment as
he made the final stop of his long week out West by visiting troubled timberland
executives in Oregon.  His path dogged daily by the growing controversy over the
Environmental Protection Agency, the President nevertheless chose the occasion
to defend industry's treatment of nature and to complain about backpackers'
concern over woodlands.

''The private sector has not been guilty of rape of all the natural resources,''
the President told the lumber executives Saturday in Klamath Falls. The
statement, while categorically safe, was politically troubling to aides who have
been working ceaselessly at damage control in the E.P.A. controversy.

Similarly, the President, as if heedless of the latest poll readings showing
growing public distrust of his dedication to defending the environment, took up
a favorite theme, his contention that too much of nature can be protected by
Government.

''We have 80 million acres of wilderness land now,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''This is
land that you cannot have a road in or anything of the kind. It's there because
out of the 250-odd million Americans in this country, we realize that at least
240 million of them are backpackers who want to hike into that wilderness
area.''

His audience laughed heartily along with the President. Reagan staffers were
hardly as amused, particularly those anonymously insisting that the President
was ''forcefully'' tracking the E.P.A.  controversy.

''There was a period once upon a time,'' Mr. Reagan went on, ''when there were
so few people and this country loomed so big and unexplored that, yes, people
used and then moved on. But that isn't true anymore.''

The President's critics contend it has been heartfelt statements such as that,
over the years, that underlie the policies and attitudes of E.P.A. appointees
now facing charges of mismanagement and hostility toward environmental tasks.
But White House aides, as they traveled with the President through his rainy
week of celebrity with Queen Elizabeth II, kept to their insistence that any
problem was rooted farther down the chain of command.

In tandem with the unwanted environmental controversy, the President's West
Coast travels also trucked along the ''crisis'' in El Salvador, as proclaimed
far more willingly by Administration officials. The President himself offered
strong warnings Friday, after a San Francisco speech, on the dangers of leftist
guerrillas toppling the Salvadoran Government. Other nations in the hemisphere,
he warned, would fall in turn.

The President denied he was posing any parallel with Vietnam, and this was
reiterated Saturday night on the plane home by Edwin Meese 3d, the President's
counselor, who said Mr. Reagan had in mind not a new ''domino theory'' but more
of a ''cancer theory.''

''I wouldn't call it the domino theory,'' Mr. Meese said. ''He has always talked
about the threat to Central America. Call it the cancer theory: Infection in one
country can spread to others.''

Originally, the President's trip was designed to be an easy mixture of a few
speeches and long hours of social graces with the Queen. But even as Mr. Reagan
arrived in Santa Barbara Monday, the trip had ragged edges and his staff was
preoccupied with the problems of basic security that were aggravated by
disastrous storms. The seven-mile mountain road to the President's ranch had
been sliced through by half a dozen overflowing creeks, and some Secret Service
agents were concerned at making repeated trips on it, even in four-wheel-drive
vehicles. Nevertheless, the President's cherished plan to bring the Queen up the
mountain was kept, even though gales had washed out the most picturesque plan of
the week, the hope of President and Queen to go horseback riding.

Secret Service agents on the President's Oregon tour were devastated later in
the week when word came of the death in a auto accident of three colleagues on
the Queen's security detail in California. At least one wondered whether the
high-speed routine of these V.I.P. protection trips, in which assisting local
and state police often race anxiously about the roads, had been a factor.

Secret Service agents are among the most resilient people on Presidential trips.
They have the esprit of football specialists who defend against the deep pass,
and they quietly intercept the most outlandish surprises such as the occasional,
predictable habit of some innocent Americans to actually carry their own pistols
to dinners and lunches where the President speaks. ''Isn't that wild?  Well
there really are people who do that,'' one agent said in describing the discreet
confiscation of these weapons after they set off metal detectors at the doorway.

Mr. Reagan himself seems at least as resilient as his bodyguards and far more
smilingly fatalistic on this subject. At the end of the week, discussing the
question of whether his economic policies might revert back to more inflationary
days, he said: ''I would say, 'Over my dead body,' but there are too many people
willing to take me up on that.''

In Santa Barbara, the President vigorously ''worked the crowd'' as he waited for
the Queen's arrival, reaching to shake hands, smiling, waving, patting children.
Such a scene of Presidential politicking is rare lately, but should not be taken
as a sign that Mr. Reagan will run again. Rather, he had to wait through weather
delays for the Queen and this was a handy way to kill time. ''I think he's using
the Presidency as a steppingstone to get back into pictures,'' Bob Hope joked at
one point.

Of all the nuances of the week, none was more closely searched from city to city
than the respective wardrobes of the Queen and the First Lady. Nancy Reagan so
often seemed to show up in outfits that were far more eye-catching than the
Queen's that even a member of the President's party was hoping Mrs. Reagan would
begin to show some mercy. Even amid the tans and grays of a rainstorm photo
session, Mrs. Reagan managed to have a bright red raincoat. It was noted that
she did adjust in midcourse one day and remove an elaborate fur collar from her
dress. The Queen's special taste in frocks eventually seemed refreshing against
the California norm of overstyled display.  And on Thursday night the Queen
reigned at the state dinner in San Francisco with such a display of diamond
shimmer that any contest with Mrs. Reagan imagined by the masses was settled
with blinding finality.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 9, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SAUDIS CONSIDER BUYING NEW U.S. ARMS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 8


The Reagan Administration, in response to a request from Saudi Arabia, has begun
a program intended to sell M-1 Abrams tanks and M-2 Bradley armored personnel
carriers to that nation, Administration officials said today.

The officials said that most details of the plan remain unsettled but that the
initial phase would begin soon when Saudi crews arrive at the armor center at
Fort Knox, Kentucky, to start training.  Training on the advanced armored
personnel carrier would be conducted by the FMC Corporation, the maker.

Officials said the plan called for shipping several M-1 tanks to Saudi Arabia at
Saudi expense during the summer for demonstrations in the deserts there.
American crews will put the tanks through their paces with Saudi crews also
taking part, they said.

If the Saudi Government decides to go ahead with the purchase, negotiations over
numbers, delivery and price would commence, the officials said. Each tank would
cost about $2 million.

Opposition Is Expected

The program seems likely to arouse opposition from Israel and the American
supporters of Israel who have vigorously objected to arms sales to Arab nations
in the past. The debate in Congress, which has the authority to veto arms sales,
over the sale of Awacs radar warning planes spread over eight months in 1981.

But the sale, Administration officials contended, would give the United States
another visible tie to Saudi Arabia. Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger
has been the Administration's leading advocate of better relations with Arab
nations, especially Saudi Arabia.

The possible M-1 tank sale, officials said, figured in Mr.  Weinberger's recent
decision to reject an agreement with Israel to share in intelligence and
operational information gained by the Israelis during the war in Lebanon.

Among the elements the Israeli Government requested in return for sharing that
information, the officials said, was full technical information on the M-1 tank.
The officials said the Israelis evidently wanted that to design antitank weapons
and tactics.

Pentagon officers expressed mixed views about the possible sale.  Some feared
that delivering a large number of tanks to Saudi Arabia would cut into the
production run of tanks intended for American forces.

After a long and troubled history of development and testing, the Abrams tank,
named for a former commander in Vietnam, Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, is being
deployed by the Army. The 1984 military budget before Congress calls for
producing 60 a month for $1.8 billion.

The Bradley armored personnel carrier, named for General of the Armies Omar N.
Bradley of World War II fame, comes in two versions, an infantry personnel
carrier and a cavalry reconnaissance vehicle.  The 1984 budget calls for
producing 600 vehicles at a cost of $858.3 million.

Swiss Interest in M-1 Tank

But the military officers said that having the Saudis buy the tanks might help
overcome their damaged image and would provide additional information about how
they performed in the desert. If the Saudis buy enough, that would also reduce
the cost of each unit, they asserted.

Saudi Arabia is the second country to show interest in buying the Abrams tanks,
Switzerland having been the first. Officials here said the Swiss are considering
the Abrams and the West German Leopard tank.

Further, the tank sale would add to the American presence in Saudi Arabia, thus
exerting a subtle political influence, the officials said. Privately, officials
in the Reagan Administration, as in the Carter Administration, see American arms
shipments to Saudi Arabia as a form of positioning equipment that might be
useful if the Saudis asked for assistance from the Rapid Deployment Force. The
same is true of bases and military installations constructed for the Saudis.

United States military ties to Saudi Arabia have expanded steadily over the
years, with about 5,300 Americans related to the military forces now working
there. Of those people, 1,000 are in the military, including 500 who fly and
support four Air Force Awacs planes.

From 1950 to 1982, the United States concluded $23.3 billion in military sales
agreements with Saudi Arabia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 9, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THIRD WORLD NATIONS ARE URGED TO BE SELF-RELIANT

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 642 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, March 8


The Prime Minister of Malaysia called on third-world leaders here today to look
to their ''own resilience'' to solve their economic problems and to ''stop
deluding'' themselves about getting concessions from the industrialized
countries.

''As long as the poor economies are incapable of striking back, we are not going
to have one bit of concession from them,'' the Malaysian, Mahatir bin Mohamad,
said at a conference of leaders of 101 countries and organizations that call
themselves nonaligned. The conference opened on Monday with Prime Minister
Indira Gandhi of India appealing for more aid for the poor nations and for an
international conference to overhaul the world monetary system.

''If we are poor, let us be frugal,'' Mr. Mahatir declared. ''Let us conserve
every little strength and resource that we have so that our needs do not exceed
our means. If we lack the skills, let us acquire them from whatever source is
available. The process is going to be slow and painful.''

Appearing to underline his appeal for self-reliance was a speech by Sheik Jabir
al-Sabah, the Emir of the oil-producing country of Kuwait. He said price wars
among the oil-producing nations were reducing their revenues and impairing their
abilty to carry out their own development projects and to assist friendly
countries.

A different kind of appeal was made by President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, who
said the delegates should seize ''the golden opportunity'' that the gathering
presented ''to put in motion the wheels of a comprehensive settlement'' of the
Middle East conflict.

(Mr. Mubarak himself took the opportunity, The Associated Press said, to meet
with five Arab leaders in an effort to end the Arab world's ostracizing of Egypt
over its peace treaty with Israel.  Egyptian officials said he had discussed all
aspects of the Middle East conflict in separate conversations with President
Amin Gemayel of Lebanon, the emirs of Kuwait, Qatar and Bahrain, and Vice
President Taha Mohieddin Maruf of Iraq.)

In his address, President Mubarak called for efforts to advance proposals
''aimed at replacing Israel's occupation of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank by
a Palestinian authority,'' and he appealed for an end to the war between Iraq
and Iran.

A spokesman for the Palestine Liberation Organization, Abdelmohsen Abu Maizer,
voiced concern at a news conference over the contacts between Mr. Mubarak and
the Arab leaders, which began Monday with a meeting with King Hussein of Jordan.

Mr. Abu Maizer said his organization wanted to be sure that those meetings were
not ''directed against the rights of the Palestinian people.'' He said the
P.L.O. would continue to back those who opposed the Camp David agreements and
the peace treaty with Israel.

King Hussein told the conference that his talks with the P.L.O. had brought some
progress toward a goal of eventually ''establishing a close federal
relationship.'' Last September, President Reagan proposed Palestinian autonomy
in the West Bank and Gaza in association with Jordan.

(The backstage contacts at the conference included a meeting between Yasir
Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, and President Gemayel of Lebanon, Reuters said. A
Palestinian spokesman said Mr. Arafat had assured Mr. Gemayel that he was ready
to withdraw the guerrillas remaining in Lebanon to facilitate an Israeli
withdrawal.)

The issue of Vietnam's role in Cambodia came up in the speech by Prime Minister
Mahatir of Malaysia. He accused Vietnam of using its military might to install
''a puppet regime'' in Phnom Penh and said Cambodia was occupied by some 200,000
Vietnamese.

Prime Minister Pham Van Dong of Vietnam rose to defend his country, saying the
presence of ''Vietnamese volunteers'' was made necessary by what he described as
the danger of external interference to the Phnom Penh Government of Heng Samrin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 9, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Sigma Delta Chi Lists 1982 Award Winners

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 454 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, March 8


The Society of Professional Journalists, Sigma Delta Chi, today announced the
winners of its 1982 Distinguished Service Awards for outstanding contributions
to journalism and research.

The winners were selected from more than 1,200 entries from throughout the
country. Plaques and medallions will be presented April 29-30 in Los Angeles.

The winners, listed by category, were these:

General Reporting: Loretta Tofani of The Washington Post for a series on sexual
assault on men being held in the Prince George's County Detention Center.

Editorial Writing: David Rohn of The Indianapolis News for editorials on Social
Security.

Washington Correspondence: Judith Bender, James Klurfeld, Earl Lane and Susan
Page of Newsday for articles on the ''permanent'' bureaucracy.

Foreign Correspondence: Robert Rivard of The Dallas Times-Herald for a series on
American involvement in the El Salvador conflict.

News Photography: Robert Fila of The Chicago Tribune for a photograph of a
cleaning woman looking at the body of John Cardinal Cody as she cleaned around
his coffin.

Editorial Cartoon: Richard Locher of The Chicago Tribune for a cartoon showing
President Reagan working on an airplane labeled ''U.S. Budget'' while the House
Speaker, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., walks away with the propeller.

Public Service: The Gannett News Service for news articles about the abuse of
children in the Oklahoma institutional system.

Magazine Reporting: Sally Bedell and Don Kowet for ''Anatomy of a Smear,'' an
article published in TV Guide questioning the accuracy, balance and fairness of
a televised documentary on Vietnam.

Public Service in Magazine Journalism: The New Yorker for an article by Johathan
Schell on the impact of nuclear war.

Radio Reporting: WEEI-AM in Boston for coverage of a World Airways crash.

Public Service in Radio Reporting: WRAL in Raleigh, N.C., for coverage on the
impact of the economic recession on five racial and cultural groups.

Editorializing on Radio: Susan Nixon of WBBM in Chicago for an editorial asking
Gov. James R.  Thompson to reconsider his decision to eliminate funds for the
Rape Victims Emergency Treatment Act.

Television Reporting: KGTV in San Diego for coverage of a severe winter storm.

Public service in Television: WCCO-TV in Minneapolis for coverage of the problem
of sexual abuse of children and the response of the judicial and social system.

Editorializing on Television: Beth Konrad, WDIV-TV in Detroit, for an editorial
series questioning the racial matching policy used for foster care placements.

Research About Journalism: Robert W. Desmond of La Jolla, Calif., for ''Crisis
in Conflict: World News Reporting between two wars 1920-1940.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 9, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

El Salvador's 9-to-5 War

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 528 words


Not lies but Huck Finn's word, ''stretchers,'' best describes the Reagan
Administration's tales about the imminent collapse of ''our'' side in El
Salvador's civil war. There was the one about the possibility that the
Salvadoran Army would run out of bullets in 30 days. Or the State Department's
forecast that Nicaragua's 40,000-strong army might invade El Salvador,
presumably without being noticed as it crossed Honduras.

The official analysis goes on in that apocalyptic, simplistic way.  Why are the
guerrillas doing better? Because they get Soviet arms.  What factors can turn
the tide of battle? More American aid and advisers (or ''trainers,'' in the
revised standard version).

Congress, distracted and uncertain of the truth even if it disbelieves these
tales, may again give President Reagan what he wants - and now he's asking $110
million for military assistance. No one wants to be blamed for ''losing'' El
Salvador, and when a case is joined in such black-and-red terms, waverers tilt
to the President.  But let the Administration beware: all its claims will be
hostage to the real world of El Salvador.

The claim of an ammunition shortage has already been detonated.  Whatever else
the Salvadoran Army may lack, it's not bullets. Nor do its officers confirm any
seismic shift in the military balance.  Though the insurgents took a provincial
town for three days, this war is still a stalemate.

If the guerrillas have seized the initiative, a very different explanation for
their success is offered from the scene. The Times's Drew Middleton reports that
Soviet and Cuban military aid, though increasing in Nicaragua, is not a key
factor in the insurgent campaign now being waged in El Salvador. If there is a
parallel with Vietnam, it isn't in terms of Soviet assistance but the inadequate
motivation and leadership of ''our'' troops. While the guerrillas fight around
the clock, it's a 9-to-5 war for Salvadoran officers.  And most of the
casualties have been civilians.

Americans have been on this slope before and know too well what lies at the
bottom: desperate appeals for greater United States involvement. For that there
is no significant support in Congress or among the American people, much as all
wish to keep El Salvador from yet a new kind of tyranny. Wise policy would fit
available resources to an attainable goal.

Whatever weapons may be needed, they cannot replace motivation and a plausible
political strategy. For that the Administration now suggests another election,
in December. But who will run it, and who will assure the safety of an
opposition whose leaders have been slaughtered? That can't simply be left to the
government of the day, not without justifying another leftist boycott and
strengthening the extreme right.

There is a better way, urged again by Pope John Paul II. He calls for a
''dialogue'' between Government and opposition - a word that is acceptable to
insurgents, and apparently also to some Reagan aides.  ''Dialogue'' can, of
course, mean anything. What it should mean is serious talks, then an
internationally monitored campaign. Power sharing of some kind could yet resolve
what violence cannot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN PROPOSES $298 MILLION MORE FOR LATIN REGION

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 10


President Reagan, saying that the nations of Central America ''are in the midst
of the gravest crisis in their history,'' today proposed an emergency $298
million military and economic assistance package for the region that inclues
$110 million in arms aid for El Salvador.

''Central America is simply too close and the strategic stakes are too high for
us to ignore the danger of governments seizing power there with ideological and
military ties close to the Soviet Union,'' Mr. Reagan said in a policy speech.

He said the military situation in El Salvador was ''not good'' and called that
country the current ''first target'' of the Soviet Union, Cuba and Nicaragua.
''If guerrilla violence succeeds,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''El Salvador will join
Cuba and Nicaragua for spreading fresh violence to Guatemala, Honduras, even
Costa Rica. The killing will increase and so will the threat to Panama, the
canal and ultimately Mexico.''

2 Weeks of Official Debate

His speech, before a luncheon of the National Association of Manufacturers at
the Washington Hilton Hotel, came after nearly two weeks of Administration
debate and concern over what officials termed the deteriorating military
situation in El Salvador, a critical shortage of ammunition and the possible
need to increase the number of American military advisers there above the
self-imposed limit of 55.

Mr. Reagan's speech sought to balance the Administration's anxiety about what he
called Soviet, Cuban and Nicaraguan efforts to ''pursue political change through
violence'' in Central America with demands by many members of Congress that the
Administration actively seek a political solution to end the guerrilla war in El
Salvador . Beyond this, many members of Congress are plainly uneasy about
American involvement in El Salvador and compare it to Vietnam.

''Are we going to send American soldiers into combat?'' Mr. Reagan asked before
the group, which gave him a warm introduction and sendoff. ''The answer is a
flat no.''

Negotiations, Mr. Reagan added, ''are a key part of our policy.'' He said the
United States supported the regional peace initiative now under way, and ''we
wish it well.'' The effort, begun by Costa Rica, excludes the United States,
although Administration officials privately and publicly have welcomed it.

''Bullets are no answer to economic inequities, social tensions or political
disagreements,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''Democracy is. What we want is to enable
Salvadorans to stop the killing and sabotage so that economic and political
reforms can take root.''

The additional $298 million economic and military proposal for the region this
year includes $110 million in military aid for El Salvador and $67 million in
economic aid. This brings the overall military aid request for El Salvador this
year to $136.3 million, while proposed economic assistance for 1983 is now
$227.1 million.

Last year, El Salvador received $178.5 million in economic assistance and $82
million in military aid.  In addition to seeking more money for El Salvador, Mr.
Reagan proposed increasing military aid by a total of $20 million for Honduras,
Costa Rica and Panama Canal security. He also said he would seek an added $168
million in economic assistance for Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador and Honduras.
El Salvador's share would be the largest. This places the overall economic aid
request for the four nations this year at $472 million.

Reaction from Congress was somewhat negative. ''I don't see the votes around
here at the present time,'' Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr. said. ''He's going to
have to do a lot of selling.''

Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut and a vocal foe of
Administration policy in El Salvador, said he was convinced that ''the President
still totally misunderstands the problem and we've got to listen to the voice in
the region and bring this thing to an end through dialogue, negotiations,
whatever.'' He added, ''We've got to take it off the battlefield.''

Administration officials said Mr. Reagan played a role in the choice of language
in the speech, which was worked over until early this morning. Members of a task
force from the State Department, White House, Pentagon and Central Intelligence
Agency also worked on the speech, and Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the delegate to the
United Nations, played a key role, Administration officials said. Last week she
said the United States should start a major economic aid program for Central
America, which she recently toured.

In briefings before the speech, Mr. Reagan and aides told Congress, in effect,
that unless the Administration received the military funds it wanted for El
Salvador this year, the United States might be compelled to increase the number
of military advisers there.

Mr. Reagan said ''the best way'' to train Salvadorans - and keep the number of
Americans there as low as possible - was ''to provide training outside of El
Salvador, in the United States or elsewhere.

''But that costs a lot more,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''So the number of U.S. trainers
in El Salvador will depend upon the resources available.'' An Administration
official said it costs 10 times more to train Salvadoran units in the United
States than it does in their own country.

The official, who spoke to reporters before Mr. Reagan's speech, said that if
Congress cut the requested funds, the training would have to be done in El
Salvador, and that would probably require sending more American advisers.

According to an aid official at the State Department, El Salvador is now the
sixth largest recipient of American military and economic aid, after Israel,
Egypt, Turkey, Pakistan and Spain.

Mr. Reagan told the business group that the nations of Central America ''are in
the midst of the gravest crisis in their history.'' He continued:

'' Accumulated grievances and social and economic change are challenging
traditional ways.  Their struggle for a better future deserves our help. We
should be proud to offer it, for in the last analysis they are fighting for us,
too. And we will not let them down.''

He added: ''The problem is that an aggressive minority has thrown in its lot
with the Communists, looking to the Soviets and their Cuban henchmen to help
them pursue political change through violence. Nicaragua has become their
base.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
AGE OF DIVERSITY (1)

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 385 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, March 10


The contrast between the seventh nonaligned summit meeting here and the first,
held in Belgrade in 1961, is a better measure of the way the world has evolved
than Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger's estimate of the power balance.

Belgrade was an extraordinary display of larger-than-life characters, one of
history's spectaculars. Besides the founders, including Yugoslavia's Tito,
Egypt's Nasser, India's Nehru and Indonesia's Sukarno, there were Cyprus's
Archbishop Makarios, Ethiopia's Emperor Haile Selassie, Ghana's Nkrumah. Most of
the 25 leaders attending wore symbolic costumes to assert national identity and
reject Western homogenization.

The one survivor, Cuba's Fidel Castro, stayed away and sent his Foreign Minister
as observer, presumably because he wasn't ready so soon after his revolution to
line up openly against the U.S.

There was little question then that nonalignment, ostensibly opposed both to
Soviet and Western influence, saw in the U.S. the major threat of world
dominion. That was the generation of decolonization and ''liberation'' wars.

Secretary of State John Foster Dulles had proclaimed neutrality between East and
West ''immoral.'' Nehru, for one, implicitly agreed and said nonalignment must
not be passively neutral but actively opposed to imperialism, intervention, war
and the nuclear menace.

He and the others provided a clearer definition when the Soviet leader, Nikita
Khrushchev, exploded a 50-megaton atom bomb in the atmosphere while the
conference was taking place. Fifty megatons is 2,500 times the explosive power
of the Hiroshima bomb, and radioactive fallout swirled around the globe.

But the blast provoked no echo from the Belgrade assemblage, only an embarrassed
silence. Nehru didn't peep.  Now his daughter, Indira Gandhi, heads the
movement. There are 101 members. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and
Soviet-supported occupation of Cambodia by Vietnam are major, bitterly argued
issues.  Indian diplomats say a group of about 20 they call ''radicals''
regularly takes a pro-Soviet line.

But they are only a fifth of the membership, not the most influential, and can
only sway but cannot impose views on resolution by consensus. Though he still
blames the U.S. for everything wrong in the world, Mr. Castro has stopped trying
to sell the

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POP JAZZ;
RED MITCHELL, BASSIST, BACK FOR DEBUT AS PIANIST-SINGER

BYLINE: By JOHN S. WILSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 915 words


PICTURES of Red Mitchell 30 years ago, when he was playing bass in Woody
Herman's band, in Red Norvo's trio and in Gerry Mulligan's quartet, show a very
lean young man with a long, prominent nose dominating a thin face. Now, at 55,
Mr. Mitchell has filled out, his nose has settled back into a rounded face, the
flame of his red hair has subsided and is noticeable primarily in the soft wisps
of a modest beard. Peering out over the half-moons of his unframed glasses, he
might be part of a Norman Rockwell painting of a gathering around a pot-bellied
stove in a New England country store.  His gentle, homey, philosophical manner
of talking is in keeping with that portrait.

Mr. Mitchell is now an expatriate, who commutes between the United States and
Sweden. He settled in Stockholm 15 years ago and began coming back for extended
visits in the last five years because, he says, ''New York City is the action
center whence all the ripples move.'' Although he has been a professional
musician for 36 years, he is making a debut tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11
P.M. and Sunday at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. at Village West, Hudson at Bank Street,
(691-2791), appearing not as a bassist but, for the first time, as a pianist and
singer performing his own compositions, with John Goldsby as his bassist (music
charge, $7, with a minimum of $7 at tables; $10 covers admission and two drinks
at bar).

Piano was his first instrument, and he has played piano occasionally as a side
man, notably with Chubby Jackson's big band at Bop City in 1949. He has been
writing songs and singing them since he went to Stockholm.

The Jazz Bob Dylan

''This engagement at Village West is perfect timing,'' he said the other day.
''I think the world needs a jazz Bob Dylan, and I'm going to be the only one
trying for it.''

The world, he believes, has been taken over by ''isms'' - all kinds of isms,
from left to right. ''What jazz is all about,'' he said, ''is the breakdown of
isms. I put it in a poem I wrote: Every ism Makes a schism. I'm for anti-ismism.
(Sometimes).''

Mr. Mitchell's conversation is studded with brief poems pointing up his outlook.
He has a heritage of personal involvement in music and poetry. His mother has
always written poetry, and his father has played music, and they still have
gatherings at home in which his mother reads her verses and his father plays on
a pipe organ that he built himself.

Mr. Mitchell's political and social views have been conditioned by his musical
career and have conditioned that career in turn. A year that he spent in a
tuberculosis hospital in 1951 was brought on, he says, partly by too many
one-night stands with Woody Herman's band, and partly as a result of the anxiety
caused by traveling through the segregated South with what became an all-white
band after the departure of his roommate, the vibraphonist Milt Jackson, who was
the only black in the band.

Played in Studio Orchestra

In 1953, the year in which he was voted the top new bassist in the annual poll
conducted by Down Beat, the jazz magazine, he settled in California and, after
playing in the Gerry Mulligan Quartet and the Hampton Hawes Trio, he joined the
studio orchestra at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. He remained in the studios for 12
years. He learned a great deal from the classical bassists with whom he played,
for instance to tune his bass in fifths, instead of the usual fourths.

''After I'd done it,'' he said, ''I found that this was the way that basses were
originally tuned. It gave me increased range and cleaner, larger sound. It also
provided an ease in playing chords because you always have a fifth under your
fingers.''

Mr. Mitchell's jazz work did not stop when he went into the studios. He also
made more than a dozen records as a member of Andre Previn's trio and was a
producer of Ornette Coleman's first album.

At the same time he was repelled by the violence in the films he was making
sound tracks for. So, in 1968, he left the studios and went back to jazz. He was
an active supporter of Eugene J. McCarthy's Presidential campaign because of the
former Senator's stand against the Vietnam War, although he believed that Mr.
McCarthy was not addressing the needs of black people. On the night of the
California primary he was a member of a band that was to play at Mr. McCarthy's
headquarters when word came of the assassination of Robert F.  Kennedy, who had
spoken out for blacks.

Making the Move to Sweden

This event, coming so soon after the assassination of the Rev. Dr.  Martin
Luther King Jr. and at the same time as the personal crisis of a failing
marriage, made Mr. Mitchell resolve on a course of action he had been
considering for a while. He set out for Sweden, a country he had visited in the
early 1950's on a touring jazz concert.

''I went there to compose myself,'' Mr. Mitchell said. ''I went to learn how to
verbalize my feelings so that I would never again be misunderstood or exploited
as I was when I allowed my playing to be used as a background for shoot-'em-ups
like 'Peter Gunn' and other series about violence. I wanted to get back to
playing jazz and to reach for a goal: to improvise words and music at the same
time.''

Village West has provided him with his first opportunity to play piano while he
sings his own songs, which he mixes with pop standards. His songs deal with the
world as he sees it. Some are funny, some are political.

''I'm a human being looking for a balance,'' Mr. Mitchell said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Red Mitchell

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NONALIGNMENT'S AIMS, AND OURS

BYLINE: By Robert A. Manning

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


As well-heeled officials from 101 primarily third-world nations parade across
the podium making pious declarations about peace, global crisis and economic
development, the temptation is great to dismiss the nonaligned movement as a
hypocritical farce.

A quarter century after Jawaharlal Nehru, Gamal Abdel Nasser, Kwame Nkrumah and
Josip Broz Tito sought to give newly independent nations an alternative to
following the United States or the Soviet Union, the history of this third-world
movement is marred by failure, betrayal and broken dreams.

As nonaligned membership has grown to 101, the movement has increasingly lost
its original meaning. How seriously can one take denunciations of the United
States by military elites in countries such as Syria and Iraq whose survival is
based on paid bodyguards and repression, and by notoriously self-indulgent and
corrupt leaders such as Zaire's Mobutu Sese Seko? How can members such as
Vietnam, which is dependent on Soviet aid, talk about the ideal of nonalignment?
What does economic independence mean when countries from Argentina to Zaire are
teetering on the edge of bankruptcy, surviving on bailouts from frightened
Western banks and the International Monetary Fund? Surely Nigeria's mass
expulsion of illegal aliens and the brutal Iran-Iraq war give the lie to the
nonaligned profession of third-world solidarity.

But hypocrisy and rhetoric notwithstanding, the real failures of the movement do
not negate its ideals. The nonaligned countries need a genuine alternative to
the hard political realities of superpower rivalry and a lopsided interdependent
economic system. Third-world countries must somehow cope with record low
commodity prices - the lowest they have been in 30 years - and a protracted
recession that has curbed their ability to repay their debts.

The passing of the nonaligned chairmanship from Cuba to India presents the
United States with an opportunity to rethink what it can to do about the
political and economic issues facing the nonaligned.

The nonaligned countries' rhetorical condemnation of the United States - for
intervention in Central America, for its support of Israel and its military
presence in the Indian Ocean - may be hard to swallow. But such
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Robert A. Manning writes on foreign affairs for magazines in the United States
and abroad. charges contain at least a kernel of truth, and on a number of
substantive issues the nonaligned countries' position is far from inimical to
American interests. The United States should welcome the mediating role that the
non-aligned movement has played in the Iran-Iraq conflict. Most of the real and
potential conflicts that we hope to prevent and contain with the Rapid
Deployment Force and our burgeoning military network in the Persian Gulf and
Indian Ocean stem from regional ethnic, economic and political problems that
cannot be solved by military force. Perhaps we should revive the Carter
Administration's efforts to negotiate a demilitarization of the Indian Ocean. We
would also do well to heed the nonaligned warning that American ascendancy in
the region would provoke a Soviet reaction - like the growing Soviet presence in
Syria today - and produce a dangerous rivalry. The most pressing issue being
addressed at the nonaligned conference is also of vital concern to the United
States - the global financial and economic crisis. The nonaligned countries'
outstanding debt of more than $600 billion gives them a new leverage, and their
proposal to link the debt crisis to reforms in the international financial and
economic system could help boost American economic recovery. Increasing aid
flows, stabilizing commodity prices, boosting multilateral institutions such as
the World Bank, curbing protectionism and creating a new system for debt
repayments would bolster sagging third-world economies. The less-developed
countries already account for more than one-third of American exports, and a
boost to their economies would mean new markets for American goods, thus
spurring recovery. Finally, Indira Gandhi has made disarmament a major theme of
the nonaligned conference, and a non-aligned call for a nuclear freeze could
help the United States curb nuclear proliferation. Many potential third-world
nuclear powers - India, Pakistan, Argentina, Libya and Iraq - are nonaligned
members, and holding them to a nuclear freeze, including a comprehensive test
ban treaty, might help considerably to deter proliferation. On these key issues,
American and nonaligned objectives overlap. Like previous Presidents, Ronald
Reagan pays lip service to nonalignment. But aggressive support for these
complementary objectives would bolster America's security and help to curb
Soviet influence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 12, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT ORDERS CURBS IN HANDLING OF CLASSIFIED DATA

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1097 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 11


President Reagan issued an order today tightening procedures for the handling of
classified information by Federal employees, and, as a result, many more
employees will have to sign secrecy agreements.

The directive says employees throughout the Government are required to cooperate
with Federal agents investigating unauthorized disclosures of classified
information.

It said further that an agency might decide ''adverse consequences will follow
an employee's refusal to cooperate with a polygraph examination.''

Disciplining Is Possible

Such consequences, the Justice Department said in a document explaining the
President's directive, could include disciplinary action against the employee,
including possible dismissal from the Government. But Justice Department
officials said the results of a test by polygraph, or lie detector, must be
considered in the light of evidence obtained from other sources.

The Reagan order establishes, for the first time, a standard policy on the use
of polygraph machines at all agencies. In the past, although many agencies had
access to classified information, only a few, including the Justice Department
and the intelligence agencies, had formal policies on the use of such devices.

For a long time only the Central Intelligence Agency used them, as a regular
security check instrument on all its employees.

Challenged as Unreliable

Civil libertarians and other critics have challenged the use of polygraphs on
the ground that they are unreliable. Polygraph results are generally not
admissible as evidence in Federal courts in criminal cases, according to Justice
Department lawyers.

President Reagan said in his directive, ''Safeguarding against unlawful
disclosures of properly classified information is a matter of grave concern and
high priority for this Administration.''

The directive also requires Federal agencies to adopt policies for contacts with
journalists ''so as to reduce the opportunity for negligent or deliberate
disclosures of classified information,'' adding that all employees must be
''clearly apprised of the agency's policies in this regard.''

Action Is Not Made Specific

Mr. Reagan's directive does not specify what steps a Federal agency should take
to investigate the disclosure of classified information to journalists. The
Justice Department said there would be ''no change in the current practice of
targeting investigations at employees who are suspected of disclosing classified
information, rather than at journalists who publish it.''

The Justice Department document said, ''Unlawful disclosures of classified
information damage national security by providing valuable information to our
adversaries, by hampering the ability of our intelligence agencies to function
effectively and by impairing the conduct of American foreign policy.''

A Reagan Administration spokesman said he could not cite a specific example of
damage to national security. ''When we confirm the information, it compounds the
damage,'' said the official, who briefed reporters at the Justice Department on
the condition that he not be named.

John Shattuck, director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties
Union, said: ''This is a sweeping order that goes far beyond any prior use of
lie detector tests by the Federal Government. It raises serious constitutional
questions because those who refuse to take the test can have adverse action
taken against them.''

'Witch Hunt' Is Feared

He said the order was ''aimed at curtailing the free flow of information'' and
could lead to ''a privacy-invading, potential witch hunt of the first order.''

The Administration official who briefed the reporters said that ''many more
employees will have to sign agreements'' promising not to disclose classified
information. However, he said he did not know the number of employees who now
must sign such pledges or the number who would have to do so as a result of the
Reagan order.

Steven Garfinkel, director of the Information Security Oversight Office at the
General Services Administration, the Government' supply and warehousing agency,
said 60 Government agencies and hundreds of thousands of Federal employees had
access to classified information. However, he said he did not know how many had
already signed secrecy agreements.

Mr. Reagan's directive says certain employees with access to highly classified
information must sign, in addition to the secrecy agreement, a promise to submit
manuscripts to the Government for review before publication. The purpose of such
a review is to avoid the disclosure of classified data to which a person gained
access while working for the Government.

The effect of the order would reach not only current Government employees, but
also every former employee who had signed such a contract.

Wording Stressed for Use in Court

Under the Reagan order, both secrecy agreements and arrangements for the review
of manuscripts must be in a form that could be enforced in court through civil
lawsuits filed by the Government. The Supreme Court, in 1980, upheld the
Government's power to require ''prepublication review'' in a case involving
Frank W. Snepp 3d, a former Central Intelligence Agency officer who had written
a book about the Vietnam War.

Employees who have knowingly disclosed classified information or who refuse to
cooperate with the investigation of such disclosures must, at the very least, be
denied further access to classified data, the Reagan order says.

The unauthorized disclosure of classified information could violate any of
several criminal statutes, but, according to the Justice Department statement,
''there has never been a successful prosecution'' in such a case.

More Systematic Scrutiny

The Reagan order requires Federal agencies to adopt new procedures so that
unauthorized disclosures will be investigated more systematically. An agency
must examine any disclosure of classified information that it views as
''seriously damaging to its mission and responsibilities.''

Morton H. Halperin, a former Defense Department official who is now director of
the Center for National Security Studies, a project of the American Civil
Liberties Union, said that the Reagan order ''proposes a censorship system that
will cut off most of the information that Americans rely on to understand
foreign affairs - namely, the writings and testimony of former Government
officials'' who had access to highly classified information.

Congress, he said, should approve legislation to limit the scope of the
President's order.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Shattuck (Page 11)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 12, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: DELHI PRIMPS FOR COMPANY

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, March 11


To assure the comfort and security of the largest modern assembly of heads of
states and government, the Indian hosts of the third world meeting here lavished
garlands and hospitality on their guests and effectively sealed off this city
from the rest of India.

Beggars were rounded up and sent to hostels across the Jamuna River. Sidewalk
fortunetellers and strolling monkey tamers vanished.  Gone, too, were the
thousands of Rajasthani women who on their heads carried the bricks and mortar
for city's new arenas, overpasses and hotels.

Several times a day traffic on the major streets was blocked to allow convoys of
bulletproof cars to speed the leaders of the 101 countries and organizations to
the conference hall that was ringed with troops from the five hotels that were
also ringed with troops.

It is the best time of year in Delhi, with just a hint of the heat that is soon
to come. The red silk trees are in bloom, and the normal springtime bouquet has
been enhanced with thousands of marigold streamers vaulted over the wide
throughfares and with pastel pennants lining the streets. The glorious old
British parliament buildings are further bedizened each evening by a filigree of
several thousand electric bulbs.

The Indians had only four months to prepare for this meeting, which was shifted
here from its scheduled site in Baghdad because of the war between Iraq and
Iran. The people here have obviously worked hard, with Prime Minister Indira
Gandhi reportedly approving every detail from traffic plans to the logotype
etched into the specially ordered glassware used for leaders' dining rooms.

In this capital city, where alcoholic prohibition was in force until two years
ago, hampers of wine and whisky were supplied to delegations, and visiting
reporters were permitted to buy up to 11 bottles of imported spirits at
duty-free prices.

The delegations were each permitted to bring only six personal and uniformed
bodyguards armed only with side arms. Just before the conference began, an Iraqi
plane tried to bring in a special bulletproof car and some artillery pieces
along with a corps of elite troops. They were turned back, and as a result
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq stayed away.

Still, the Iraqi Embassy was the most highly fortified outpost in town, with
Indian soldiers manning machine guns behind sandbag fortifications that, in
keeping with the general air of tidiness, were upholstered in new green
slipcovers.

How exactly to define nonalignment, which the countries at this conference
espouse, remains a matter of active debate here. Four years ago President J.R.
Jayewardene of Sri Lanka was overheard to comment that the only countries in the
world that could ''truly afford to be nonaligned'' were the United States and
the Soviet Union.

At that time Burma decided to protect its nonalignment by withdrawing from the
movement. Its members span a wide political spectrum; they include
Soviet-supported countries such as Cuba, Afghanistan and Vietnam, and
pro-Western countries such as Singapore, Somalia and Jamaica.

The longest speech made at a full session at the conference was made Wednesday
by President Didier Ratsiraka of Madagascar, who beat Fidel Castro's earlier
two-hour mark by 20 minutes. Mr. Ratsiraka also graced his speech with what many
here viewed as the most original metaphor to explain global relations between
rich and poor countries when he devoted five full pages to a detailed analysis
of World Cup soccer.

Soccer and the Third World

''Have you noticed that except in the case of Brazil in 1958, an exception that
proves the rule, no third world team has even won the World Cup in a European
capital?'' he asked a suddenly awakening audience.

He said that the schedule, the interpretation of the rules and traveling
arrangements were all stacked against the teams from Africa, Asia and Latin
America. Even though the president of the ruling body of the soccer
championships was a Brazilian, President Ratsiraka said he could not do very
much since his title was unmatched by any real power.

Mr. Ratsiraka said that while European teams colluded to assure the victory of
one of them, the third world teams knocked each other out of the competition.
The President referred to specific teams' statements that Cameroon, which had
advanced to the semifinals, had a reputation in the third world as a team with
an inferiority complex, never believing that it could beat Italy or
Czechoslovakia and that its only ambition was to play in the World Cup.

The lesson of all this, Mr. Ratsiraka said, was that ''there is solidarity and
an understanding within the nations of the North and there is no cooperation
among the various states of the South.''

Apparently in an attempt to shield the important visitors from some of India's
harsher images, a Government spokesman confirmed that issues of Time and
Newsweek with articles about last month's massacres in Assam had been barred
from the capital. The spokesman said the importation of these magazines was not
blocked in either Bombay or Calcutta.

At the same time, editors of India Today, a local magazine, said its current
issue, with a full illustrated report on Assam, had been bought up in bulk by
Government agencies, keeping copies off newsstands.

Some intimations of Indian life beyond renovated New Delhi are slipping past the
nearly hermetic seal. One of the morning papers, the usually conservative Times
of India, had a large cartoon on its front page showing Prime Minister Gandhi
speaking to leaders as they sat around a table eating a lavish meal while gaunt
and hungry faces peer through a window. ''And the emphasis will be on solving
the problem of poverty,'' she is saying.

Indian Officials Defend Cost

The conference was indeed costly, but Indian officials defended the outlay by
saying that along with the Asian Games here last November the conference
established India's prestige as a democracy with increasing technological
competence.

The officials said the image it projected at the conference would eventually
attract investment. Such a view was disputed the other day by Viren J. Shah, an
industrialist and a former opposition Member of Parliament. ''Some people might
come to Delhi now and think that it is on the verge of becoming Singapore or
South Korea,'' he said, ''but if they are serious investors they will surely
travel out of town and there India begins.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Nguyen Co Thatch

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 12, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS IS SKEPTICAL ON SALVADORAN AID

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 11


The initial reaction on Capitol Hill to President Reagan's request for more aid
to El Salvador indicates that approval will be conditioned on assurances that El
Salvador will take strong steps to curb human rights violations and broaden its
political base, according to comments from both Democrats and Republicans.

These legislators said that for the President to succeed he would have to lobby
intensely. They said he would have a much harder time in the
Democratic-controlled House than in the Republican-controlled Senate.

''There's just a strong feeling around here that it's another Vietnam
situation,'' Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. said. ''At the same time, nobody
wants to see that country go Marxist.''

What are the prospects that the White House will prevail? ''They'll have to do a
lot of tearing around,'' the Massachusetts Democrat said. ''The votes aren't
here today.''

The Speaker was one of several leaders who were skeptical of Administration
reports that the Salvadoran Army suffered a critical lack of supplies. ''We
think it's blown out of proportion,'' Mr.  O'Neill said. ''Could things get that
bad in a month? We don't think so.''

A similar assessment was made by Representative Silvio O. Conte, Republican of
Massachusetts, ranking minority member of the Appropriations Committee. ''It's a
Catch-22 situation,'' Mr. Conte said. ''Congress doesn't want to see El Salvador
go down, but they don't want to further the killings either.''

''There's no doubt about it, it's a very difficult, thorny issue,'' he added.

Pledge on Combat Troops

Facing opposition on the Hill to his proposal to increase military aid to El
Salvador, President Reagan today expressed uncertainty about how long the United
States would need to continue to send arms to the Central American nation and
said, ''We have to stay with this.''

At a brief White House news conference, Mr. Reagan also emphasized that the
United States would not send combat troops to help El Salvador repel guerrillas
trying to topple the Government there. He said that although the United States
sought ''a political and an economic solution'' to the crisis in El Salvador,
well-trained guerrillas supported by Cuba and Nicaragua wanted to destroy the
nation's economy and democratic institutions.

The United States, Mr. Reagan said, had ''an obligation to try and help'' El
Salvador defeat the guerrillas.  Mr. Reagan's comments came one day after he
proposed an emergency $298 million military and economic aid package for Central
America, including $110 million in arms aid for El Salvador.

''I do not see why there is so much opposition to it,'' the President said. ''We
have no intention of sending combat forces, nor have we ever been asked for
combat forces. And there is no intention of us sending the adviser teams to be
with combat units or anything.''

Reagan Rejects Accusations

Mr. Reagan rejected Congressional accusations that the Administration was trying
to ''blackmail'' and ''pressure'' Congress into approving the new arms package,
which includes training, spare parts and ammunition for the Salvadoran forces.
Overall proposed military aid to El Salvador this year is now $136.3 million.

Mr. Reagan and his aides said Thursday that if the Administration received the
aid it sought for El Salvador, then all or most of the additional training of
Salvadorans would be outside El Salvador. But if Congress balks, Mr. Reagan
indicated, then more advisers will probably be needed in El Salvador.

''There's no blackmail of any kind intended,'' Mr. Reagan said.  Asked if there
was any limit to American aid to El Salvador and where it would end, Mr. Reagan
replied, ''Where it ends, I think, is with a political and an economic
solution.''

Mr. Reagan said the American role would end when the guerrillas stopped trying
''to shoot their way into a ruling position in government'' and Salvadorans had
a chance to vote on their own future in democratic elections rescheduled for
late this year.

Of the $110 million sought by the President, Mr. Reagan seeks $60 million by
persuading the Appropriations Committees to redirect money already earmarked for
other nations. The remainder would come from a supplemental appropriation, which
would be debated and voted upon by both the House and Senate.

Some members think the supplemental appropriation will be easier because
Congress will be able to attach riders expressing its concerns.

Representative Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, chairman of the Foreign
Operations subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee, said he would support
the President's request only under certain circumstances. His concerns echoed
those of many Congressional colleagues.

Emphasis on Politics

''I want to see some real convictions on human rights violations and punishment
of the offenders,'' he said. ''I want to see greater emphasis on broadening the
political process, including guaranteed safety to those participating in the
election.''

Mr. Long also called for a shift from military defense to offense, ''and I want
to see that their military knows what it's doing,'' he said.

''I'd have to see that they understand what they have to do militarily and
economically to turn this around, and not just pour more money year after year
into an ever-deepening rathole,'' Mr. Long said.

Even with such assurances, Mr. Long said, ''Most people I talk to, liberals and
conservatives, are opposed to increasing military aid under any circumstances.''

The liberals opposed increased aid to a nation with broad human rights
violations, he said, while conservatives feared there would be ''no end to the
money going out.''

A similar view was expressed by Senator Jim Sasser, Democrat of Tennessee, a
member of the Appropriations Committee. ''My guess is that the President is
going to have great difficulty getting the funds he wants,'' Mr. Sasser said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADORANS PLAN 2-TRACK CAMPAIGN TO DEFEAT REBELS

BYLINE: By LYDIA CHAVEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1177 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, March 12


El Salvador's armed forces, prodded by the Reagan Administration, are planning a
major drive to destroy guerrilla base camps and to separate civilians from the
guerrillas, according to Salvadoran and United States officials.

The officials say the military and civic campaign, along lines similar to the
''rural pacification'' program used by the United States in Vietnam, is tied to
a sharp increase in aid that the Administration hopes will be approved by
Congress.

The operation, they say, will begin with a military sweep through the rich
agricultural provinces of San Vicente and Usulutan, where the guerrillas have
recently been most active. The military campaign is to be followed by a rigorous
economic redevelopment program, assisted by Americans, to prove that ''the army
is part of the solution, not part of the problem,'' according to an official
close to the planning.

Some Officials See Risks

The Salvadoran and United States officials said they believed such a campaign
offered El Salvador the best chance to regain the upper hand in a military
situation that has deteriorated since last October.

Some officials, however, said the plan was risky. They said it would be
difficult for the armed forces to concentrate on one region without leaving
other provinces vulnerable to guerrilla attack. In addition, separating
civilians from the insurgents will be difficult and could result in an increase
in human rights abuses.

Alvaro Magana, El Salvador's provisonal President, said, ''We have come to the
conclusion that the best possibility we have for a total recovery of these areas
is to have the army stay and guarantee a reasonable climate and at the same time
start these programs.''

When It Will Start

''It is very difficult to find a solution to our problems if we continue to
fight this war in the way we have fought it in the past,'' he added.

The first phase of the campaign, a military sweep and consolidation of the
paramilitary forces, will begin in the next couple of months and will take more
than a third of the country's 22,400-member army.

The State Department's Agency for International Development will give both aid
and manpower for the campaign's second phase, the economic redevelopment, which
includes providing medical care, rebuilding schools and bridges and creating
jobs.

''If it's safe to have people out there we would do it,'' Deane R.  Hinton, the
United States Ambassador, said. ''A.I.D.'s had people all over the country, but
what's new is that somebody would live out there regularly.''

The Salvadoran and United States officials said the strategy of combined
military and civic action was similar to the pacification program in Vietnam
that tried to care for war victims, promote economic development and eliminate
the Vietcong underground organization. But the officials said the program had
been tailored to the situation in El Salvador.

''I don't know much about Vietnam,'' Mr. Hinton said. ''But it seems to me that
the doctrine or philosophy of how you deal with these insurgencies is applicable
with some variations elsewhere. The proper question is, 'Did the basic concept
make sense?' ''

U.S. Aid Called Crucial

The total of $136.3 million in proposed military aid for this fiscal year and
$227.1 million in economic aid is viewed as crucial to the operation. President
Reagan proposed the aid package in a speech Thursday, saying the nations of
Central American are facing ''the gravest crisis in their history.''

The United States is pushing for early elections and for the major
military-civic campaign to stabilize the country before the Presidential
elections in the United States, according to an American official here. The
Reagan Administration, he said, is ''going for broke'' in El Salvador.

Salvadoran and United States officials said the idea for the basic campaign was
developed separately by three groups. The State Department wrote one plan, the
embassy made suggestions of its own and, in a class directed by American
military advisers last year, a group of majors in the Salvadoran Army developed
their own program.  The big push for the campaign began last October.

'Pick Something and Do It Right'

''The basic concept is pretty simple,'' Mr. Hinton said. ''You can't do
everything so pick something and do it right.'' Already, according to Mr.
Magana, some privates and corporals are being trained to evaluate the needs of
the civilian population as they accompany the army during the military sweep.

The recently named Salvadoran National Commission for Regional Restoration will
be in charge of coordinating the civilian programs, along with A.I.D.  A
commander for the entire operation will be appointed shortly, according to Mr.
Magana.

A critical aspect of the program that has not been fully worked out involves the
country's civil defense forces, which will eventually be responsible for the
region's security. In the past, civil defense forces, who are appointed by local
commanders, have been involved in many cases of desertion and human rights
abuses.

United States officials want the civilian population to choose the civil defense
force, but the Salvadorans resist this.  One United States official said that
there were 2,000 civil defense troops in San Vicente and Usulutan and that these
would have to be increased considerably to secure the region.

Guerrilla Strongholds

Usulutan and San Vicente, which have 13 percent of the country's population,
were chosen because of their agricultural importance. In addition, two bridges
across the Rio Lempa between the two provinces link eastern El Salvador to the
country's heartland.

Moreover, the southern part of Usulutan and the northern region of San Vicente
are strongholds for the guerrillas. Their bases in those areas are used by
patrols that disrupt traffic on the nation's two main highways and destroy
crops. In addition, they are used to pass supplies arriving on the Pacific coast
to northern El Salvador.

''The assumptions are that the guerrillas are out to destroy the economy,'' said
one military official, ''and to separate the east from the west.

''What do you do?'' he asked. ''I don't believe there is a purely military
solution. You have got to do things: land reform, economic reform, civic action.
You have got to kill guerrillas, destroy their will and take some of their
dedication.''

A major obstacle, according to a Western political analyst, is how to separate
the guerrillas from the civilian population. Many parts of southern Usulutan,
for example, have been guerrilla-controlled for more than a year, and the
leftists have become an ingrained part of the local economy.

Asked how how the separation would be effected, one official said it would be a
case of ''you are either with us or against us.'' He said a weakness of the
campaign was that following this doctrine without violating human rights was
difficult. In addition, he added, as long as the army is concentrating on San
Vicente and Usulutan, the guerrillas could strike elsewhere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map (page15)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
SUNDAY, MARCH 13, 1983

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 619 words


International
The U.S. stepped up its efforts to break the deadlock over talks on the Lebanese
situation. Secretary of State George P. Shultz met with Lebanon's Foreign
Minister, Eli Salem, and was to confer today with Israel's Foreign Minister,
Yitzhak Shamir. Meanwhile, President Amin Gemayel of Lebanon was sending former
Prime Minister Saeb Salam to Wasington with an undisclosed personal message to
President Reagan.  (Page 1, Col. 6.)
The Israeli-Lebanese agreement is being held up by the question of whether the
border will be open to free trade, negotiators said.  (20:1.)
A new intelligence-sharing plan with Israel that would provide the United States
with intelligence information from the Lebanese invasion has been proposed by
Secretary of Defense Caspar W.  Weinberger. The proposal by Mr. Weinberger, who
last month rejected an Israeli plan for sharing data, has put the Israeli
Government in a difficult situation, according to diplomatic officials. (1:5.)
Destruction of guerrillas base camps in El Salvador and the separation of the
civilian population from the guerrillas are the goals of a major drive planned
by Salvador's armed forces with the encouragement of the Reagan Administraiton.
Salvadoran and United States officials say the military and civic campaign would
be similar to the ''rural pacification'' program used by the United States in
Vietnam. (1:2.)
Joshua Nkomo flew to Johannesburg, where he boarded a plane for London. Mr.
Nkomo, who has been the opposition leader in Zimbabwe, is expected to campaign
from abroad against the harsh tactics used by Zimbabwean Government troops in
recent weeks in rural Matabeleland in their effort to control army deserters.
(1:1.)
National
A campaign of ''gentle persuasion,'' by White House aides led to President
Reagan's acceptance of Anne McGill Burford's resignation last week as
administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, a key Administration
source said. (1:3.)
A parasite is killing the oysters of Chesapeake Bay, which have provided nearly
half the nation's supply. Catches are now half the size of previous years
because of the infestation of oyster beds by a microscopic protozoan parasite.
(1:2.)
A nonprescription contraceptive for women is expected to be approved soon by the
Food and Drug Administration. The new product consists of a soft, disposable
polyurethane sponge permeated with a spermicide developed by a California
company with the aid of funds provided by the National Institutes of Health.
(25:1.)
Municipal insurance is being bought by some western Massachusets towns after a
negiligence suit against the town of Ware awarded the plaintiff more than
$873,000. The suit was brought by a woman whose husband and one of their
children were killed in a collision with a car driven by a drunken driver. The
driver, who also died, had been pulled off the road but let go by the police
just minutes before the crash. The case broadens municipal liability for acts
long considered ''discretionary.'' (26:1.)
Metropolitan
Physical and psychological barriers that prevent elderly crime victims from
becoming witnesses are causing increasing concern among the police and
prosecutors. They said they were unable to go forward in many cases because the
elderly victim could not identify the suspect or was afraid to testify. (1:5.)
About two dozen new school buses stand idle in school garages in New York State
because their bottom steps are too high. Regulations call for steps 16 inches
off the ground. Steps on some of the new buses are as high as 18 inches. Their
release is awaiting a decision by manufacturers and state and local school
officials about how to correct the problem. (40:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 41 words


''I don't know much about Vietnam. But it seems to me that the doctrine or
philosophy of how you deal with these insurgencies is applicable with some
variations elsewhere.'' - Deane R. Hinton, United states Ambassador to El
Salvador. (15:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Americans Leave Hanoi With Data on War Dead

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 12


Four Americans returned from Vietnam today carrying ''tentative information'' on
12 Americans killed during the Vietnam War, a United States Embassy spokesman
said.

A Vietnamese press agency report Friday said the information had ''just been
gathered from a number of localities in northern Vietnam.''

The Vietnamese reportedly told the official American team they had been able to
obtain some of the remains and identification tags and other information on the
dead Americans and had asked the United States delegation to provide files on
the 12 cases so more positive identification could be made.

The American delegation was headed by Lieut. Col. Joseph Harvey, chief of the
Joint Casualty Resolution Center, a Hawaii-based unit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET IS MAKING MORE USE OF CAM RANH BAY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 639 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 12


American naval officers say the Vietnamese port of Cam Ranh Bay, which was built
up by the United States during the Vietnam War, has become a fulltime naval
operating base for the Soviet Pacific Fleet.

On a recent day, the officers said, 20 Soviet ships were in the bay, the largest
number spotted since Soviet ships began calling there three years ago.

About half the vessels were said to be combatants, including the aircraft
carrier Minsk, several cruisers and destroyers, and two submarines. The others
were supply ships, oilers and repair tenders, they said.

In addition, the officers said, Soviet reconnaissance planes at Cam Ranh patrol
the South China Sea and the Indian Ocean. The planes, known in the West as
Bears, have a range of 7,800 miles and use electronic sensors and acoustical
devices to watch surface shipping and to search for submarines.

The Soviet Union has also built an electronic intelligence complex at Cam Ranh
to monitor United States communications to Clark Air Force Base and Subic Bay
Naval Station in the Philippines and transmissions from there to the fleet and
to the base at Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean, the officers said.

A floating drydock in which large ships can be lifted out of the sea for repairs
has been stationed in the river at Ho Chi Minh City.  The officers said they
were puzzled as to why it was there but said it could be easily moved to Cam
Ranh Bay.

The Soviet Union has invested little in the base and has relied on floating
piers and repair tenders to service warships, they said. A hospital ship houses
technicians, which is permitted in peacetime under the Geneva convention, they
said.

Western intelligence officials said in December that there was a slow but
significant expansion of Soviet forces in the western Pacific in 1982, with the
greatest buildup in waters adjacent to Vietnam.

As recently as January 1981, the Vietnamese Government said it would not allow
the Soviet Navy a base at Cam Ranh Bay. The American officers said, however,
that there had been a gradual Soviet buildup in the harbor since 1979.

American satellites are known to be capable of photographing the bay in detail.
Vietnamese defectors are also reported to have provided information.

Cam Ranh Bay has long figured in the military history of the region. It was a
French port during the colonial period and, in 1905, the assembly point for the
Russian fleet that sailed to the Far East to be defeated by the Japanese in
Tsushima Strait. During the war in Vietnam, the United States spent $156 million
to build up the base.

For the Soviet Navy, having a base on the South China Sea means that ships can
operate longer there and in the Indian Ocean than they could if they had to
return to Vladivostok for servicing. The base has also become what one officer
called a good ''garage'' for ships steaming between Vladivostok and the Indian
Ocean.

The base at Cam Ranh Bay means that the Soviet Navy is no longer limited to the
Sea of Japan, in which it could be trapped by United States or Japanese ships
barring the straits. The Japanese have recently agreed to take on that task in a
crisis.

With hostilities, the operating base at Cam Ranh Bay would permit Soviet
warships to threaten the United States lifeline to the Indian Ocean, the naval
officers said. The United States maintains 20 to 30 ships, centering around an
aircraft carrier, in the Indian Ocean at any one time. Supply ships and air
cargo planes from the West Coast through Hawaii and Guam to the American bases
in the Philippines and from there to Diego Garcia.

If the United States were to send the Rapid Deployment Force, now called the
Central Command, to the Persian Gulf to defend the oilfields in that region,
that force's main supply line would follow the same route, with Cam Ranh Bay on
its flank.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GERMAN TV BIDS FOR U.S. VIEWERS

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1513 words


On Jan. 30, 1983, millions of Americans sat down before their television sets to
immerse themselves in Superbowl Sunday. On the same day in Germany, millions of
Germans sat down to watch ''The Oppermanns.'' The date marked the 50th
anniversary of Adolf Hitler's accession to power.

''The Oppermanns'' is a film adaptation of the novel by Lion Feuchtwanger, one
of the many Jewish artists who fled abroad from the Nazi threat. Set in Berlin
during the winter of 1933, ''The Oppermanns'' tells of a sophisticated,
successful, literate, assimilated Jewish family. Within months, the Nazis had
crushed the lives of them all and driven their brightest young hope to suicide.

A two-part, four-hour production, ''The Oppermanns'' is one of a number of films
made expressly for West German television that are being shown under the
umbrella title ''Contemporary German Television,'' at the Museum of
Broadcasting, 1 East 53d Street, through April 30. Complete schedules may be
obtained there.

According to Robert M. Batscha, who became director of the museum in November
1981, it took a year to put the festival together. One purpose, he explained
recently, is to provide visitors to the museum as well as American broadcasters
with an opportunity to see how German television in the 1970's and 80's has been
exploring the dark and painful Nazi past with extraordinary seriousness, depth
and poignancy.

The exhibition, consisting of 50 hours of programs, all subtitled or dubbed into
English, includes works by two of Germany's most prolific and celebrated
directors: Wolfgang Petersen and the late Rainer Werner Fassbinder. Mr. Petersen
has produced almost exclusively for television; his World War II submarine film
''Das Boot'' (''The Boat''), with its tellingly antiwar message, was financed by
German television, then released to movie theaters at home and abroad. It has
been nominated this year for six Academy Awards, including Best Director.
Fassbinder, who died in 1982 at the age of 36, produced half of his remarkable
output of more than 40 films specifically for German television.

The money for transport, subtitling and dubbing of the films came entirely from
German television stations, Mr. Batscha said. The German Foreign Ministry and
Goethe House in New York provided the underwriting for the extensive program
notes.

Channel 13 has just bought the rights to ''The Oppermanns'' and plans to
broadcast it in May. Indeed, public-television viewers, long accustomed to
British imports, may soon be getting other samples of these German television
productions. Channel 13 has also negotiated the rights to telecast, via its
''Great Performances'' series, an 11-part adaptation of ''Buddenbrooks,'' Thomas
Mann's novel about four generations of a 19th-century family. Four episodes from
it will be screened at the museum; it is expected to be shown in its entirety
nationally over the Public Broadcasting Service sometime in 1984.

The selected programs, both fact and fiction, have drawn huge audiences in
Germany. For example, one of Fassbinder's most ambitious serials for television,
''Eight Hours Are Not a Day,'' is a five-part saga about a contemporary German
working-class family, with each ''chapter'' running about 90 minutes. It was
made in the early 1970's, and in the first segment features Hanna Schygulla and
Gottfried John as the lovers from different social strata. The miniseries
consistently captured more than 40 percent of the German television audience. It
will be shown in full at the museum.

Although Fassbinder projected a public image that was ''disorderly'' and often
outrageous, the director ''radiated calm and confidence'' on the set, according
to Gunter Rohrbach, one of the more significant creative forces in German
television. Mr. Rohrbach will participate in the museum's lunchtime seminars
here during the festival. This facet of the director is dramatically illustrated
in one of the museum's documentaries, in which Fassbinder is seen shooting
another television mini-series titled ''Berlin - Alexanderplatz.'' The epic
undertaking, with a cast literally in the thousands, was completed in 1980. What
comes through in the documentary is the director's total professionalism, an
intimate glimpse of what Mr. Rohrbach, his discoverer and mentor, calls
Fassbinder's ''masterly command of filmmaking.''

Wolfgang Petersen is represented in the museum's exhibition by his extremely
popular ''Scene of the Crime,'' a TV series somewhat similar to ''Columbo'' in
the United States.

Among other documentaries in the exhibition are several originally shown as part
of a German series called ''Yesterday.'' Since 1977, ''Yesterday'' has been
presenting searing reflections of Germany, during both the prewar and immediate
postwar years. In ''The Final Solution,'' for example, the systematic
persecution and subsequent annihilation of the Jews in Germany and Nazi-occupied
countries such as Poland are treated in unflinching detail. The production
weaves together contemporary and rarely seen Nazi footage, Allied films shot
during the liberation of concentration camps, and interviews with surviving
eyewitnesses.

Jurgen Ruhle, creator and overseer of ''Yesterday,'' said in a telephone
interview from Cologne the other day that he had initiated the series with six
major productions a year because ''German youth had no notion whatsoever of
their country's past. This broke the silence and shocked them into reality.''
''The Final Solution,'' he added, was produced to prepare the German television
audience for the broadcast of the American mini-series ''Holocaust'' in 1979.

That same year, German viewers watched an exceptionally rare documentary; it,
too, is in the museum's exhibition. Called ''Conspiracy Against Hitler,'' it
shows the trial of those who almost succeeded in assassinating the Fuhrer with a
bomb on July 20, 1944.  The dominant figure throughout is Roland Freisler, ''the
hangman in a judge's gown,'' whose raving, shrieking denunciations of the mostly
high-born, high-ranking defendants so disgusted test audiences at the time that
Joseph Goebbels, the Nazi propaganda minister, ordered all copies of it to be
destroyed. One, however, remained in a Berlin safe: the Russian army seized it
in 1945 and West German television obtained it in 1979.

The museum's exhibition additionally features the world television premieres of
two major operas, including a new production of Benjamin Britten's ''Turn of the
Screw'' from the Henry James novel; award-winning children's programs, and
Salvador Dali's first film since 1930 - all made for German television.

Further, according to Mr. Batscha, there are ''reports about aspects of life in
the United States that tend to be overlooked by American broadcasters,'' among
them a ''startlingly frank'' documentary about Ron Kovic, the disabled Vietnam
War veteran who wrote ''Born on the Fourth of July.''

Why has it not been possible for American television to address itself as
frequently to the profound social themes that are evident in the exhibition's
more important offerings? Hanns J. Friedrichs, the New York correspondent for
ZDF, one of Germany's two national networks, believes a major reason is the
structure of his country's television, which the World War II Allies wanted to
guarantee would never be in the grip of a government monopoly such as Hitler's.

''We are totally decentralized into regional network stations. We do not have
state-owned broadcasting, like France,'' Mr. Friedrichs explained recently.
''The German federal government doesn't have anything to do with us, and none of
the money we get goes into its kitty in taxes. We aren't solely commercial like
the three big U.S.  networks and we don't have to pass the hat like PBS. Our
legal base is almost a blueprint of the BBC. One source of our income is a
viewer fee of about $6 a month that every German set owner must pay.  The other
is commercials, but we cannot have more than 20 minutes total of them a day,
they are bunched together in five- or eightminute segments, they never come on
after 8 P.M., and never on Sundays or public holidays.''

Egon Monk, who wrote and directed ''The Oppermanns,'' said in a telephone
interview from Hamburg that he had hoped for 20 years to make a film of the
novel. He felt it was the most fitting way to mark Hitler's pseudo-legal coming
to absolute power as Chancellor of the German Reich. ''I wanted the audience to
understand how he had been able to take over the government with the public's
consent,'' Mr.  Monk said.

''The Oppermanns'' was shown a few days earlier than in Germany on TVOntario in
Canada to critical and popular acclaim. One critic, David Wesley, said that
''its major contribution to our understanding of Nazism is to remind us that it
wasn't a lunatic fringe movement somehow forced on an unwilling public by a
madman.''

He went on: ''In 'The Oppermanns,' the Germans show an incredible honesty about
their own recent history, an honesty never approached by North American attempts
to deal with the subject.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of the scene Zero Hour

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM;
'TENDER MERCIES' STANDS OUT IN A FINE OFF-SEASON CROP

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1521 words


The season is out of joint. This is the time of year when distributors usually
get rid of all of those movies they don't think are worth releasing in the prime
moviegoing times of Christmas and the midsummer months. Yet there have been more
new films of interest in the last few weeks than I can remember in any
comparable period in a number of years.

One of the latest of these is ''Tender Mercies,'' a funny, most appealing and
most sharply observed film that's set in rural Texas and concerns, among other
things, people who sing ''Jesus Saves,'' without making fun of them. Based on an
original screenplay by Horton Foote, who received an Oscar for his adaptation of
''To Kill a Mockingbird,'' and directed by Bruce Beresford, the Australian
director (''Breaker Morant'') in his American debut, ''Tender Mercies'' is
likely to become the year's most unexpected hit, sometimes called ''a sleeper,''
which has always seemed to me to be a phrase that contradicted itself.

If any other actor except Robert Duvall were playing the leading role in
''Tender Mercies,'' that of a down-and-out country-and-Western singer, you'd
probably call this the performance of his career. But Mr. Duvall has contributed
so many brilliant performances to such films as ''True Confessions,''
''Apocalypse Now,'' ''The Great Santini'' and ''The Seven Percent Solution''
that it doesn't do justice to him to suggest that ''Tender Mercies'' is somehow
better. It's great and different. It's also the performance of an extraordinary
American actor in the midst of an exceptional career.

In all respects ''Tender Mercies'' is so good that it has the effect of
rediscovering a kind of film fiction that has been debased over the decades by
hack moviemakers, working according to accepted formulas, frequently to the
applause of the critics as well as the public.

''Tender Mercies'' is a warm film, by which I mean something very different from
sentimental. The good ''warm'' film, as opposed to the good ''cool'' film, never
leaves one in any doubt as to what it's about or how one is supposed to respond
to it. Its surprises come not through any breakthroughs in style, or from shock,
or from disorienting juxtapositions of content that force one to reexamine one's
relations with the universe.

Instead, like ''Tender Mercies,'' it works through conventional means to find
the special that we always hope exists within the ordinary.

If it isn't still too soon to attempt to identify the most important film
development in the 1970's, I'd say it was the emergence of a kind of cool -
commercial movies can't support a fancy term like Modernist - film that owes
more than a frame or two to the radically new-looking films made by Jean-Luc
Godard in the late 1950's and 60's. These films, as well as the cool films that
came after, especially those of Rainer Werner Fassbinder, insist that audiences
make choices while looking at the films.

They often don't mean exactly what they say. They favor medium long-shots that
allow the audience to choose where to look. A closeup may be used more for
decoration than to italicize a point.  The people on the screen - sometimes they
can't even be described as characters - are not to be identified with but,
instead, to be scrutinized and considered, as if they were previously unknown
fauna.

In its extreme form, as in Fassbinder's classic, ''In a Year of 13 Moons,'' the
cool film may be beautiful to look at but resolutely off-putting as it demands
that we pay attention to things most of us would prefer to ignore. The cool film
initially makes us uneasy, though ultimately it may be far more involving than
the more ordinary warm film because we've had to contribute to it. The warm film
soothes.

Though Godard and Fassbinder films have never been wildly successful in the mass
American market, an increasing number of films that do reach this market show
the influences of these cool moviemakers. Martin Scorsese's best films - ''Taxi
Driver,'' ''Raging Bull'' and ''The King of Comedy'' - do not go gently into
one's memory. They are entertaining but they also disturb us by forcing us to
consider people and situations that undermine our feelings of self-assurance and
well-being.

Though ''Betrayal'' is extremely moving, it also is a cool film. It keeps its
three characters at an equal distance from us so that no one character has a
distinct emotional advantage over the other two.

Two typical examples of warm films are Richard Attenborough's ''Gandhi,'' a
wholehearted endorsement of a man whose saintliness is never in doubt, and ''The
Night of the Shooting Stars,'' by Paolo and Vittorio Taviani, a movie that sides
with the angels, with heroic ''little'' people, but so unequivocally that it
seems a tiny bit smug. The principal thing the audience discovers in a film like
this is its own - not the characters' - worthiness. The filmmakers have done all
of the work and labeled every character so clearly that all we have to do is nod
in approval.

''Tender Mercies'' is an equally warm film but you know that, like its hero, Mac
Sledge (Mr. Duvall), it is aware of the bottomless pit that awaits those who
lose their bearings in life. ''Tender Mercies'' is full of surprises, the major
one being that a film that so unembarrassedly and unashamedly endorses the
so-called oldfashioned values could be both moving and provocative.

Mr. Foote and Mr. Beresford achieve a kind of tender heroism, something missing
from ''The Night of the Shooting Stars,'' in two ways. They dramatize the depths
of their characters' feelings so successfully that we share them, and they allow
us to understand just how fragile are the lives we are watching. It's only by
seeing this fragility that we have any idea of their true strength.

When first seen, Mac Sledge is a boozing has-been, a once-famous
country-and-Western singer and songwriter, drifting through rural Texas doing
odd jobs for room, board and bottle. One day he comes upon the isolated motel
and service station run by Rosa Lee (Tess Harper), a pretty Vietnam widow who is
15 years younger than Mac and has a 9-year-old son, nicknamed Sonny (Allan
Hubbard). Unlike the writing in most warm films, Mr. Foote's screenplay - the
best thing he's ever done for films - doesn't overexplain or overanalyze. It has
a rare appreciation for understatement, which is the style of its characters if
not of the actual narrative.

After a week or two working for Rosa Lee, Mac starts drinking less and less and,
after two months, he's off the sauce entirely, at which point he proposes. They
are working side by side in the garden, hoeing. ''Would you think about marrying
me?'' says Mac. ''Yes,'' says Rosa Lee, ''I will.'' That is that and they return
to their work.

For much of the film we're never quite sure how lasting Mac's cure will be. Only
gradually do we realize that it's the result of his love for Rosa Lee and Sonny,
combined with the physical and emotional exhaustion that have accumulated over
the years. Mac never has to say anything to that effect. It's apparent in every
line and in every gesture, big and small.

Although understatement is the style of the characters, ''Tender Mercies'' is
packed with dramatic incidents, sometimes bordering on melodrama, which involve
not only Mac's relations with Rosa Lee and Sonny but also with his ex-wife Dixie
(Betty Buckley), who is still a star on the country-and-Western circuit, and
their pretty, troubled, teen-age daughter, Sue Anne (Ellen Barkin). More about
what happens is unimportant to spell out, except to emphasize that it's never
predictable.

Mr. Beresford's ''Breaker Morant'' was a good, solid film based, I'm told, on a
good, solid play. I suspect that the success of ''Tender Mercies'' has less to
do with any similarities between Australia's outback and rural Texas than with
the director's secure sense of what he wants to see on the screen and his
ability to put it there. Beginning with Mr. Duvall, the film is perfectly cast,
not with types but with superior actors.

Tess Harper, a Texas actress who makes her film debut as Rosa Lee, will be one
of this year's discoveries. A young woman with an oddly asymmetrical blonde
beauty, she has the kind of concentration one usually associates with actors
who've had long stage experience.  However, since young Allan Hubbard, who plays
her son and who has never acted professionally before, shares that
concentration, I suspect it must be the work of Mr. Beresford.

Almost as fine are Ellen Barkin, as Mac's spoiled, doomed daughter, and Betty
Buckley, who is currently in Broadway's ''Cats,'' as Mac's ex-wife, a tough,
determined, savvy, show-biz type.

The film's beautiful physical ''look'' - lots of long, low, flat horizons under
great expanses of cloudless blue sky - is as idealized as the sentiments
expressed in the country-and-Western music on the soundtrack, which also gives
the film its lilting pace.  Good films as genuinely warm and sweet as ''Tender
Mercies'' are rare. I don't want to oversell it, but if an essentally nonmusical
movie can be called a toe-tapper, ''Tender Mercies'' is it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
The Nonaligned Spread the Blame

BYLINE: By Henry Giniger and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 206 words


Extending hospitality last week to leaders of 101 countries professing
nonalignment, India garlanded New Delhi with flowers and removed street beggars
and monkey tamers. But Prime Minister Indira Gandhi's efforts to steer the
organization away from the anti-American tilt favored by her predecessor as
chairman, Cuba's Fidel Castro, met only partial success in a final resolution
that stressed the third world's urgent need for financial help.

On other matters, the document condemned American military and political support
of Israel, which it said should be brought before a ''war crimes tribunal.'' The
United States was also accused of violating ''commitments'' to protect
Palestinian refugees in Lebanon and of bringing an ''extraneous issue'' - Cuban
troops in Angola - into negotiations on Namibian independence. More evenhanded
on other matters, the conference told both Washington and Moscow to keep their
disputes out of Latin America, called for a ban on use and production of nuclear
weapons and criticized plans to deploy them.  Without naming the Soviet Union
and Vietnam, it demanded withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan and
Cambodia.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND JOURNAL

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 3, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1266 words


A SERIES of pleasant surprises occurred recently in the life of Lewis Love,
chairman of the science department at Great Neck South High School. First, he
realized that the woman selected to be the first female astronaut, scheduled to
go aloft in the next United States space trip, was Mary Cleave, a student of his
in the early 60's.

Next he learned that Miss Cleave named him as one of the teachers who had most
influenced her. Then he was told that Dave Marash of WNBC-TV News, while talking
to the most recently selected astronauts, had been struck by the fact that each
was a product of a highly rated public high school. They were Stuyvesant in
Manhattan, Scarsdale in Westchester County and Great Neck High Schools.

''I told Dave Marash,'' Mr. Love said, ''that I remember Miss Cleave as a very
hard-working young lady at a time when not many girls took physics. Don't
forget, we not only didn't have computers then, we didn't even have
calculators.''

A teacher for 33 years, 29 of them in Great Neck, Mr. Love said, ''I must admit
I've never regretted a moment of my teaching life.'' In addition to instructing
in physics, he has taught teachers how to introduce science into the elementary
grades. He has also led science seminars for labor leaders, and he has helped
start a Saturday program at C.W. Post College for gifted children in grades 2
through 9.

Mr. Love said he knew of many former students, like Miss Cleave, who ''have
accomplished a great deal, and that's a wonderful thing for a teacher to feel.''

''I just hope what I had to say has some impact,'' said Mr. Love, who will be
seen on the news on Channel 4 this week, ''because I think the government has to
put energy, time, money and commitment into developing science teachers. Science
is not just technology, it's a way of looking at the world, of making
intelligent decisions.

''The information explosion in the last few years has been incredible. It could
be that the answers to many of our problems are already in the literature and we
don't even know it yet.''

Is our view of the Soviet Union justified? How do the Soviet people look on life
in the United States? Who are the aggressors, and can the aggression be halted?

''If we don't understand,'' said Phyllis Kurland, organizer of a spring lecture
series at Nassau County Community College in Uniondale, ''we cannot make
properly informed decisions as an electorate.''

To provide some answers, the college is sponsoring ''Everything You Always
Wanted to Know About Russia but Were Afraid to Ask.'' Tomorrow at 1 P.M. in the
College Union, Salome Eydelman, a Russian immigrant and language professor, will
discuss ''What Wrong Ideas Do Americans Have About the Soviet Union, and How
Does the Average Russian View America.''

On Tuesday at 11:30 A.M. in the Administrative Tower, Leonid Bieny, first
secretary of the Soviet mission to the United Nations, will address issues in
the arms race, and on Friday at 11:30 in the College Union, McGeorge Bundy will
talk about the arms race, nuclear war and communication between the superpowers.
Mr. Bundy, special assistant for national security to Presidents John F. Kennedy
and Lyndon B. Johnson, said, ''When we are serious, the Soviets can be, too.''

The lectures are open to the public. For information, call 222-7153.

Residents of the Shoreham-Wading River School District will not be able to
decide whether to build two swimming pools in the district's high school at a
cost of $2 million until the future of the Shoreham nuclear power plant is
determined.

A vote on the pools had been scheduled for March 23, but Dr.  Albert Prodell,
president of the Board of Education, said, ''If it were definite that the
nuclear power plant were to be abandoned, we would not build the pools.''

Eighty percent of the district's tax bill is paid by the Long Island Lighting
Company plant.  According to Dr. Prodell, a projected $1 million surplus in this
year's budget that would have been applied to the pools could be used to reduce
taxes or go into a capital reserve fund to cover building expenses or be spent
on other options, with voters' approval.

The C.W. Post Center of Long Island University in Brookville has been granted
approval by the State Board of Regents to become the first college on the Island
to offer students undergraduate degrees in journalism.

''We've received word from Albany,'' said Dr. Julian Mates, dean of the School
of Arts at the center, ''and we are all set to begin accepting students.''

He said the baccalaureate program in journalism closely adhered to the
curriculum guidelines of the American Council of Education in Journalism and was
designed to prepare students for to begin working on newspapers and magazines
and in public relations and advertising.

Dean Mates also said Post had received a ''generous gift'' from the Rosalind P.
Walter Foundation for a journalism award. At least one journalism freshman each
year will receive a four-year award.

''We want to keep the memory of Allard Lowenstein alive in the hope it will
inspire others,'' said Representative Doug Walgren, Democrat of Pennsylvania, of
the activist who was fatally shot three years ago.

Toward that end, Mr. Walgren and others have organized the second annual Allard
Lowenstein Symposium, scheduled for Friday and Saturday in Washington.

The symposium, which one organizer called ''a chance to keep dialogue open on
important current issues,'' will focus on the topics of ''Money and Politics,''
''Defens and Arms Control,'' ''Employment Policy,'' ''Southern Africa'' and
''Can Congress Work?''

Pivotal issues were central to Mr. Lowenstein's political philosophy, said
Wendie Owen, a Lowenstein campaign worker in his successful 1968 race for
Congress from Nassau County.

Mr. Lowenstein, she said, ''was a passionate believer that individuals could
make a difference.'' She added: ''He believed that if they used their talents to
constructive ends, they could change society for the better.''

''A lot of us,'' Mr. Walgren said, ''believe Al's life was one of the most
important examples our democracy can have. He believed so deeply in the process
of a democracy that he devoted almost all of his energies to being a citizen in
one form or another.''

Mr. Lowenstein, who had a home in Long Beach, was defeated for reelection in
1970. A college teacher, lawyer, author and political adviser, he is perhaps
best remembered for his activism, particularly of his mobilization of the anti-
Vietnam War movement.

''To this day, he is remembered by many who listened to him as the most
convincing human being they had ever heard,'' David Harris wrote in The New York
Times Magazine shortly after Mr. Lowenstein was shot to death in 1980 by a
former aide.

Among those scheduled to attend the symposium are Senator Edward M. Kennedy,
Democrat of Massachusetts; Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut;
Representative S. William Green, Republican of Manhattan; David S. Broder,
columnist for The Washington Post, and Mike Farrell, the actor.

Keynote addresses will be delivered by former Representative Paul N. McCloskey
Jr., Republican of California, and Aaron Henry, a Mississippi civil rights
figure.

Admission to the symposium is $25. Registration will be at 5 P.M.  on Friday in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building.  Mr. Walgren, pointing out that
Mr. Lowenstein's grave in Arlington National Cemetery had ''a direct view across
the Potomac'' to the Capitol, said: ''We like to think that Congress is never
out from under Al's eye and the values he represented.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 13, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT GUIDE;
'THREE MUSKETEERS'

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 14, Column 4; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words


Rudolf Friml's musical ''You're in Love'' had its premiere at the Hartman
Theater (then the Stamford Theater) in November 1916. Tickets were 50 cents to
$2 and the show was advertised locally for its ''snappy songs and pretty
girls.''

Mr. Friml's music for ''The Three Musketeers,'' written in 1928, will be heard
in the same theater beginning at 8 P.M. Saturday, when a new version of the show
opens as the final production of the current Hartman season. It will run through
April 10.

The original lyrics by P.G. Wodehouse and Clifford Grey were retained, but the
book has been updated by Mark Bramble, who also attended to the directorial
chores. A cast of 25 is the largest assembled to date for a Hartman musical.

Mr. Bramble was a Tony Award nominee and an Outer Critics Circle Award winner
for the book of ''Barnum.'' He is currently represented on Broadway as co-author
of ''42nd Street.''

D'Artagnan, the swashbuckling hero of the piece, will be played by David
Garrison, who has appeared on Broadway in ''The Pirates of Penzance'' and ''A
Day in Hollywood/A Night in the Ukraine,'' and Off Broadway as ''Snoopy.''

B.H. Barry, a specialist in staging hand-to-hand combats ranging from those in
Joseph Papp's ''Hamlet'' to the Metropolitan Opera production of ''Mahagonny,''
has supervised the swordplay.

The choreography is the work of Onna White and the costumes were designed by
Freddy Wittop, both well-known to Broadway and film audiences.

Miss White created the dances for ''Music Man,'' ''1776,'' and the films
''Oliver!'' and ''Bye Bye Birdie,'' while Mr. Wittop designed costumes for ''The
Roar of the Greasepaint,'' ''I Do! I Do!'' and ''Hello, Dolly!'' which won him a
Tony.

Tickets are priced from $12 to $18. Curtain time is 8 P.M. Tuesday through
Saturday, 7:30 P.M. Sunday and 2 P.M. for randomly scheduled matinees. The box
office number is 323-2131.

U.S.-JAPAN TRADE

The computer, the chip and the robot will be the subject of the 14th annual
Symposium on International Relations sponsored jointly by the League of Women
Voters and Yale University. It will be held in Sprague Hall on the Yale campus
from 9:30 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. Tuesday.

''The United States and Japan: The High Technology Challenge'' will examine the
implications for education, industry and society, the relationship between
government and business and the changing environment of world trade.

Among the speakers will be Scott DeGarmo, editor in chief, Science Digest; Peter
diCicco, president, International Union of Electrical Workers; Merton J. Peck,
professor of economics, Yale University; Clyde Prestowitz, United States
Department of Commerce, and Seiichiro Ohtsuka, deputy consulate general, New
York City.

Tax-deductible registration fees are $9 for the morning session, $7 for
students; $17 for the full day, including lunch, $15 for students. Information:
288-7996.

HENRY BRANT BIRTHDAY

Real Art Ways has lined up a series of noteworthy events this week, starting
with the retrospective of Henry Brant's spatial music celebrating the composer's
70th birthday at 3 P.M. today in the Lincoln Theater of the University of
Hartford.

Co-sponsored by the university's Hartt School of Music, the performance will
feature instrumentalists and vocalists from the school conducted by Mr. Brant.
Tickets are $3.

From 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Monday through Friday a free Video Festival will be held
at Real Art Ways headquarters, 40 State Street.  ''Smothering Dreams,'' an
examination of the American preoccupation with violence, was made by Dan Reeves
and Jon Hilton ''in the context of my experiences as a marine in Vietnam in the
60's,'' Mr. Reeve said.

''Media Games'' by the German artist Bernd Krack combines video art,
pre-recorded video tape, live performance and cross-country transmission, while
''Ellis Island'' is a professionally acted film without dialogue, commemorating
the 16 million immigrants who sought admittance to the United States through
''the isle of tears.''

Finally, Derek Bailey, the English guitarist known for his improvisational
skills, will give a concert at Real Art Ways, 8:30 P.M. Saturday. Admission $3.

Call 525-5521 for more information.

CORPORATE WOMEN

How women adapt to corporate cultures will be explored in the first of a series
of annual conferences at Fairfield University, titled ''Women and Work: Life
Issues,'' scheduled from 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.  Thursday in the Campus Center Oak
Room.

Heading a group of panelists will be Terrence E. Deal, co-author of ''Corporate
Cultures: The Rites and Rituals of Corporate Life,'' a book that identifies
companies by such terms as ''macho,'' ''highstakes,'' ''slow feedback,'' ''work
hard-play hard'' and ''lowrisk.''

On the list of topics to be discussed are modifying employee behavior, corporate
culture shock associated with moving from one company to another, how
corporations attract new people, employee benefits in terms of ''golden eggs''
or ''golden handcuffs,'' the psychology of corporate dress and the tax
ramifications of stock options, pensions and profit-sharing.

Members of the panel include Mary E. Head, of the Connecticut Bank and Trust
Company; Linda Cassell Jones and Randall E. Ruppart, of Lee-Hecht and Associates
Career Services; Marilyn R. Lew, Deloitte Haskins & Sells, accountants; Victor
Kiam, of Remington Products; and Judith Milinowksi, of Ed Mitchell Inc.,
clothing services.

To register, at a fee of $30, call 255-5411, extension 2249.

SOLAR HOME TOUR

To provide insulation against ''the roller coaster of oil prices and natural gas
decontrol,'' according to the Connecticut Audubon Society, is the reason for
homeowners to continue pursuing alternate sources of energy.

To demonstrate how that may be done, particularly in the solar energy field, the
society will conduct its third annual tour of passive solar homes in the
Fairfield area from 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.  Saturday. The tour will originate at the
Audubon Center, 2325 Burr Street, Fairfield.

Designers, builders and homeowners will be on hand to answer questions and go
over details of maintenance, cost and effectiveness. The Audubon Society itself
is one of the nine locations to be visited. A 400-square-foot solar greenhouse
has been completed there as a first step in a total retrofit of the building.

Passive solar, the society points out, does not rely on mechanical devices, and
is therefore less expensive than active solar.  Admission to the tour is $5.
Call 2595-606 for more information.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
THAT DOUBLE STANDARD

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, March 13


Of course, there is still a double standard.  For some, it stems from ideology.
But all the huffing and puffing at the 101-member nonaligned conference here
over how to phrase the verbose declaration makes it clear enough why others go
along.

It is a sense of helplessness. Words form the bulk of their arsenal in the
struggle to fill independence with more than mere selfcongratulation.

Some of the countries are heavily armed for their size, and some, oil exporters,
have known sudden national wealth. But the weapons only prey on weaker neighbors
and the money is drying up. That could have been foreseen, but it wasn't in the
exaltation of the moment.  Now it is easier to blame disappointment on others
than to admit a lack of prudence.

Sheik Jaber el-Sabah of Kuwait said that industrial countries have launched a
price war to squeeze down the income of exporters. Others, with more reason,
blame scrooge interest rates for driving them to bankruptcy. Nicaragua and
Grenada, backed by Cuba, called for a debtors' strike to frighten Western banks.
They lost that one because too many know that creditors set the terms for loans,
not desperate borrowers.

For all the high-sounding words about solidarity and the third world's superior
concern for global peace and welfare, there is a narrow-eyed national
self-interest here at least as dominant as among powerful states, and sometimes
more so.

Though they have nothing in common with Cuba's view of the world, Argentina,
Bolivia and Belize helped Havana tar and feather the United States in return for
endorsement of their pet projects.

This was expert log-rolling, abetted by Cuba's neat use of another parliamentary
trick: keeping meetings going day and night without a break to exhaust less
adamant opposition.

But they were all just words, and nobody supposed they would settle anything. In
a way, that was an advance because it was a reminder that the urgent problems
can't be eased by a war of invective and letting off steam doesn't drive any
engines.

India's Indira Gandhi, chairing the meeting and trying to maneuver the
quarrelsome leaders from the strident ''spirit of Havana'' toward a calmer
''spirit of New Delhi,'' called for a ''more realistic and prac-tical
orientation'' to make solutions possible.

There is a nostalgia, somewhat mythical as usual, for the time of creation when
nonalignment was supposed to mean steering a course between East and West and
drawing strength from unity. Now, there are valid fears that factions within the
nonaligned movement serve to spread superpower rivalry and increase tensions.

Even if ''alignment'' is reduced to meaning only formal membership in an
alliance with the United States or the Soviet Union, thus excluding Cuba and
Vietnam, for example, the presence of NATO-member Portugal and Warsaw
Pact-member Rumania shows how thin the notion of distance from the cold war has
become.

As for hot war, the painful fact is that where it's at is among the nonaligned.
Iran versus Iraq is the most glaring case. But despite earnest efforts, the best
the New Delhi conference could do about it was statements such as the one by
Forbes Burnham of Guyana congratulating the movement on declarations ''which, if
fully complied with, will further eliminate conflicts.''

The nature of the membership still makes it easy enough for the group to come
down hard and unanimously on some controversies; namely, against Israel and
South Africa and for Namibian independence. Israel is a special case, but the
shortness of the list shows how much has changed since colonial rule was a real
target.

In the land of Mahatma Gandhi, that thought does refresh faith in the power of
words.  What else can they do? Oliver Tambo, head of the African National
Congress, which is fighting apartheid, said, ''We are weak,'' adding that he
just received intelligence of plans by Pretoria to wipe out A.N.C. centers in
raids on all neighboring countries.

Words evoking a sense of justice have nudged the world. The kettle's blackness
doesn't excuse the pot, as many suggest when they condone Soviet horrors and
their own on grounds that the United States and the West also err. There are
double standards, but they shouldn't obscure the real needs and hopes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'DOMESTIC ISSUES' BY CORINNE JACKER

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 743 words


WHATEVER you feel about what went on in the United States during the 1960's,
chances are that you feel something. It says a great deal - none of it good -
about Corinne Jacker's new play, ''Domestic Issues,'' that it rakes over that
volatile decade without arousing a single emotion of any kind. Try as Miss
Jacker may to reopen some of the deepest wounds and debates of the Vietnam War
era, her play is so becalmed that it might as well be about night fishing in
Nova Scotia.

''Domestic Issues,'' now at the Circle Repertory Company, is actually set in a
Chicago suburb of the present day. Its protagonist is Stephen Porter (Michael
Ayr), a violent radical activist who had long been pursued by the Federal Bureau
of Investigation. Thanks to the political clout of his wealthy brother, Larry
(Robert Stattel), ''the biggest contractor in the Midwest,'' Stephen has been
recently granted amnesty and is writing his memoirs on a $25,000 publisher's
advance.

The play's action unfolds during one long night at Larry's house, where Stephen
is staying while he pulls his life together. Through various contrived means,
Miss Jacker creates a tug-of-war for the hero's soul. Out of the blue, Stephen's
estranged wife, an unregenerate fugitive played by Caroline Kava, shows up,
hoping to lure her husband back into both his marriage and the underground
movement. Meanwhile, the well-meaning Larry and his square wife (Joyce Reehling
Christopher) try to convince Stephen to assume his rightful position as a full
partner in the family business.

What's Stephen to do - remain true to his political ideals, sell out or find
some middle path? It's a problem that has defined a generation - as well as some
very fine plays by Michael Weller - but here it's impossible to care. The play's
domestic conflicts, which also involve a love triangle of sorts, never catch
fire because the members of the Porter family are wan Jewish stereotypes, and
Stephen himself is just a vaguely tortured blank. The political arguments that
underline the squabbling are also lame: though characters speak up for the
respective virtues of violent revolution, nonviolent protest and old-fashioned
liberalism, it's impossible for a debate to get going when all the antagonists
are equally inarticulate and passionless.

Miss Jacker, the author of ''Bits and Pieces'' and ''Harry Outside,'' is not
untalented, but you simply cannot hear her voice on this outing. Except for one
funny gratuitous Jewish-mother joke, her dialogue is flat and prosaic. The only
colors are provided by idly deployed buzz words - ''Rosa Luxemburg,'' ''days of
rage,'' ''safe houses in Guatemala,'' ''commitment.''

The craftsmanship is lazy. Surely, there must be a better way to tell the
audience that Larry and his wife have offstage children without having one of
them tell the other, ''We have two boys.'' Surely there must be a better way to
fill in Stephen's checkered past without dragging on both a ghost writer
(Glynnis O'Connor) and a bona-fide ghost (James Pickens Jr.) to announce or
prompt the exposition. And surely one needn't resolve a play by having each
character in turn step forward to make a flat-out exit speech.

This dramatic lassitude is matched by the perfunctory production, which has been
directed by Eve Merriam on a solid set by David Potts. Not even a simulated
terrorist bomb explosion and an Act II fist fight wake things up. Though it's a
pleasure to find Miss O'Connor, a sprightly young film actress, working in the
New York theater, she can't do much with the nonrole of the writer. The others
come off like Sunday morning television panelists on a slow week when there are
no domestic issues to discuss.

Yesterday's Activist
DOMESTIC ISSUES, by Corinne Jacker; directed by Eve Merriam; set by David Potts;
costumes by Joan E. Weiss; lighting by Dennis Parichy; sound by Chuck London
Media-Stewart Werner; production stage manager, Jody Boese. Pre- sented by
Circle Repertory Company, Marshall W. Mason, artistic director; Richard Frankel,
managing director; B. Rodney Marriott, acting artistic director. At 99 Seventh
Avenue South.  Susan Porter ...............Joyce Reehling Christopher Larry
Porter ...........................Robert Stattel Stephen Porter
............................Michael Ayr Nancy Graham
.........................Glynnis O'Connor George Allison
......................James Pickens Jr.  Ellen Porter
...........................Caroline Kava

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of scene from ''Domestic Issues''

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A SOVIET PUSH ON OIL EXPORTS

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 5, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 796 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 13


With the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries in disarray and worldwide
oil prices falling, the Soviet Union, the world's largest oil producer, is
scrambling as hard as any other exporter these days to protect itself.

In recent weeks, growing numbers of Soviet tankers have gotten underway for
Rotterdam, the Netherlands, and other refining centers of the West, laden with
crude from Siberia and the Caspian Sea at prices and volumes calculated to pry
an increasing share of the world market away from OPEC.

According to Western data, Soviet crude exports to the West in the first two
months of this year have increased to between 1.4 million and 1.5 million
barrels a day from an average of 1.1 million in 1982.

Falling Price on Spot Market

At the same time, the asking price for Soviet crude on the Rotterdam spot market
has fallen to between $27 and $28 a barrel this month from $29.25 in February
and $31.50 late last year. While transport and quality factors complicate price
comparisons, the result has been to maintain a slight competitive edge for the
Russians relative to other major sellers.

Moscow's push to win a larger market share for its oil reflects its concern
about earning the hard currency it needs to pay for key imports from the West.
Among these are at least 30 million tons of grain this year and billions of
dollars worth of steel pipe and machinery that it needs to complete a 2,800-mile
gas pipeline to Western Europe, due to open early in 1984.

The Kremlin also faces heavy drains from its allies, particularly Poland, Cuba
and Vietnam, all of which receive part of their Soviet assistance in the form of
hard currency. Soviet vulnerability to falling oil prices can be measured from
figures showing that crude oil accounted for more than 50 percent of its trade
earnings from the industrialized West in 1981, a figure that some experts
believe may now be as high as 60 percent.

Volume Offsetting Price

Western diplomats and bankers here believe that, for now, Moscow's increased oil
sales are offsetting the impact of falling prices, and that Soviet energy
earnings from the West this year will equal or slightly exceed last year's $20
billion, unless the oil price falls to $25 or less a barrel.

Awkward as falling oil prices have been for the Kremlin, the decline has not
been felt as sharply here as it has in those oil exporting countries that have
run up huge hard currency debts in recent years on the strength of projected oil
revenues.

Although Soviet imports have risen rapidly to absorb the earnings that came with
the nearly tenfold increase in oil prices in the decade after 1973, the Kremlin
has followed a generally prudent fiscal policy. Recent figures show that the
cost of servicing hard currency loans takes only 16 percent of revenues from
trade with the West, a relatively low figure.

Then, too, Moscow's gold reserves total more than $20 billion at current market
rates, or the equivalent of nearly 10 months of hard currency imports.

Squeezing East Bloc Partners

Nonetheless, the need to push rapidly increasing amounts of oil into Western
markets is causing headaches for planners here and in Eastern countries that
depend on Soviet oil. With domestic oil production virtually stagnant - last
year's output of 613 million tons was up barely four million tons, or less than
1 percent -any major increase in shipments to the West must come from squeezing
users at home or in allied Communist states.

In the long term, Western analysts here see a possibility that the Kremlin may
place an even tighter squeeze on Eastern Europe, asking that a part of oil
shipments be paid in hard currency instead of rubles, or by shifting an even
larger proportion of total Soviet exports into Western markets.

But even with the shift toward larger energy shipments to the West, Moscow's
hard currency sales still lag significantly behind its exports to Eastern Europe
and other soft currency buyers. In 1981, when the country exported nearly 3.3
million barrels of oil a day, about 2.3 million went to soft currency partners.
Most of the remaining 1 million barrels a day went to Finland, France, the
Netherlands, Italy and West Germany.

One of the spillover effects of the oil-price decline is the risk it poses to
Moscow's cherished natural-gas pipeline to Western Europe. The availability of
abundant supplies of oil at low prices now appear to be discouraging the
commitments that the Kremlin was hoping for from Western European gas users.

Some diplomats foresee the possibility that the pipeline may not be used at
anything like its maximum capacity. If so, the Kremlin's hopes of realizing up
to $10 billion a year in revenues from the project by the end of this decade
could prove illusory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph of spot oil prices graph of Soviet oil shipments
to West

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WIDE POWER GIVEN ON CLASSIFIED DATA

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 13


Federal agencies will have broad power to review and approve books, magazine
articles and the texts of speeches prepared by their employees and former
employees under President Reagan's new order protecting classified information.

The order, in effect, requires the State Department, the Defense Department, the
White House, the National Security Council, the Justice Department and several
other agencies to establish procedures similar to those of the Central
Intelligence Agency, which routinely reviews manuscripts intended for
publication by its employees and former employees.

The C.I.A. has a Publications Review Board, seven officials who meet once a
week. Charles E. Wilson, chief of public affairs who is chairman of the board,
said it had reviewed more than 800 manuscripts containing a total of 70,000
pages since it was established in 1977.  The manuscripts included memoirs by
former intelligence officials such as Vernon A. Walters, William E. Colby and
Cord Meyer, as well as a chapter of a book written by Vice President Bush, a
former director of the agency.

Mr. Reagan's order, issued Friday, was designed to halt unauthorized disclosures
of classified information. It said that any Federal employee with access to
classified data must sign a secrecy agreement and submit to a polygraph
examination if asked to do so by Federal agents investigating a leak of such
information.

Disclosures Irked Reagan

Administration officials said the directive reflected the President's irritation
over disclosures of classified information, such as the fact that American
aircraft and ships were deployed near Libya last month.

The order said that employees with access to highly classified data known as
''sensitive compartmented information'' must agree, in advance, to have their
manuscripts reviewed by the Government to ''assure deletion'' of all classified
material.

Steven Garfinkel, director of the Information Security Oversight Office, which
monitors the handling of classified information at all agencies, said thousands
of Government employees would be subject to the rule requiring ''prepublication
review.''

Fiction as well as nonfiction will probably have to be submitted for review, Mr.
Garfinkel said. The C.I.A. requires agents and former agents to submit fiction,
such as spy stories, on the ground that it ''can be used as a subterfuge to
convey factual information.''

The Supreme Court upheld the validity of the agency's secrecy agreement,
including the requirement for review of manuscripts, in a 1980 case involving
Frank W. Snepp 3d, a former intelligence officer who published an unauthorized
book about the fall of Saigon. The Government did not argue that Mr. Snepp's
book contained classified information. But it did say that he had violated both
a written contract and a ''fiduciary obligation'' in publishing it without
clearance from the agency.

'Letters to Editor' Included

Justice Department officials said that the secrecy agreement used by the C.I.A.
was a prototype for the forms that other Government employees would now be asked
to sign. The agreement requires review not only of classified information, but
of ''any information or material'' relating to intelligence, including letters
to the editor, book reviews and scholarly papers. The Government contends that
it is the only proper judge of what material is classified.

Morton H. Halperin, a former Defense Department official who is now director of
the Center for National Security Studies, said the prepublication review
requirement would permit the Government to censor the written works of former
officials, especially diplomats and military officers. ''It will be much more
difficult for them to participate in public debate and the political process,''
he said.

Mark H. Lynch, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union, said that under
the President's order it would be virtually impossible for Federal officials to
become newspaper or television reporters because they would have to obtain
Government approval for articles and scripts using information gained in the
course of their Government employment.

Under the new policy, Mr. Halperin said, Mr. Reagan would presumably have to
submit his memoirs for review by some future Administration, just as Jimmy
Carter and his chief of staff, Hamilton Jordan, would have had to submit their
manuscripts to the Reagan White House under the policy.

30 Days for Review

C.I.A. officials, aware of the vast power given to them by the Supreme Court as
a result of the Snepp decision, have been very careful in reviewing manuscripts,
said Mr. Lynch, a critic of the surveillance procedures. Ernest Mayerfeld,
deputy general counsel of the agency, said the Publications Review Board tried
to complete its scrutiny of a work within 30 days and could clear an essay
within 48 hours if it was needed for a newspaper. The board's rules say that
''approval will not be denied solely because the subject matter may be
embarrassing to or critical of the agency.''

But former agents who have gone through the review process have often had
difficulty. Ralph W. McGehee recently wrote a book about his 25 years in the
C.I.A., and in an appendix describing the prepublication review process, he
said, ''Agency officials show no hesitation in trying to censor embarrassing,
critical or merely annoying information.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MICHIGAN RESIDENTS SEEK INVESTIGATION OF DIOXINS

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 778 words

DATELINE: LANSING, Mich., March 14


Some Michigan environmental groups are increasing their demands for official
action against dioxin poisoning in light of what they regard as pervasive
evidence of pollution by chlorinated dioxins and other toxic chemicals.

The groups point to evidence of unusually high rates of cancer and birth defects
in Midland County, Mich., where the Dow Chemical Company produces industrial and
agricultural chemicals, of which dioxins are an unwanted byproduct. The groups
asked the state to conduct an investigation.

The Federal Environmental Protection Agency, meanwhile, has charged Dow in
Federal district court with violating the Clean Water Act by its refusal to
disclose to the Government the contents and origins of the waste fluids it
discharges into a river and deep wells. The rate of that discharge, the agency
says, is 64 million gallons a day.

The chemical company's license to dump the wastes formally expired in late 1979,
but it remains in effect until a new one is issued.  Issuance of a new license
has been thwarted, however, by Dow's objections to stricter limitations on
pollutants and the amount of information about the plant's internal operations
that the Federal agency demands.

Dow Cites Other Sources

Ever since disputes over dioxins erupted in Michigan more than four years ago,
Dow has argued that dioxins are widespread in nature and may be a natural
byproduct of combustion from incinerators, power plants and perhaps automobile
exhausts. The company also says that its internal health-monitoring studies have
turned up no evidence of harmful effects on its employees.

Dioxins are associated with birth defects and other illnesses in laboratory
animals.  The Foresight Society and the Environmental Congress of Mid-Michigan,
two small citizens' groups that follow the dioxin contamination issue in this
heavily industrialized state, today reported what they said were high levels of
dioxin contamination known as TCDD in soil at the Dow plant. They charged that
it might be contaminating the city of Midland and areas downwind.

Larry E. Fink, director of the society, cited a National Cancer Institute study
finding that certain cancers were found at twice the national level in Midland
County from 1950 to 1969. Mr. Fink asserted that sometime in those years Dow
carried out some major internal plant dismantling and product changeovers that
might in turn have led to a release of dioxin byproducts of the Vietnam War
defoliant Agent Orange.

Dow replied that when one of its dioxin-producing plants was demolished in 1968,
''the equipment was decontaminated, dismantled and buried in an area with a clay
cap inside the plant's fenceline.'' It added: ''Deep wells were used to dispose
of some residual material, a method that is approved and environmentally safe.''


'A Degree of Fear'

Andrea K. Wilson, director of the Midland-based Environmental Congress, declared
that there was ''a degree of fear'' among people in the town. Mrs. Wilson cited
14 confirmed or possible cases cancer concentrated in a few blocks in Midland,
but she added that no scientific study of these or other diseases had been
conducted.

Indeed, the dioxin controversy is filled with such gaps in scientific knowledge,
as well as with disputes among experts over the validity of various studies.

A comparative study conducted by Dow of the child-bearing experiences of wives
of Dow workers exposed to dioxins and those of employees who were not exposed
showed no significant differences in the rate of miscarriages or birth defects
among the two groups, for example. Several hundred wives were studied in each
group, Dow said.

''It was quite a thorough study,'' Dr. Ralph Cook, its author, said today, ''and
I think it is pretty well accepted.'' Yet critics of Dow, like Mr. Fink, object
that the study should have included a group of women without any association to
Dow to act as a control.

Another Study of 8,000

Dow has also completed a 24-year health study of 8,000 employees that, it says,
reveals a lower mortality rate among the Dow employees than among white American
men generally.

''Based on Dow employee health studies such as this, as well as soil and fish
tests, Midland is not atypical from other industrial communities,'' the company
commented in a statement issued in response to today's charges.

But Mr. Fink discounted the study on the ground that it had not been made public
and subjected to outside scrutiny. A.A. Wolf, a Dow spokesman, responded that
the study was part of a doctoral dissertation and therefore subjected to ''peer
review,'' and that it would be released in due course by the University of
Michigan .

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
2 DANGEROUS DOCTRINES

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 839 words


President Reagan has now proclaimed and presumably bases his policy upon two
dangerous doctrines:

* The Soviet Union is ''the focus of evil in the modern world'' and ''an evil
empire,'' while Americans are ''enjoined by Scripture and the Lord Jesus Christ
to oppose ... with all our might'' the ''sin and evil in the world.''

* ''If guerrilla violence succeeds'' in El Salvador, that country ''will join
Cuba and Nicaragua as a base for spreading fresh violence to Guatemala,
Honduras, even Costa Rica. The killing will increase, and so will the threat to
Panama, the Canal and ultimately Mexico.'' So what's ''at stake in the Caribbean
and Central America ... is the United States national security.''

A Communist takeover reaching north to the Rio Grande would certainly threaten
the United States. But in thus propounding a Central American domino theory, Mr.
Reagan is inviting exactly the repetition of the Vietnam experience that he
insists he will avoid.

The President pledged again in his speech to the National Association of
Manufacturers that he would not send combat troops to El Salvador, that he would
not ''Americanize'' the war with combat advisers - that all he wanted was to
send a few more non-combat ''trainers'' and more military assistance money to
help the Salvadoran Army halt ''guerrilla violence.''

It's not cynicism, a Vietnam reflex or a slur on Mr. Reagan's sincerity to point
out that John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson said all those things, too, about
Vietnam in the early 60's. They also sought support for assisting South Vietnam
by calling it a matter of protecting U.S. national security, which would be
endangered, they said, if South Vietnam became the first falling domino in a
line stretching through Southeast Asia all the way to the Philippines.

Having so defined the situation, when American economic assistance, military
training, weapons and supplies all failed to create a South Vietnamese Army
capable of handling ''guerrilla violence'' and North Vietnamese intervention,
Mr. Johnson felt he had no choice but to ''Americanize'' the war with 500,000
ground troops and fleets of bombers. Had he not himself preached that U.S.
''national security'' was at stake?

That's the trap Mr. Reagan is now setting for himself, or his successor: If U.S.
national security is endangered in El Salvador, but if all the non-combat
training and assistance the U.S. can provide fails to halt ''guerrilla
violence'' - which, the record suggests, is altogether likely - can the
President stand by and see El Salvador become the first domino in a string
reaching to the Rio Grande? Or will he not then be forced by his own words to
stronger action?

Staking the national security on a weak, rightist-tending Government of dubious
popular acceptance is a substantial risk, in any case, for a U.S. widely
regarded in Latin America as interventionist and self-interested. President
Eisenhower well understood that kind of risk nearly 30 years ago, when he wisely
refused to intervene to help the French in Indochina:

''Any nation that intervenes in a civil war can scarcely expect to win unless
the side in whose favor it intervenes possesses a high morale based upon a war
purpose or cause in which it believes,'' he wrote. No such ''high morale'' is
visible in the Salvadoran Army.

Later on, Eisenhower also concluded, ''The presence of ever more numbers of
white men in uniform probably would have aggravated rather than assuaged Asiatic
resentments.''

The Eisenhower model of 1954, in short, has a good deal more than the Johnson
model of 1964 to offer Ronald Reagan in 1983. As the President himself told the
N.A.M., ''Bullets are no answer to economic inequities, social tensions or
political disagreements.''

In the long run, however, the greater danger lies in Mr. Reagan's vision of the
superpower relationship as Good versus Evil, and his near-proclamation of holy
war against ''an evil empire.''

Most of what I know about the Soviet regime I find repellent. But if the
President of the United States proclaims to the world the view that this
country's relationship with the Soviet Union is a death struggle with Evil, then
his own words inevitably suggest that there can be no real compromise with that
Evil -not on arms control or anything else. Knowing that, why should those
proclaimed as ''the focus of evil'' believe in the possibility of real
compromise with a U.S. dedicated to their destruction? The holy war mentality on
either side tends to evoke it on the other; and holy wars are both the hardest
to avoid and the least likely to be settled short of one side's annihilation.

Perhaps even more dangerous, Mr. Reagan's smug view, if further inculcated in
Americans, will preclude self-examination, humility, a willingness to concede
error. Are we so clearly a God-directed, chosen people that we have no need to
question our virtue, or the evil of our rivals? If Mr. Reagan really thinks so,
he has shaken off the strongest restraints on human conduct - doubt and fear.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 16, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

YEAR WITH SALVADORAN REBELS RECOUNTED

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 973 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 15


A former United States Air Force pilot who flew missions in Southeast Asia in
1969 and 1970 has spent the last year serving as a physician with the Salvadoran
rebels.

''I can't remember a day since July that the zone hasn't been hit by A-37
bombings, helicopter strafings or a Cessna that rockets - and sometimes all
three,'' the physician, Charles Clements, said of the rugged volcanic area where
he has been working about 15 miles from San Salvador, the capital. ''And that
includes Christmas and New Year's.''

Like his older brother, the 37-year-old Dr. Clements went to the Air Force
Academy, graduating in 1967. After pilot training at Reese Air Force Base at
Lubbock, Tex., he went to Southeast Asia where, he said, he flew ''more than
50'' C-130 support missions to Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos from a base in Taiwan.

In an interview in Washington last week, he said his anger and disillusionment
with American policy while he was in Southeast Asia was the beginning of a
transformation that led him from his life as an Air Force captain to a life
aiding Salvadoran rebels.

In a Psychiatric Hospital

He recalled, as an example, that when President Nixon said there were no United
States troops in Laos, ''I knew that my classmates in civilian clothes were
flying unmarked planes there on that day.''

In April 1970, Dr. Clements said, he told his superiors he would not fly any
more missions. He said their response was to commit him to a psychiatric
hospital for several months. Eventually, he said, they offered him a choice of
returning to Southeast Asia or receiving a psychiatric-based discharge. Air
Force officials have refused to comment on Dr. Clements's statements about his
time of service or his discharge.

''I took the craziness they were labeling me with rather than the craziness of
that war,'' Dr. Clements said, adding that ''the really crazy thing was that I
was very loyal.''

''I thought I could remain in the service in another capacity.'' After his
discharge, Dr. Clements earned a doctor of medicine degree and a master's in
public health at the University of Washington, interrupting his studies for one
year to serve as the president of the American Medical Student Association here.


'I Am Not a Communist'

After several years of treating Salvadoran refugees in California and finding
''that the rhetoric of the Administration was increasingly like Vietnam,'' he
decided to go to El Salvador to learn for himself what was happening. ''I am not
a Communist,'' he said.

Since clandestinely entering El Salvador last March, Dr. Clements said, he has
been trudging through the hills of the ''Guazapa front,'' one of the seven
fronts into which the rebels have divided the country.

Dr. Clements, a Quaker, said he made a ''commitment to nonviolence'' when he
left the Air Force. He said he did not carry a weapon. ''I may be the only male
in El Salvador who doesn't carry a gun,'' he said with a laugh, then added,
''Sometimes that's been a hard decision.''

Dr. Clements said there were about 100,000 civilians and at least 25 foreign
doctors in the ''controlled zones,'' the term by which he referred to the areas
under guerrilla control.

Population of Zone Increases

Asked about the size of the Guazapa front, Dr. Clements said ''eight hours of
walking, marching fast,'' between the most distant villages. He said that the
population had increased by about 20 percent in the last year and that there
were 30 elementary schools, 15 medical clinics and two hospitals in the zone.
The rebels in Guazapa hold regular assemblies and have established a ''primitive
judicial system,'' he said, adding that the rebels had asked him to try to
recruit an American lawyer to help them codify their laws.

Dr. Clements, still gaunt even though he has been eating ''six times a day''
since leaving El Salvador a few weeks ago, plans to return there. He came to the
United States to present the rebels' cause to members of Congress and to try to
raise money for medical supplies.

Dr. Clements explained that the peasants' diets ''are lacking in vitamins - it
is mostly tortillas and beans - so I introduced them to leaves'' of the yucca,
papaya and radishes.

Similarly, he said that in an effort to combat widespread anemia, he has taught
the peasants to place a nail in a glass of water for 24 hours before drinking
the water.

For older peasants suffering from arthritis, he said, he supplies four aspirins,
then ''I explain that because of the difficulty of getting aspirin, they can
make a tea from the bark or seeds of a willow tree to relieve the pain.''

4 Other Americans There

Dr. Clements said the average age of the rebels was about 17 or 18 years. He
said there were no Nicaraguans or Cubans fighting in Guazapa nor, to his
knowledge, in any other parts of the country.  There are four other Americans
with the guerrillas, at least two of whom are taking part in fighting, according
to Dr. Clements.

He said the guerrillas in Guazapa had captured scores of automatic rifles and
several mortars since his arrival. To acquire ammunition, he said, the
guerrillas raid Government arsenals. He added that the rebels buy bullets for
the equivalent of $1 each from the Government soldiers.

In December, according to Dr. Clements, a unit of about 30 Government soldiers
surrendered. Altogether, he said, about 60 soldiers have been captured by the
guerrillas. He said that some 40 of these had chosen to remain with the
guerrillas, some as combatants, and that others had returned ''to their life as
farmers.''

On the effectiveness of the guerrillas against the American-trained soldiers,
Dr. Clements told of one occasion when 40 guerrillas held off the Ramon Belloso
Battalion, which was trained in the United States, for 14 hours to allow the
residents of a village to escape.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 16, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NO. 2 MAN IN ARMY PICKED BY PRESIDENT TO BE CHIEF OF STAFF

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 273 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 15


Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., the Army's second-ranking general, was picked by
President Reagan today as the next Army Chief of Staff.

General Wickham, 54 years old, has been Army Vice Chief of Staff since last
summer when he returned from Korea after three years as United States and United
Nations commander. He will succeed Gen.  Edward C. Meyer, who will end his
four-year tour as Army Chief of Staff on June 30.

General Wickham, a native of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., will become the fourth new
member on the five-member Joint Chiefs of Staff since Mr.  Reagan took office in
early 1981. The President soon will choose a new Marine commandant, completing
the changeover.

Pentagon sources who spoke on condition they not be identified said the leading
prospect to head the Marine Corps for the next four years is Gen. Paul X.
Kelley, now Assistant Commandant.

The current Marine Corps chief, Gen. Robert Barrow, is to complete his term
about the same time as General Meyer.  From 1973 to 1976, General Wickham served
two Defense Secretaries, James R. Schlesinger and Donald Rumsfeld, as their
senior military assistant.

General Wickham, a 1950 graduate of West Point, has had extensive service both
as a troop commander and staff officer. He was a combat commander in Vietnam. He
is also a past commander the 101st Airborne Division.

In addition to attending the Army Command General Staff College, the National
War College and other professional schools, General Wickham holds two master's
degrees from Harvard, in public administration and politics and economics and
government.

He is married and has a son who is an Army lieutenant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 16, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SENATOR BAKER'S ERROR ABOUT SALVADOR'S PAST

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 261 words


To the Editor:

Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. has, it appears, joined the domino theorists of
U.S.-Salvadoran policy.In a recent statement to reporters, the Senator remarked
that the domino effect is more credible in El Salvador than it was in Vietnam.
''Vietnam,'' he said, ''was a country in Southeast Asia that had a tradition of
conflict. El Salvador does not have a tradition of conflict'' (''Required
Reading,'' Washington Talk March 4).

Mr. Baker is badly misinformed. The list of differences between those two
ill-fated nations is extensive, but domestic conflict is not among them. The
record of civil strife in Vietnam should be well known to the American public.

In El Salvador, an entrenched elite of landowners has called the shots for most
of the 20th century, largely through a succession of army colonels and generals.
Popular opposition to repressive military rule, endemic for decades, has
recently erupted into civil war. El Salvador's re-volution has its roots in
conditions that predate the cold war and Castro's Cuba.

What is most disturbing about this misreading of history is its source - the
majority leader of the Senate. Given the Reagan Administration's propensity to
seek a military solution in Sal-vador and to reject diplomatic negotiations out
of hand, it is im-portant that the Congress speak with an independent and
accurately informed voice on Central American issues, if we are to avoid the
ul-timate Vietnam analogy - another disastrous quagmire.
JAMES F. TIERNEY, Executive Director, Fund for Peace New York, March 10, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 16, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Robin Herman and Laurie Johnston

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


Tall Order for a Clown: Creating Cheer Amid Gloom

I t was a challenge, even for a circus clown. Around the spartan ''family room''
of Los Padres Unidos (Parents United) lay Manhattan Valley, that depression - in
skyline and living conditions - between Central Park West and Broadway, from
100th to 110th Street.

The children's handicaps ranged from birth defects to emotional and learning
disorders. But Charlie Frye, in false nose and baggy pants, involved them in his
gentle antics. Two hundred families in School District 3 are linked by Los
Padres Unidos at Direction Service, the Community Service Society's center in
Public School 145 on West 105th Street.

Myrta Cuadro directs professionals, volunteers and parents, 90 percent of them
single heads-of-household. Three times a week they meet in the family room, with
a wall picture by a father in a drugdetoxification program. They deal with
schooling, care, clothing, shelter, food stamps, legal matters.

Delta Ferreira - who has five boys aged 2 to 12, four handicapped - was there,
trailing her three youngest. So was Zelda Wiener, Vietnam War widow and mother
of a convulsive 20-year-old confined to a wheelchair. ''Only her mind functions
but they've got her into a school,'' said Mrs. Wiener. ''They help with
everything - you can't concentrate on education when it's all caving in.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 17, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
REAGAN VS. MADISON

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, March 16


Henry Kissinger plans to discuss the Vietnam War in a class at Georgetown
University. Before he does, he has to show his lecture notes to officials at the
State Department, the Defense Department, the Central Intelligence Agency and
the White House, and delete any thoughts they decide are secret.

Or, 10 years from now, Edward Rowny writes a book criticizing the arms control
agreement signed by President Reagan in 1983 over General Rowny's objections.
Before he even shows the manuscript to a publisher, he has to get it cleared by
half a dozen agencies - and the process takes two years.

Scenarios of that kind will be the result of an executive order just issued by
President Reagan. It is, I think, the most dangerous executive order in many
years: dangerous to the American system of democratic control over public
policy. It is also, so far, dangerously misunderstood.

When the White House issued the order - on Friday afternoon, to minimize public
notice - some of the press focused on a colorful but relatively unimportant
provision. It tells Government employees that they must agree to take
lie-detector tests when leaks are being investigated, or face ''adverse
consequences.''

The main point of the Reagan order is far more sweeping: more revolutionary. It
extends to hundreds of thousands of men and women throughout government a system
of prior censorship used until now only by the C.I.A. and other super-secret
intelligence services.

Anyone who has seen sensitive information will be covered by the censorship
system even after he leaves government service - for the rest of his life. He
will have to get official approval before writing or saying anything about
subjects he dealt with in government - subjects as broad as arms control or El
Salvador.

Lawyers at the Justice Department, which shaped the order, said it would apply
not only to memoirs of former officials but to speeches, book reviews, scholarly
papers, and even fiction: novels and short stories. It covers not just Secretary
of State Shultz and other Cabinet members but diplomats, soldiers and civil
servants of all kinds.

The censorship system is not narrowly limited, as some people mistakenly
believe, to making former officials submit classified material for clearance
before they use it. They have to submit everything, however innocuous, and let
Government cen-sors decide what can be said or published. And experience has
shown that the censors spend most of their time trying to suppress embarrassing
facts, not true secrets.

When Victor Marchetti and John Marks wrote ''The C.I.A. and the Cult of
Intelligence,'' the agency tried to keep out the fact that Richard Helms, then
Director, had mispronounced the name of the Republic of Malagasy. Last summer,
after years of litigation, it agreed to let them print this blanked-out
sentence: ''The Agency's closest ally is British intelligence.''

An agency veteran, Ralph W. McGehee, has just published ''Deadly Deceits: My 25
Years in the C.I.A.'' In an appendix to the book he describes the draining,
tortuous negotiations he had to go through in order to get his manuscript
cleared. They lasted two years.

Officials demanded that Mr. McGehee delete from his manuscript critical passages
that he was sure included no classified material.  When he showed them that the
facts had already appeared in books generally supporting the agency - by such
former officials as Allen Dulles and William Colby - they withdrew. Then others
would renew the objection.

The sheer bureaucratic impact of the Reagan order staggers the imagination. The
C.I.A., with a centralized system, ties people up for months and years over
manuscripts. How will it work when a former official needs clearances from
several agencies before he can consult with a business or write a newspaper
article?

The point is that this country has relied heavily on those who have been inside
the Government to inform us on how the decision-making process works. They are
going to be discouraged now from trying. So the Reagan order may fundamentally
affect the quality of information available for public discussion of government
policy.

In a way the order is not surprising. Mr. Reagan's Attorney General, William
French Smith, has worked zealously to suppress information about Government from
the moment he took office.

But the audacity of it is still breathtaking. Here is an Administration that
tried the courts for making law without waiting for Congress to act. Yet it now
tries to transform what has been a premise of the American system since James
Madison: that informed public discussion is essential to wise policy. And it
does so without asking Congress, without giving any reason.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICS AND TRADITION MIX AS IRISH MARCH

BYLINE: By MARTIN GOTTLIEB

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1174 words


On a raw day and amid unaccustomed controversy, New York's 221st St. Patrick's
Day Parade made its way up Fifth Avenue yesterday to the sound of pipes and
drums and the cheers of onlookers standing 10 deep in places.

The controversy, which centered on the election of an Irish Republican Army
supporter, Michael Flannery, as grand marshal, reached a dramatic point shortly
after noon when Terence Cardinal Cooke broke with tradition and declined to
receive the 81-year-old Mr. Flannery on the steps of St. Patrick's Cathedral.

The Cardinal, who met with Mr. Flannery before a 10 A.M. mass, has criticized
all violence in Northern Ireland and a characterization of the event as ''a
pro-I.R.A. parade.''

At 12:22 P.M., Mr. Flannery halted in the line of march in front of the
cathedral's empty steps, took off his hat and waved to cheering onlookers.

About 20 minutes after Mr. Flannery walked by, the Cardinal emerged with a dozen
bishops and bishop's aides and greeted tens of thousands of other marchers who
continued to pass by until the last unit - the United States Customs Service's
Emerald Society - walked past at 4:50 P.M.

When the Cardinal appeared, a number of people in the crowd booed and jeered
while others tried to shush them.  Later, when the Cardinal spoke with
reporters, he said he had expected even more jeering.  Political banners and
cheering were evident along the line of march, but the parade retained much of
its traditional good cheer. On a windy day when temperatures barely rose above
40 degrees, families came from all over the metropolitan area. Young children
sat at curbside, watching high school majorettes shiver along the two-mile
route. While the police reported little violence or rowdyism, there was one
serious incident.

Seven people were reported hurt by a truck that turned onto the parade route at
West 54th Street. The driver was charged with drunken driving and attempted
murder.

In a parade boycotted by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, former Gov. Hugh L.
Carey and a score of high school bands, Mr. Flannery became the centerpiece,
receiving waves of cheers from the sidewalks.

Governor Cuomo, Mayor Koch, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Representative Mario
Biaggi and a number of other elected officials marched in or reviewed the parade
and received applause and cheers.

''Usually nobody notices the grand marshals,'' said Jack Thornton, editor of The
Irish Echo. ''Usually their uncles give them a clap.'' Yesterday it was
different - and cheers for Mr. Flannery were accompanied by a number of
''England Out of Ireland'' signs.

The police said the crowds along the parade route were larger than they were
last year and comparable in size to many of the larger parades.

''I think it's larger than last year because last year we had rain,'' said
Assistant Police Chief Milton Schwartz, head of the Manhattan South Borough
Command. ''The crowd seems to be large and subdued.''

Chief Schwartz said incidents of drunkenness and rowdyism had practically
disappeared from a parade that had been plagued by such problems until last
year.

Continuing last year's policy, most Catholic schools in the metropolitan area
kept classes in session. In addition, 3,800 police officers were assigned to the
event, and liquor and beer were confiscated from youths.

Bottles Confiscated

By last night, the police said, 1,147 bottles of wine, liquor and beer had been
confiscated. Officers had also issued 172 summonses for drinking along the
parade route.

At 1:45 P.M., according to the police, a pickup truck driven by a New Jersey man
suddenly turned south onto Fifth Avenue from West 54th Street and sped down the
west side of the avenue against the line of march.

The truck hit a barrier, struck two women watching the parade between 46th and
47th Streets, mounted the sidewalk and continued south on Fifth Avenue. It came
to a stop after colliding with two vehicles crossing the avenue at 42d Street.
Three police officers were hurt while chasing the truck on foot, and a fourth
officer was struck by the barrier the truck hit. None of the officers was
seriously injured.

James Walsh, a spokesman for Bellevue Hospital, said one of the two women,
Frances Yoncko, 59, of Albany, had suffered a severe injury to her right ring
finger. The other woman, her daughter, Jaclyn Morby, 33, of Ravena, N.Y., was
treated at the hospital for ''minor trauma.''

Reminders of Politics

The truck driver was identified as Eugene Francis Brady, 36, of Livingston. The
police said he had been charged with attempted murder, reckless endangerment and
driving while intoxicated.

Flecking the parade route were banners with such slogans as ''Ireland: England's
Vietnam,'' ''We Love You, Michael Flannery,'' and ''New Jersey Loves Mike
Flannery.'' Leaders of the Fire Department Emerald Society carried signs, as
they have in the past, reading, ''England, Get Out of Ireland'' and ''Bobby
Sands and Comrades Live On.'' Mr. Sands was one of 10 I.R.A. prisoners who died
during hunger strikes in Northern Ireland in 1981.

But many of the viewers came with children to enjoy a family tradition that went
back generations. Others said that while they deplored violence, they were
strongly critical of the British role in Northern Ireland.

At 59th Street, John Killoran, 47, an executive with Avon Products, spent his
lunch hour watching the parade with his 5-year-old son, Sean. ''This is his
first parade,'' said Mr. Killoran. ''I brought him because my parents took me
here when I was his age.'' Turning to Sean, who was cradled in his arms, he
said: ''This is the first time he saw Mayor Koch. Isn't that right?''

'The American Mosaic'

Sean nodded, but mostly he hunched over to keep warm.  ''My mother brought me
here when I was this high,'' said Joseph Collins, who retired from the Police
Department as a sergeant last Thursday. Mr. Collins still plays a bagpipe in the
department's Emerald Society Band. ''Nothing could stop me from coming here.''

Nearby, Governor Cuomo said: ''The political statement of this parade is its
great to be Irish and that the price of being American does not involve giving
up being Irish, Italian, Jewish, black, Greek or whatever. This is a celebration
of the American mosaic.''

Mr. Flannery became the center of attention at 9:40 A.M., when his limousine
pulled in front of St. Patrick's Cathedral. He and his wife, Margaret, were
escorted inside for a meeting with Cardinal Cooke.

Describing the meeting later, the Cardinal said: ''It was a very cordial
meeting. I explained to him that the way of violence was futile, immoral and
interfering with the peace process. I also told him, however, that I was well
aware of denial of human rights and injustice in the North of Ireland and that
by the political process something had to be done about it, not only by the
people in the North of Ireland, but by the Irish Government, the British
Government - our own United States has to be more interested and supportive -
and by the European community too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of St. Patrick's Day parade (Page B2) photos of
St. Patrick's Day Parade

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM REPORTS PUZZLE AMERICANS

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 326 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


Two studies conducted abroad have reached conflicting conclusions on whether
Agent Orange, the herbicide used in Vietnam, caused birth defects for children
of non-Vietnamese troops who fought in Vietnam.

A study by Vietnamese scientists reported an increase in abnormalities in
children of North Vietnamese women whose husbands served in South Vietnam and
thus were potentially exposed to Agent Orange.

But a study of Australian veterans of Vietnam found ''no evidence that army
service in Vietnam relates to the risk of fathering a child with an anomaly.''
The Australian Government praised the study.

It was not clear to scientists in this country why the studies reached such
opposite conclusions, or what the relevance of either might be to whether Agent
Orange caused birth defects for American servicemen's children.

U.S. Study Being Conducted

The national Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta is trying to determine if
there was any increase in defective American children of veterans.

The Vietnamese study was discussed in January in Ho Chi Minh City at a symposium
attended by American scientists. A report of that conference, now circulating in
American scientific circles, says the group was ''very much impressed,'' but
stops short of endorsing the Vietnamese findings.

Arthur H. Westing, an ecologist from Hampshire College in Amherst, Mass., who
helped organize the conference, said of the Vietnamese results, ''There is no
precedent for it in the international literature.'' Birth defects from by toxic
agents usually mean the mother, not than the father, has been exposed.

American experts on Agent Orange said they were withholding judgment until they
saw the full data and analysis for both studies.  The Veterans Administration
said the Australian study appeared well conducted. It reported ''persuasive
evidence that Vietnam service has not been associated with any important
increase in the risk of birth defects.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POP JAZZ;
OSCAR BRAND FINDS PUBLIC IN MOOD FOR 40'S PROTEST

BYLINE: By JOHN S. WILSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 896 words


THE musical mood at the Cookery this month is a throwback to the days 40 years
ago when Barney Josephson, who owns the restaurant at University Place and
Eighth Street, opened Cafe Society on Sheridan Square as a cabaret mixing
political satire and jazz. The three boogie-woogie pianists Albert Ammons, Meade
Lux Lewis and Pete Johnson, would be rumbling on their keyboards while Big Joe
Turner shouted the blues, and minutes later Josh White would pick his guitar as
he accompanied himself on ''Free and Equal Blues'' or the union song ''Joe
Hill,'' or Billie Holiday would sing the antilynching song she introduced there,
''Strange Fruit.''

At the Cookery these nights, there is only one singer, Oscar Brand, but he
comments musically on a wide range of American social and political issues. He
goes from Sojourner Truth's ''We Are the Negro Soldier'' to Tom Paxton's ''Let's
Bring Back the Chair,'' from a song written by Joe Hill, ''Pie in the Sky,'' to
the song about Joe Hill that Josh White sang at Cafe Society. He recalls Harold
Rome's ''Sing Me a Song of Social Significance'' from the 1937 labor revue
''Pins and Needles,'' and he updates Sheldon Harnick's catalogue of disasters
around the world, ''The Merry Minuet,'' by including the Falkland Islands and El
Salvador.

There are songs of his own that are as immediate as ''Trouble in the Streets,''
written for ''It's a Jungle Out There,'' a cabaret revue in which he was
appearing last month, and songs like ''Touch the Earth,'' which decries the lure
of false values.

''The Unturned Cheek''

They all flow together in a program Mr. Brand calls ''The Unturned Cheek.'' He
is fascinated by the reaction he his getting from audiences at the Cookery,
where the fare until he arrived had usually been such veteran jazz singers as
Alberta Hunter, Helen Humes and Nellie Lutcher.

''One night an elderly man told me he was going to bring some of his old Wobbly
friends in,'' Mr. Brand said the other day, using the term by which members of
the Industrial Workers of the World were known. ''Another time, four Rotarians
from Mississippi came in. I was wondering how they were going to feel because I
was hitting at fundamentalists and Ronald Reagan. I was singing about civil
rights.  After the show, one of them came up and gave me his card. He told me,
''That's the best time we've had in New York.''

Talking to these people,'' he continued, ''you get a sense of a kind of relief
that somebody is actually saying things, good or bad.  A young man from Prince
Edward Island came up to me after one show and said: 'I'm a conservative. I
hardly agree with anything you sang. But you're reasonable. You made me think
about things, but you didn't tell me I was an idiot.' ''

Mr. Brand, who has had a weekly folk-music radio program on WNYC since 1945, is
curator of the Songwriters Hall of Fame in Times Square, music consultant to the
Bill Moyers television series ''Walk Through the 20th Century'' and author of
innumerable songbooks, the latest of which, ''Oscar Brand's Party Songs,'' is
coming out next month.

Experience on the Farm

His roots are in the wheat fields of Canada and in the farm life of the United
States. He was born in Winnipeg, and although he grew up in New York City and
was graduated from Brooklyn College, he immediately went back to the earth and
worked his way around the country as a farmhand. He was a member of the Dairy
Farmers Union when it was organizing in upstate New York.

He was a teen-ager in the late 30's, when he became part of New York's
politically motivated folk-singing world with Woody Guthrie, Pete Seeger and the
Almanac Singers. He became a walking encyclopedia of children's songs, political
songs, parodies, bawdy songs, religious songs, any kind of song.

''Americans have been producing songs at a tremendous rate for 400 years,'' he
said. ''It's a tradition in this country: everybody is a songwriter.''

Militancy of the Depression

''The Depression produced a tremendous outpouring of American songs,'' he
declared. ''There was a lot of left-wing sentiment then - let's get back to the
earth, to home, away from the stock market and business. These songs were more
militant and more acceptable during the Depression. During World War II
everybody became an American patriot. They were for the United Nations, and the
songs reflected warmth and harmony. There was a feeling of hope and expectation.
Then Russia got the bomb, and everybody got scared. But there was a tremendous
surge toward civil rights and women's and workers rights that was reflected in
songs of the 40's.''

Blacklisting sent the singers underground in the 50's. The Vietnam War brought
them out again in the 60's, but in the 70's, Mr. Brand said, ''the kids got
scared, they thought scared.''

''I was teaching at Hofstra,'' he said, ''and I couldn't get a rise out of the
kids, no matter how I tried. They wouldn't ask embarrassing questions. They
became ingrown. It was all inside.

''But it's changing now,'' he continued. ''When Barney Josephson asked me to
come to the Cookery, he said, '' 'Let's do the political songs.' He felt
something was moving out there again.''

Mr. Brand sings his songs with Jonathan C. Segal on piano and Vic Colucci on
bass at the Cookery (674-4450) tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11:15 P.M. There is
a $5 cover charge and a $5 minimum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Oscar Brand

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ART: SAUL AND GROOMS, COMMENT FROM THE 60'S

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words


PETER SAUL was born in California in 1934, Red Grooms in Tennessee three years
later, and both got their start as visual comedians on the New York scene around
1960. This makes them proto-Pop artists, although neither pressed on to the
secondary phase. Instead, they remained at the movement's rim, each developing
his own idiosyncratic style.

They otherwise have little in common. Mr. Grooms's humor is knockabout and
relatively wholesome, and his Expressionism is in the Ashcan tradition. Mr. Saul
is a satirist with a hysterical edge, but his delivery is ostensibly Abstract
Expressionist. By joining forces in a show at the Frumkin Gallery, 50 West 57th
Street, with work from 1960 to 1965, the painters make a pertinent comment on
that period itself and on much that has happened since.

The point made by this show, like another held at the same gallery nearly a
decade ago, is that the early 60's were a ''watershed.'' The backlash against
high seriousness in art was well under way by the late 50's, in the work of
Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg.  So, while it may not have seemed so at
the time, the official unveiling of Pop in 1962 was a climax rather than a
beginning, and things have never been the same since.

As he appears here, Mr. Saul had not yet taken up Day-Glo paint, but his color
is already vivid and his theme -the crassness of everyone and everything - is
set. Though painted in Europe, these canvases are crowded with cartoony
allusions to, for instance, a capitalist at his desk, complete with bloody knife
and forkfuls of dollar bills, refrigerators crammed with junk food, trusses and
pimples. It may all look Pop, but it is actually a more violent form of the
teen-age disaffection so brilliantly exploited by J.D.  Salinger. Later in his
career, Mr. Saul found a bigger vehicle for his spleen in the Vietnam war.

The show's catalogue includes excerpts from the artist's letters of the time,
which help orient the viewer. Of his apparently automatist imagery in shallow
space, Mr. Saul said it was filled with ''annoying contradictions, which are
created by the edges of the shapes, like pieces from other paintings.'' Today,
the work seems closer to the late figurative Philip Guston. But it is easy to
see how, as Mr. Saul observes, an acquaintance with real Abstract Expressionism
was needed to appreciate his parodies of it.

Mr. Grooms's start was more hesitant. After some film making and happenings, he,
too, spent time abroad, mainly in Italy, where he painted portraits and figure
compositions. ''Via Guelfa Studio'' (1961) is an interior peopled by expatriate
friends, some of whom are airborne in the manner of Jan Muller. It shows
promise. The Groomsian humor doesn't take over until ''One Way'' (1964), a
heavily impastoed view of a New York City intersection, replete with traffic
jams, signs and grotesque figures - a forerunner of the artist's well-known
urban tableaux, and very funny.

Unlike Mr. Saul, who had a mission from the start, Mr. Grooms gives the
impression of having chosen humor as the line of least resistance. There are
snatches of nice painting here, and the painted relief collage of a flapper
getting a cigarette lighted by a beau is attractive and simple, as well as
clever. But more often the pigment is muddy and confused. Mr. Grooms says that
he liked the imagery of Pop but not its cool attitude. Still it was that very
attitude that enabled him to bypass ''serious'' art and still be taken seriously
as an artist. (Through March 31).

Also of interest this week: Joan Mitchell (Fourcade, 36 East 75th Street): An
Action painter of the second pressing, Joan Mitchell has been highly visible
since she appeared on the scene some 30 years ago. For most of her career she
has lived in France - since 1969, in a house near Giverny that was once occupied
by Monet. That doesn't make her a child of the great Impressionist, of course,
but it is a reminder of how Abstract Expressionism, by claiming him as an
ancestor, helped revive his reputation. Miss Mitchell's gestural images are
related to those of Willem de Kooning and Philip Guston, but they are always
recognizably hers.

These new works, large and small, are energy expressed in stabbing strokes,
superimposed on washes of thinner pigment and usually coalescing slightly below
the canvas's center. Still very much the ''brambles'' they were called by a
critic years ago, these powerful, nervous flurries evoke landscape in every way
save that of color, which runs from pure orange and yellow through pink and
lilac to emerald and dark blue. The unanswerable questions are whether the
artist could have sustained her commitment to Abstract Expressionism if she had
remained in its birthplace, and whether she has stopped the clock by removing
herself. Taken at face value, this is totally American painting, and only a
viewer privy to its place of origin would wonder how much it owes to Monet's
ghost and to the landscape he painted. (Through March 26.)

Joseph Raffael (Hoffman, 429 West Broadway): Working from photographs, Joseph
Raffael paints flowers and fish many times life-size in lush and limpid colors.
Yet the work is too hallucinatory to be called photographic realism and, in
fact, is sometimes quite hard to identify. There is a big fish here that, in
real life, was obviously fluttering in a pool dappled by light and ripples. But
in an oil, ''Up, Through and Over,'' it has become the dark blue and vermilion
nucleus in an all-over design of bright beads and speckles on a white ground; in
the watercolor, ''Wind on Water,'' the same fish is transformed into a mosaic of
light-colored beads on a dark ground.

In these and the similarly all-encompassing flowerbeds, the artist seems to
drown in the act of mapping what he calls a ''feel'' across the canvas. The
viewer sinks with him, and it's a not-unpleasant sensation. Mr. Raffael, who
paints to music from a headset, may not, as he says, draw sustenance from the
art scene, but in his best works he has surely osmosed the languor of Klimt and
Art Nouveau. Lately, though, he has simplified his surfaces, which may take him
a bit too close to Lowell Nesbitt territory. (Through April 6.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of painting

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 19, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Australia to Study Troops Who Fought in Vietnam

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 77 words

DATELINE: CANBERRA, Australia, March 18


Australia said today that it would set up a commission to examine the effect of
chemicals and herbicides on Australian servicemen who fought in the Vietnam War.

The commission is also to decide whether there was any breach of international
agreements dealing with the use of chemical weapons, according to Veterans
Affairs Minister Arthur Gietzelt. Australia began sending forces to Vietnam in
the mid-1960's, and 50,000 served there. Nearly 500 were killed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 19, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ARMS TO SALVADOR REPORTED AT PEAK

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 335 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 18


A senior State Department official said today that the infiltration of weapons
by air into El Salvador ''is considerably above anything we've seen before.''

The official also said Algeria had joined such countries as Cuba, Vietnam and
Libya in sending weapons to the guerrillas.  The official, who spoke at a
briefing, said that officials in El Salvador were worried about the increase in
air shipments of arms and that Salvadoran military authorities ''don't have any
radar, as they remind me every day.'' He said the Salvadorans would need modern
fighter planes to intercept the aircraft from Nicaragua.

But it would take, the official said, ''two or three times the currently
available military assistance'' to buy even one modern jet fighter for El
Salvador to undertake such missions.

Aid Request Causing Concern

He added that the Administration's $110 million military aid request was causing
concern in Congress and that the Salvadoran court decision two days ago delaying
a trial in the killing of four American churchwomen did not help.

Meanwhile, John Hughes, the State Department spokesman, denied a report in The
New York Times today that the Administration was weighing cuts in the Salvador
aid request.

''Absolutely not,'' Mr. Hughes responded, when asked if the Administration was
planning an aid reduction. He added: ''Our request stands. We expect to persuade
Congress on its merits. No one is thinking about reducing the requested level.''

The Times quoted Government officials as saying that the Administration was
weighing proposals to cut portions of its million aid request. One of the
proposals, according to the officials, was that the Administration would propose
a cutback in the aid request with further assistance to El Salvador conditional
on the performance of the Salvadoran Army.

Officials both in the Administration and in Congress said today that discussions
were continuing on a possible compromise that could include a reduction in the
proposed aid level.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 19, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
SATURDAY, MARCH 19, 1983

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 857 words


International
Israel accused the United States of not honoring an agreement on delineating
military patrol zones in the Beirut area. It charged that all the incidents
between United States marines and Israeli soldiers had occurred outside Marine
areas, in zones designated as Israelicontrolled. (Page 1, Col. 5.)
Israel gave ''strict instructions'' to its forces to avoid incidents with United
States marines in Lebanon, a senior Pentagon official said. The official said
the instructions followed the announcement Thursday of a letter from the
commandant of the Marine Corps, Gen.  Robert H. Barrow, to Secretary of Defense
Caspar W. Weinberger complaining of Israeli harassment of the marines. (3:5.)
Shipments of weapons to El Salvador by guerrilla sympathizers ''is considerably
above anything we've seen before,'' a senior State Department official said. The
official said that Algeria had joined such countries as Cuba, Vietnam and Libya
in sending weapons to the guerrillas. (5:6.)
Edward L. Rowny's effectiveness as the chief American strategic arms negotiator
is doubted by senior Reagan Administration officials because of disputes over a
private memorandum attributed to him that criticizes his colleagues in the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency. (4:1.)
National
Deletions in a dioxin pollution report on Michigan were made to comply with
demands from the Dow Chemcial Company, regional officials of the Chicago office
of the Environmental Protection Agency told a House subcommittee. They said
superiors in Washington had given them orders to delete from the report a
sentence saying the agency had concluded that ''Dow's discharge represented the
major source, if not the only source, of TCDD contamination found the
Tittabawassee and Saginaw Rivers and Saginaw Bay in Michigan.'' (1:6.) A new
surge of Mexicans crosses the United States border every day looking for work
for a day or whatever else provides subsistence.  Driven by the currency crisis
that has shattered the Mexican economy, the stream of illegal aliens is
inundating the Border Patrol. A day's pay on the United States will provide
about six times what could be earned at home. (1:2.)
More high-technology companies are expected to follow Atari Inc.'s decision,
announced last month, to move 1,700 assembly jobs from California to Asia, many
economists and analysts said, raising questions of whether high technology will
be the panacea for American industry. (1:1.)
Two consecutive life prison terms were imposed on Charles Voyde Harrelson in San
Antonio in the assassination in 1979 of Federal District Court Judge Charles H.
Wood Jr. Three other persons convicted of charges that arose from the killing
were also sentenced to terms ranging from 15 to 30 years. (6:1.)
Illegal aliens would not qualify for Social Security benefits under an amendment
approved by the Senate in its third day of debate on the retirement program.
(7:1.)
Metropolitan
State layoffs would be reduced and many programs favored by the Legislature
would be restored in a budget for the new fiscal year agreed upon by Governor
Cuomo and legislative leaders. The budget includes more than $900 million in new
and expanded taxes proposed by Mr. Cuomo, but does not include a key tax measure
he sought. This was a broadening of the sales tax to include movie and theater
tickets, haircuts, dry cleaning and other services. (1:4.)
A ruling in favor of women on the teaching staff of the City University of New
York found that they had been unlawfully discriminated against in salaries. The
decision by Judge Lee P.  Gagliardi of Federal District Court arose from a
class-action suit filed in 1973 by 25 women employed at most of the City
University's 17 senior and community colleges. It could affect as many as 10,000
women who have taught at the university. (1:5.)
Higher income taxes for New York City residents who have apartments with
controlled or stabilized rents but have primary residences elsewhere were
proposed by Mayor Koch. He said that such people should pay income taxes at the
higher rate imposed on city residents or give up the ceiling on their apartment
rent. The proposal, announced at meeting of the Association for a Better New
York, has been under study by Deputy Mayor for Finance Kenneth Lipper. (1:6.)
The South Bronx has a suburban touch in the form of two singlefamily ranch-style
houses that were built in the middle of burned-out tenements and empty lots. The
houses are a part of city-supported effort to retain middle-class families in
the area.  Eventually 90 similar homes will be built in a development named
Charlotte Gardens. The prefabricated houses are priced at $47,800. A basement
will be an additional $6,000. (1:3.)
One vote upheld the landmark status of Lever House in the Board of Estimate. The
6-to-5 vote assures the survival, at least for now, of the 24-story Park Avenue
building erected 31 years ago to house the headquarters of Lever Brothers.
Fisher Brothers, a development concern, sought to overturn the landmark status
so that a larger building could be erected on the site. (25:6.)

Business Digest, Page Page 31

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAID TO EXPAND CENTRAL AMERICAN INTELLIGENCE OPERATIONS

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 19


In the last two years the United States has established an extensive
intelligence-gathering network in Central America to track Soviet and Cuban arms
shipments and to monitor guerrilla activities in El Salvador, according to
senior Reagan Administration officials.

Although national security officials said they had taken precautions to insure
that the intelligence activities were not provocative, they acknowledged that
the collection activities had involved infiltrating American intelligence agents
into Nicaragua and conducting low-altitude flights by United States spy planes
over territory in El Salvador where guerrillas move freely.

As a result, the officials said, some American intelligence technicians and
agents covertly working in Central America, particularly those operating near
combat areas along the Nicaraguan border and in El Salvador, are exposed to
greater danger than United States military advisers based openly in El Salvador.
The military advisers are officially prohibited from going on combat missions.

More Operatives Than Advisers

There are many more covert intelligence operatives and technicians in the region
than military advisers, the officials said. The Administration limits the number
of military advisers in El Salvador to 55. An exact total for intelligence
personnel in El Salvador was not available, but officials estimated that the
number exceeded 150.

The officials said the system at work in Central America was primarily operated
by scores of American intelligence technicians, agents and translators, many
based in El Salvador.

Intelligence committees in the Senate and the House approved expenditures for
establishment of the collection system, which has cost more than $50 million to
build and operate since work was begun two years ago, according to Congressional
officials.

Members of Congress Concerned

Several Senators and Representatives on the intelligence committees, however,
expressed concern in interviews that the network represented, in effect, a
secret increase of American involvement in the region. Specifically, they said
they were concerned that American technicians and agents stationed in the field
could become the target of attack, creating the kind of incident that could draw
the United States into more direct military involvement in Central America.

Some of the lawmakers added that they were not sure the benefits of the
collection network were worth the risks. Both Congressional sources and
Administration officials said that while the network had provided valuable
information to policy makers in Washington, including a detailed picture of
Soviet and Cuban arms shipments to Salvadoran guerrillas, it had proved too
sophisticated to be used effectively by the Salvadoran military.

Detailed Information Provided

The network provides highly detailed information about guerrilla plans and
operations, including targets designated for attack, according to national
security officials.

The Salvadoran military, however, has often ignored the warnings or been unable
to dispatch troops quickly enough to head off guerrilla attacks, the officials
said. ''It's like having a 20th-century intelligence network for a 19th-century
army,'' an official said.

Smuggling Routes Traced

The intelligence network has also revealed land, sea and air routes used to
smuggle arms to the Salvadoran guerrillas, according to the officials. They said
the flow of arms from the Soviet Union and Cuba, while increasingly shifting
from land and sea routes to movement by air from Nicaragua to El Salvador, had
remained fairly heavy in the last year. But a senior State Department official
said Friday that the infiltration of weapons by air into El Salvador is now
''considerably above anything we've seen before.''

Administration officials said a rapid increase in collection operations was
started in 1981 after the Reagan Administration took office and found that
almost all American intelligence activities in Central America, including many
focused on Cuba, had been eliminated by budget cuts in the 1970's.

The increase in collection efforts also coincided with the Administration's
emphasis on Central America as a new battleground in the East-West conflict.
Shortly after taking office in 1981, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
said the Soviet Union and Cuba were sending arms and other aid to the guerrillas
in El Salvador.

Intelligence officials said then, and repeated recently, that because of the
intelligence cutbacks in Central America there was little hard evidence at the
time to support Mr. Haig's assertions.

As a result, they said, establishment of a major collection network in the
region became one of the top priorities of United States intelligence agencies.

Weapons From Vietnam

The collection system, officials said, has provided the United States with a
detailed picture of arms traffic from Cuba to Nicaragua. Most of the weapons,
which they said were American-made arms captured in Vietnam, are shipped from
the Soviet Union to Cuba and then transferred from Cuba by sea to the Nicaraguan
port of Bluefields, situated on the Caribbean.

From there, the weapons destined for El Salvador, which officials said consisted
mostly of small arms and ammunition, travel either overland across Honduras,
concealed in trucks, or are carried aboard small airplanes to dirt airstrips in
El Salvador.

A sea route once favored for smuggling, across the Gulf of Fonseca from
Nicaragua to El Salvador, has been largely closed by Salvadoran patrol boats,
Administration officials said.

Intelligence officials acknowledged that they had made a greater effort to track
the flow of arms from Cuba and the Soviet Union to the Salvadoran guerrillas
than to monitor arms purchased on the international black market or captured or
bought from the the Salvadoran military.

U.S. Arms Said to Be Sold

Intelligence officials said there was evidence that some weapons the United
States has sent to friendly nations in Central America, including Honduras and
El Salvador, have been sold by officials in those countries to guerrilla forces
in El Salvador. The officials said the diversions had not involved a significant
number of weapons so far.

Intelligence officials added that because of the limited use the Salvadorans
have made of the varied intelligence information provided by the United States,
the Central American collection network had been primarily used as a source of
information for American policy makers. Data about arms shipments from Cuba and
the Soviet Union, and evidence that Salvadoran guerrillas use Nicaragua as a
sanctuary, have also been presented to Congress to justify the Administration's
request for increased military aid.

Reports about arms flow and Nicaraguan involvement have not always been
consistent. American mililtary officials in El Salvador, for example, recently
said that they had seen little evidence that guerrillas were using arms provided
by the Soviet Union and Cuba.C

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Alexander Haig

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'DOG TOWN' BURIES NICKNAME, BUT FEUD LIVES ON;
The Talk of North Little Rock

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: NORTH LITTLE ROCK, Ark., March 18


Several years ago, residents say, this city got fed up with being called Dog
Town. So the Chamber of Commerce decided to give the humiliating nickname a
proper funeral. To make it official, they purchased, at great expense, a marble
tombstone, declaring, ''Here Lies Dog Town.''

Those city fathers who were neither under indictment nor in jail that day in
1965 attended the ceremony and witnessed the placing of the white marble marker
over a shallow mock grave on the east side of City Hall.

In 1975, the tombstone vanished.  ''That led to lots of jokes in poor taste
about how Dog Town had risen from the grave,'' said Betty Nannie, owner and
operater of Deli-Delight, a popular diner down the street from City Hall.
''Anyway, a city alderman just happened to chance upon the marker two weeks ago.
He found it covered with dirt and weeds in a ditch near the river.''

''Now we're takin' no chances,'' she added firmly. ''Jackie Neil, our city
clerk, has the tombstone under lock and in her office in City Hall.''

Dog days have returned, indeed, to North Little Rock.  The city's Civil Service
Commission has suspended the Chief of Police, his deputy and the head of the
Fraternal Order of Police, with full pay, while it investigates reports about
them.

The commission began public hearings last week to explore charges of ''conduct
unbecoming a police officer'' against Police Chief William Younts, whose
nickname is ''Bubba.'' Chief Younts is a stocky man with a naturally red face
that turns redder when he denies the charges.

He adamantly rejects accusations by a waitress, for example, that he was
''rowdy, obnoxious, very intoxicated,'' or, as a banker testified, ''having
trouble maintaining vertical stability'' at a Sambo's restaurant on the morning
of Dec. 12.

His mock arrest of an assistant manager at Haverty's Furniture Store after the
store's annual Christmas party last year was ''just a joke,'' he said. ''Police
departments all over the state do that kind of thing all the time,'' Mr. Younts
said. ''It's a rinky-dink charge.''

People here attribute the current proceedings to bad blood between the Chief and
Mayor Reed Thompson. The Mayor, a former City Attorney who spent 15 years in
Washington, Vietnam and the Philippines, working for the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and for the State Department, came home in 1979 with a lot of
ideas about how North Little Rock should be run.

Many of these ideas conflicted with those of Chief Younts, who accuses the Mayor
of political interference with his department. The feud has intensified sharply
in the past year. The low point came last October, many said, when Chief Younts
arrested the Mayor at Police Headquarters for what he called political meddling,
charging him with ''disorderly conduct and resisting arrest.''

Judge Joel C. Coel dismissed the charges in November but berated both men for
''making the city look like the cesspool of the state.'' ''Lay down your
armaments,'' he counseled them.  ''I don't have no armaments,'' Chief Younts
replied, vowing to arrest the Mayor that afternoon if Mr. Thompson interfered
again with his work.

''Ain't it pitiful?'' Mrs. Nannie said as she opened another beer for a favorite
customer.

North Little Rock boasts a history filled with political scandals.  Jackie Neil,
who has been city clerk since 1968 and with the clerk's office for 38 years,
remembers most of them.

One of North Little Rock's most controversial Mayors was William F. (Casey)
Laman, who served from 1958 to 1972. ''You either loved him or hated him,'' said
Mrs. Neil, who declined to state which camp she was in. ''In any event, there
were some problems, and Casey chose not to run.''

Mrs. Nannie is not shy. She is an unabashed Casey fan. ''He took some,'' she
said, ''but he left a whole lot for the community.'' Mr. Laman's successor,
Robert Rosamond, resigned in 1973 while he was under grand jury investigation,
Mrs. Neil recounted. The Police Chief quit, too. At least one city alderman went
to jail for embezzling police funds. That was when Mr. Younts was appointed.

City officials ackowledge that when he took over things were a little wilder
than usual. ''There was open prostitution and gamblin' in the streets,'' the
Chief recalled. ''I changed all that and I'm proud of it.''

Mr. Laman, who served briefly once again as Mayor in 1979, denies any misconduct
during his term. He said that the Chief had done an outstanding job. As for
Mayor Thompson, he concludes, ''That man has stayed too long in the Saigon
sun.''

Many here attributed North Little Rock's problems to a citywide inferiority
complex. These feelings of inadequacy, Mrs. Neil explained, stem from the city's
break in 1901 from neighboring Little Rock, a far larger, more affluent city.

People in Little Rock refer to their sister city ''across the river'' in the
same tone Northerners use when they speak of ''the other side of the tracks.''

Relations between the twin cities worsened in 1904 when a group of North Little
Rock residents managed to shepherd a bill through the Legislature that enabled
their city to claim jurisdiction over what had been a part of Little Rock.

''Little Rock leaders were furious,'' Mrs. Neil said. ''To retaliate, they
gathered up all of the stray dogs in their city and dumped them on us across the
river. That's how the city got its nickname.''

''But you see, we took care of them,'' Mrs. Nannie elaborated. ''We fed 'em and
adopted 'em as our own. That's what gave us our reputation for compassion. I'm
kinda proud of this nickname. And I wouldn't leave here for the world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of William Younts photo of crowd map of Arkansas

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIRECTORS JOIN THE S.E. HINTON FAN CLUB

BYLINE: By STEPHEN FARBER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2193 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Stephen Farber is a freelance writer based in Los Angeles.
LOS ANGELES The novelist S.E. (Susan Eloise) Hinton has lived in Tulsa, Okla.,
for most of her 34 years. But these days she cannot help seeing her home town as
a giant movie sound stage. Three of her four books have been filmed in Tulsa in
the last year and a half.

''Tex,'' the first to be released, attracted good reviews last fall. ''The
Outsiders,'' directed by Francis Coppola, opens in 800 theaters across the
country on Friday. This Warner Bros. release dramatizes the violent tension
between two groups of teen-agers -the affluent ''Socs'' and the underprivileged
''greasers.'' Another teen-age gang story, ''Rumble Fish,'' also directed by Mr.
Coppola, has been scheduled for fall release by Universal. All three movies star
Matt Dillon and feature casts of young, mainly unknown actors.  Miss Hinton's
fourth novel, ''That Was Then, This is Now,'' has also been option for the
movies by the actor Martin Sheen.

Filmmakers' infatuation with Miss Hinton makes her something of a rarity today.
There was a time when every significant novelist saw his or her work adapted for
the movies, but in recent years the situation has changed. Studios have learned
to their dismay that a best-selling novel no longer guarantees a presold
audience. Many cinematic adaptations of popular novels have died at the box
office, while huge crowds have lined up for such screen originals as ''Star
Wars,'' ''E.T.,'' and ''Tootsie.'' As a result, fewer books are being bought for
the movies, and several of the most successful novelists in the country - such
as Judith Krantz and Jeffrey Archer - have never had their novels adapted for
the big screen.

What, then, accounts for the appeal to filmmakers, of S.E. Hinton, a novelist
whose name is probably unfamiliar to most adult readers?  Miss Hinton writes
books for what is called the Young Adult market; her books have sold seven
million copies to teen-agers, and teenagers happen to be the core audience for
movies these days. She is in demand because Hollywood believes that her stories
can entice the kids who determine today's blockbusters.

Francis Coppola and Tim Hunter, the director of ''Tex,'' praise the veracity of
her books.  ''When I met Susie,'' Mr. Coppola says, ''it was confirmed to me
that she was not just a young people's novelist, but a real American novelist.
For me the primary thing about her books is that the characters come across as
very real. Her dialogue is memorable, and her prose is striking. Often a
paragraph of her descriptive prose sums up something essential and stays with
you.'' Mr. Hunter says, ''Susie deals with many of the social problems that
other Young Adult writers confront, but in her books those problems are woven
into the fabric of a realistic story. She never preaches or moralizes.''

Both ''Tex'' and ''The Outsiders'' were turned into films because of pressure
from Miss Hinton's adolescent readers. Tim Hunter, who went on to direct
''Tex,'' interviewed dozens of teen-agers while preparing an earlier script,
''Over the Edge.'' When he asked them what they were reading, they all mentioned
S.E. Hinton novels. Matt Dillon, who played a supporting part in ''Over the
Edge,'' was a special champion of Miss Hinton's books. Prodded by her young
fans, Mr. Hunter read the galleys of ''Tex,'' then her latest novel, and
presented the project to the Disney Studios.

During the same period, a group of students in a California high school sent a
petition to Francis Coppola stating that ''The Outsiders'' was their favorite
book and nominating him to direct the movie version. Intrigued, Mr. Coppola
asked his producer, Fred Roos, to read the novel, and Mr. Roos recommended it
highly as a project for Mr. Coppola's Zoetrope Studios.

''I thought it was really neat,'' Miss Hinton says, ''that in both those cases,
it was my readers who got the filmmakers interested.'' Miss Hinton had turned
down movie offers before. Several producers had tried to acquire the rights to
''The Outsiders,'' her first book, which was written when she was 16 and
revolutionized the Young Adult field by introducing a dark, gritty quality to
teen-age fiction. Miss Hinton explains why she had refused to sell the book in
the past: ''I don't think 'The Outsiders' is Holy Writ, but it means a lot to a
lot of kids, and I didn't want to see it messed up. Besides, I've never been a
writer who thought my books had to be made into movies.''

Miss Hinton finally succumbed to the movie offers because she trusted the
filmmakers. When Fred Roos inquired about purchasing ''The Outsiders,'' she had
just seen another Zoetrope film, ''The Black Stallion,'' and had been very
pleased with the way that book had been translated to the screen. So she agreed
to turn ''The Outsiders'' over to Mr. Roos and Mr. Coppola.

She was more hesitant when Disney representatives called about filming ''Tex.''
''At first I said, 'No, thank you. I'm not interested in doing a Disney movie.'
I thought they'd really sugar it up, take out all the sex, drugs and violence
and leave nothing but a story of a boy and his horse. Then Tom Wilhite, vice
president at Disney, landed on my doorstep and convinced me that they wanted to
broaden their audience and do a hard PG movie. I liked Tom Wilhite and agreed to
sell, on the condition that my horse got to play the lead horse. Those two deals
happened within a week of each other.''

Her other two film projects were generated by those first two.  While Francis
Coppola was in Tulsa last year shooting ''The Outsiders,'' he decided that he
would like to utilize the crew and the locations for a second movie. As Miss
Hinton tells it, ''Halfway through 'The Outsiders,' Francis looked up at me one
day and said, 'Susie, we get along great. Have you written anything else I can
film?' I told him about 'Rumble Fish,' and he read the book and loved it. He
said, 'I know what we can do. On our Sundays off, let's write a screenplay, and
then as soon as we can wrap 'The Outsiders,' we'll take a two-week break and
start filming 'Rumble Fish.' I said, 'Sure, Francis, we're working 16 hours a
day, and you want to spend Sundays writing another screenplay?' But that's what
we did.''

At the same time, Emilio Estevez, who had acted in both ''Tex'' and ''The
Outsiders,'' told his father, Martin Sheen, about Miss Hinton's writing, and Mr.
Sheen optioned the last remaining Hinton novel, ''That Was Then, This Is Now.''
Mr. Estevez has written the screenplay, and he and his father are trying to
arrange financing for the film.

Miss Hinton's novelistic universe is a distinctive one. All four of her books
are set in and around Tulsa, and they are unusual among teen-age novels because
of their sensitivity to class conflicts between rich kids and poor kids. In her
stories the parents are largely absent; intense teen-age friendships and sibling
rivalries provide much of the dramatic material. Perhaps most surprisingly, all
four books center on boys and are told from a male narrator's point of view.

''That's the point of view I'm most comfortable with,'' Miss Hinton asserts.
''When I was growing up, most of my close friends were boys. In those days,
girls were mainly concerned about getting their hair done and lining their eyes.
It was such a passive society. Girls got their status from their boyfriends.
They weren't interested in doing anything on their own. I didn't understand what
they were talking about.''

The reason that Miss Hinton originally used her initials rather than her full
name was that she didn't want her readers to question the authenticity of her
books by knowing the author was a woman. When Matt Dillon first met her, he paid
her what he thought was the ultimate compliment: ''From reading your books,
Susie, I thought you were a man.''

Because of their admiration for her work, both Mr. Coppola and Mr.  Hunter
involved her in the filmmaking process as a collabortor, a luxury that novelists
rarely enjoy. ''Once I sold the books,'' Miss Hinton observes, ''I expected to
be asked to drop off the face of the earth. But that didn't hapen. I know that I
had extremely rare experiences for a writer. Usually the director does not say,
'Boys, these are important lines, so you've got to know them word for word,'
which is what Francis said to the actors. I've been pleased and amazed at my
involvement in the movies.''

In the case of ''Tex,'' Miss Hinton helped Mr. Hunter scout locations and select
actors, and she rewrote dialogue during the course of filming. But she was even
more intensely involved on ''The Outsiders,'' In addition to monitoring the
script, Miss Hinton was on the set every day, supervising haircuts and wardrobe.
''The boys depended on me a lot,'' she says. ''I was kind of a greaser den
mother, and they were always consulting me.'' In addition, Miss Hinton flew to
Los Angeles and then to Mr. Coppola's home in Napa to confer with him on the
editing of the film.

On ''Rumble Fish,'' Miss Hinton went one step further; she and Mr.  Coppola
actually co-wrote the screenplay. Mr. Coppola concentrated on structure and
visual imagery, while Miss Hinton wrote all the dialogue. She found to her
surprise that she had certain talents for screenwriting, particularly an ability
to rewrite material under the gun. ''Working with Francis,'' she recalls, ''I
could never tell when he was going to turn to me and say, 'Susie, we'll need a
new scene here to make this play.' I could have it for him in three minutes, and
it was pretty good, too.''

From Mr. Coppola's standpoint, Miss Hinton's role on both productions was a
crucial one. ''Susie was a permanent member of the company,'' he explains. ''My
experience with her made me realize that the notion of having a writer on the
set makes a lot of sense.''

Before long, Miss Hinton's initial qualms about the Hollywood invasion vanished,
and she became thoroughly entranced by moviemaking. ''It's the first time I've
ever felt at home in a group situation,'' she says. ''I've never been a joiner.
In Tulsa I have a reputation for being slightly eccentric. Even my close friends
think I'm a lttle nutty. But with the movie people I was accepted instantly. I
really like the way people support each other on a movie set. One of the guys on
the crew who had been in Vietnam told me that making a movie is the closest
thing to being in battle that you can find in civilian life. You get that same
camaraderie.

''Also, when you're making a movie, you feel like an outlaw.  Traffic stops for
you, and you don't keep the same hours that anybody else keeps. I like that
outlaw feeling. And there's one other nice thing about the movies. There's
always somebody else to blame. With a novel, you have to take all the blame
yourself.''

When the last crew member had finally left Tulsa, Miss Hinton felt depressed by
the sudden calm after all those months of feverish activity. Her life is
gradually returning to normal. She and her husband are expecting their first
child this summer. And upon reflection, Miss Hinton has decided that she does
not want to ''go Hollywood'' on a permanent basis. ''I like a quieter life,''
she insists. ''I could move to either New York or Los Angeles and really enjoy
it, but I don't think I'd get any writing done. I'll be more productive here in
Tulsa. I might do more film work one day, but I still think of myself as a
novelist, and with the next book I'm writing, I'm doing everything I can to make
it unfilmable.''

Does she have any desire to branch out of the teen-age market into ''adult''
fiction, as Judy Blume (another popular Young Adult novelist) did a few years
ago? ''If I can ever find any adults who are as interesting as the kids I like,
maybe I'll write about adults some day,'' Miss Hinton replies. ''The reason I
keep writing about teen-agers is that it's a real interesting time of life. It's
the time of most rapid change, when ideals are clashing against the walls of
compromise.''

Since Miss Hinton's writing requires her to stay in touch with the passions of
youth, one of the things she particularly valued about her filmmaking experience
was the chance to work with so many young people. ''Since we started filming
these three movies,'' she confesses, ''I've been around more kids than I have
been in years, and I've picked up on their energy level, which is something you
do lose as you get older. It was good for me to get back in touch with that.

''So many adults are hostile toward teen-agers. Adults like little kids because
they're cute and controllable, but there's something about teen-agers that
absolutely sets them off. I don't know if it's because they don't want to
remember how miserable they were as teenagers, or because they don't want to
realize how much they've compromised since they had those kinds of ideals. But I
like teenagers, scruffy ones especially. I must admit that when I was giving
riding lessons to Matt Dillon, sometimes I wasn't quite ready for Black Sabbath
full volume at 7 in the morning. But that was a minor inconvenience.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of the 'The Outsiders'

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
Playing Up the Civilian Side Of Military Aid

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim and Henry Giniger

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 410 words


Finding rough going in its campaign to persuade Congress on more military
spending in El Salvador, the Reagan Administration last week switched tactics.
Officials stressed benefits for civilians that would flow from its $110 million
military aid package. Besides training 7,000 Salvadoran servicemen and equipping
them with helicopters and other weapons, American officials said the program
would support civic action in the countryside.

Salvadoran soldiers, after driving guerrillas from their strongholds, would turn
to digging wells and building schools, seeking popular support in a Central
American reprise of the Vietnam battle for hearts and minds.

Pope John Paul II, back in Rome after his Central American tour, assailed all
foreign support for the fighting. The war was being waged, he said, ''in large
measure with the help of outside forces'' against the will of the overwhelming
majority.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz said the military effort was a ''holding
operation'' pending political solutions to be advanced by ''negotiations that
make it genuinely safe and possible for people of all persuasions to take part
in the democratic process.'' During elections in December, he suggested,
international observers and the 30-country Organization of American States could
insure protection.  Campaigning could be conducted from the safety of
broadcasting studios, officials added.

The new tack amounted to ''a sea change in attitudes,'' said Clarence D. Long of
Missouri, Democratic chairman of the House Appropriations subcommittee weighing
Salvadoran spending.

But Senator Mark Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, chairman of the Senate
Appropriations Committee, called for slashing funding and requiring
''unconditional negotiations with all parties to the conflict.'' Senator Daniel
K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, proposed making formal the ceiling of 55 military
advisers that the Administration has threatened to breach if new aid is
withheld.

Secretary Shultz also deplored delays in bringing to trial the suspects in the
murders of four churchwomen and other Americans killed in El Salvador. But at
least one Salvadoran appeals judge wasn't listening. Last week, he ruled that
F.B.I. fingerprints and ballistics evidence in the 1980 murder of the women
lacked validation by Salvadoran authorities and that additional evidence was
required before five soldier suspects could be brought to trial - adding months
to the process.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Topics;
Reorientation;
Mr. Yesterday

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


What was the cause of youth unrest in the 1960's? ''Look into a mirror,''
Eldridge Cleaver wrote in ''Soul on Ice,'' his famous book of prison essays.
''The cause is you, Mr. and Mrs. Yesterday, you with your forked tongues.'' He
urged an alliance between blacks, the peace movement and the New Left.
Subsequently, he traveled to, among other places, China, North Vietnam and North
Korea.

What was the cause of youth unrest at the University of Wisconsin Friday? Look
into a mirror, one might say. The object of student protests was Eldridge
Cleaver. Why? Because the revolutionary views of the founder of the former Black
Panther Party have themselves been revolutionized. He now regards himself as
strongly anti-Communist. In 1980, the former Panther endorsed Ronald Reagan for
President.

There's an even more striking sign of change: the sponsorship he has accepted.
The organization that sent him to lecture in Madison and other universities is
C.A.R.P., the Collegiate Association for the Research of

Principles. C.A.R.P. is an arm of the Reverend Sun Myung Moon's Unification
Church.  What a transformation: then, Mr. Cleaver was an advocate of black
power; now he's an advocate for the Moonies. Then an admiring visitor to North
Korea; now, an agent of a militantly anti-Communist South Korean.

Seoul on ice, one might say.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEOS JANACEK: THE VINIDICATION OF A COMPOSER

BYLINE: By John Rockwell

SECTION: Section 6; Page 47, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4037 words


John Rockwell, a music critic for The Times, is the author of ''All American
Music: Composition in the Late Twentieth Century,'' published this month by
Alfred A. Knopf. he New York Philharmonic's American concert premiere of Leos
Janacek's last opera, ''From the House of the Dead,'' this week is just one more
indication of a Janacek groundswell throughout the musical world.

An obscure Moravian music teacher born in 1854, Janacek became suddenly and
improbably famous when he was more then 60 years old.  That fame, coupled with a
burst of pride in the independence at last of Czechoslovakia and his love for a
married woman 38 years his junior, inspired him to compose nearly all his
greatest works in the last decade of his life. Now, 55 years after his death,
those works are not just receiving premieres, but actually entering the basic
repertories of opera houses, symphony orchestras and instrumentalists
everywhere.

This success serves as the posthumous vindication of an unusual, difficult man's
lifelong struggle for recognition. His triumph should be one of the great
inspirations for late bloomers everywhere. The steady spread of his work today
throws light not just on his own music, however. It provides insight into the
nature of creativity itself. It reflects on the divisions in operatic repertory
between the German and Italian standards on the one hand and the outlying
national schools on the other, and on the crisis of opera in this century. It
even illuminates the nature of 20th-century musical modernism - suggesting that
a subcurrent of unashamed Romanticism has persisted all along throughout our
century, and may now be blossoming in avant-garde work with curious similarities
of style and effect to Janacek's own music.  By now, ''Jenufa'' and ''Katya
Kabanova'' are part of the repertories of major opera companies around the
world. Other Janacek operas - above all, ''The Makropoulos Case'' and ''The
Cunning Little Vixen'' - are right behind them in popularity, with the rest of
his operatic and non-operatic oeuvre not far behind that.

The present Janacek enthusiasm is a phenomenon of the last few years. While
Janacek enjoyed considerable attention in his last decade, the deprivations of
Nazism and war and the grimly modernist fashions of the postwar period cast him
into an eclipse.

''Jenufa,'' a realistic portrayal of a series of tragedies in the heroine's life
and always the most popular of his works, had been presented at the Metropolitan
Opera in 1924 with Maria Jeritza in the title role. It resumed its American
triumphs in the 1950's, and by now has spread far and wide. The Met mounted a
new staging in 1974, which it plans to revive later in this decade.

The success of ''Jenufa'' was closely echoed by ''Katya Kabanova,'' Janacek's
other, overtly romantic opera centered on a naturalistically depicted, afflicted
heroine. (Elina Makropoulos in ''The Makropoulos Case'' is certainly afflicted,
but not quite realistic, since she is 327 or perhaps 337 years old, depending on
how you count.) ''The Makropoulos Case'' has seen fewer stagings, but those it
has received in San Francisco and at the New York City Opera have been prominent
and popular.

The latest Janacek opera to come crowding into the repertory is ''The Cunning
Little Vixen,'' a moving portrayal of forest life as a symbol of nature's
regenerative power. In Europe, the key production was Walter Felsenstein's
astonishingly lifelike version of 1956 at East Berlin's Komische Oper. In the
United States, ''Vixen'' enjoyed only sporadic college performances until 1975,
but since then it has been presented in Santa Fe, N.M.; Philadelphia, and, in
1981, with Maurice Sendak's decor, at the City Opera, where it will be revived
this fall.

Now, the final two of Janacek's six recognized operatic masterpieces are also
beginning to take hold in the West (they are all performed constantly in Prague
and Brno). ''The Excursions of Mr. Broucek,'' about a Czechoslovak Walter
Mit-ty's adventures on the moon and in the 15th-century Hussite rebellion, was
given its American stage premiere at Indiana University in 1981, after an
English National Opera production three years before. In 1969, there was a cut,
rearranged, yet highly effective version of ''From the House of the Dead''
presented as the first offering of public television's late, lamented N.E.T.
Festival. And this week's concert performances of the opera, which is based on
Dostoyevsky's grim memoir of Siberian prison life, were preceded by staged
productions in West Berlin in 1981 and by the Welsh National Opera in 1982.

ventures on the moon and in the 15th-century Hussite rebellion, was given its
American stage premiere at Indiana University in 1981, after an English National
Opera production three years before. In 1969, there was a cut, rearranged, yet
highly effective version of ''From the House of the Dead'' presented as the
first offering of public television's late, lamented N.E.T. Festival. And this
week's concert performances of the opera, which is based on Dostoyevsky's grim
memoir of Siberian prison life, were preceded by staged productions in West
Berlin in 1981 and by the Welsh National Opera in 1982.  Why was Janacek
neglected? One reason was his own idiosyncratic training as a composer. Another
was his need to work long hours as a teacher and choral conductor to support
himself and his family. And, more basically, it simply took Janacek longer than
it does some composers to find his own voice.

He was born in the village of Hukvaldy, where his father was a schoolteacher,
and he received his early musical education at an organ school in Brno. In his
20's, he did manage to spend a year studying in Leipzig and Vienna. But the
experience proved frustrating, and for all practical purposes he gave up
composition for four years upon his return to his native land.

It was only then that he became seriously involved with Moravian folk music.
After ethnomusicological wanderings similar to those undertaken a few years
later in Hungary by Bartok and Kodaly, more years had to pass before Janacek
could assimilate his folk influences into a distinctive style.

This evolved during a nine-year period, between 1894 and 1903, the time spent
composing ''Jenufa.'' By the end of that period he had shaped his own personal
approach, no longer a folk pastiche but a highly original fusion of abstract
characteristics from folk music, church music and the avant-garde music of his
day combined with melodic patterns inspired by, though not crudely imitative of,
Moravian motifs.

In its folk music as in everything else, Czechoslovakia is a culturally divided
land. While Bohemia - the homeland of Smetana and Dvorak - looks to Germany and
the West, more easterly Moravia has tangible links with Oriental music. Its folk
songs and dances have an exoticism of harmony and an abrupt, reiterative quality
that can sound strange and primitive to Western ears.

Even without direct quotation, those qualities live on in Janacek's music. His
style is grounded in 19th-century tonality and Germanic musical procedures, and
hence remains easily accessible to the casual listener - which, of course, is
one key to its success today, in a musical world daunted by inaccessible
modernism.

But just beneath that surface accessibility, this music can seem strange indeed.
It is rarely overtly folkish: In ''Jenufa,'' which positively glows with the
colors and inflections of Moravian peasant life, he always insisted that not one
single tune was an actual folk melody. Instead, musical and even verbal phrases
are repeated again and again, obsessively. The tunes are brief to the point of
gruffness, with great lyrical statements cut off when any other composer would
let them exfoliate. Above all, there is Janacek's fixation on a variety of
repeated figures that upon examination are chords broken up into jagged
patterns. Arpeggiated accompanying figures (the tones of a chord produced in
succession, not simultaneously), running scales and ostinatos - the technical
descriptions can vary, but the effect is the same: to build up the musical
texture on restless, repetitive, cyclical structures, turning over and over.

The initially striking aspect of Janacek's mature musical idiom is its terseness
set against a soaring lyricism all the more moving for the conciseness that
surrounds it. Janacek's music, like his prose, is marked by abruptness: sharp
interjections of new kinds of material, instinctively bold and highly dramatic
harmonic modulations and tempo changes, wide spans of range and dynamics. Such
extremes reach their apogee in ''From the House of the Dead''; in his reliance
on extreme high and low sonorities, one critic suggested, Janacek deliberately
cut the heart - the conventional middle range of the orchestra - out of this
musical portrayal of human heartlessness.

Janacek's style was shaped not just by the music but by the speech patterns of
Moravia. He was absorbed with Moravian speech, which he once called ''as soft as
if it were cutting butter.'' Indeed, his fascination with speech of all kinds
was such that he was forever jotting down the tones and rhythms of the way
people talked - or birds sang -even in languages he did not otherwise
understand. The most moving instance of this came in 1903, as he sat helpless at
the bedside of his dying daughter, Olga; his notebook consists of pitiful
musical notations of her last words, down to the final, sighing, ''aja. ...''

Janacek's vocal lines are conversational, riding free of any direct metrical
linkage to the instrumental music, while the orchestra - except, crucially, in
the climaxes -carries the principal melodic interest. This is all in the best
post-Wagnerian manner; the primacy of the orchestra and the reduction of the
vocal parts to recitativelike conversation has characterized most opera from
Wagner to Mussorgsky to Debussy to the serialists, however much any given
composer may or may not have attested to a Wagnerian influence.  Janacek, for
his part, fiercely denied being in Wagner's thrall.

But with Janacek, the relation of voice to orchestra, and the construction of
the music itself, are only inspired by speech patterns; they are never bound by
them. Instead, for all his inherently dramatic nature - most of his purely
instrumental works have an initial dramatic inspiration - the music works itself
out abstractly, or at least in part it does. It is the tension between
orchestrally accompanied song and instrumental abstraction that lends Janacek's
music its underlying vitality. Characters of exceptionally intense humanity live
and breathe and emote on his operatic stage. They have a tangibility, a reality
about them that elicit heartfelt audience involvement. But underlying those
characters, and binding them to a grander, cosmic destiny, is the music itself,
full of obsessively, inexorably recurrent patterns and rhythms, forming an aural
metaphor for the reality in which the drama plays itself out.  With the
completion of ''Jenufa,'' Janacek had developed his mature style, but he had
hardly found a world waiting to hear that style.  The 1904 Brno premiere of
''Jenufa'' was a great success, although historians disagree as to whether the
audience appreciated Janacek's innovations or merely responded nationalistically
to the folk trappings. But then, at 50 years of age, Janacek's worst period of
frustration set in.

His next opera, ''Fate,'' was crippled by an awkward libretto. The opera after
that, ''Broucek,'' had similar problems, at least for a while -ultimately, the
text went through more than 10 pairs of hands, the last being Janacek's own. He
did write his greatest choral music during this period, but these remain the
least known of his compositions in the West because it is the most tied to the
Czechoslovak language.

Janacek expressed his frustrations poignantly in what turned out to be his last
solo piano piece, ''In the Mists'' (1912). Of the several possible
interpretations of the title, the most persuasive is the mists of obscurity in
which he most unwillingly dwelled.

The principal personification of his frustrations was the opera director of the
Prague National Theater, Karel Kovarovic. Part of the problem was a vitriolic
review Janacek had written in 1887 of an opera composed by Kovarovic. But it
seems that the conductor also had real doubts about the worth of Janacek's
music. Whatever the cause, his persistent rejections of ''Jenufa'' first shook
Janacek's confidence, then embittered him. He felt himself growing old; his
family life was a barren wasteland, and his professional opportunities had
shrunk to the smallest kind of local renown. He was a respected - if, by all
accounts, eccentric - teacher, a beloved choral conductor, a composer with his
hometown enthusiasts in Brno.  But of wider recognition, there seemed none, nor
likely to be any.

All that changed when Kovarovic was finally persuaded by a determined cabal of
Janacek's admirers to give ''Jenufa'' a chance.  The delirious triumph of the
Prague premiere on May 26, 1916 was the turning point of Janacek's life: the
leap from Brno in 1904 to Prague in 1916 was far more difficult than those from
Prague to Vienna in 1918, Berlin in 1924 and New York the same year.

From then on, Janacek was a figure to be reckoned with in European music,
honored as much by the German avant-garde (the conductor Otto Klemperer and the
young Turks in Berlin and at the International Society for Contemporary Music
festivals) as by conservatives suspicious of modernist radicalism (Olin Downes,
music critic of The New York Times, was an early American champion). The
avant-gardists responded to his expressive conciseness; the traditionalists
clung to his underlying emotionality.  This belated but heartfelt recognition
was, of course, a factor in the unleashing of Janacek's long pent-up creative
energies, making the last decade of his life more productive in both quality and
quantity than all the decades before it. But there were two other factors, as
well.

One was the unification and independence of Czechoslovakia in 1918. This not
only allowed Janacek to assume the position of his country's leading living
composer, with all the attendant honors. It also represented the fulfillment of
his lifelong musical and political dreams. From his youth, he had been a
pan-Slavic enthusiast; his affection for Russia is revealed not just in his
Russian opera subjects -''Katya,'' based on an Ostrovksy play, along with ''From
the House of the Dead'' - but in several trips to Russia and in the Russian
names he gave both his children. But even more than that, he was a socially
concerned, passionately patriotic Czechoslovak nationalist.  For him, the
freedom and independence of his country meant the liberation of his own creative
soul.

But the deepest explanation for the creative explosion of his last years lies in
his personal life. The notion of a muse is by now a cliched conceit, perhaps,
however much it can be substantiated in the romantic longings of composers as
disparate as Beethoven, Wagner and Mahler. In Janacek's case, there can be no
doubt at all that he had a muse, and that her existence was the principal source
of his inspiration.

When he was 27 years old, Janacek had married the 15-year-old Zdenka Schulz. It
was not a happy marriage, and with the death of their young son, Vladimir, in
1890 and of their nearly 21-year-old daughter, Olga, a few days before the
completion of ''Jenufa'' in 1903, all life went out of their union.

Instead, Janacek lived and loved within the musical world he had created. ''By
now, my family consists of nothing but notes,'' he wrote to a correspondent in
1918. ''They have got heads and feet.  They can run, play, bring forth tears of
happiness. At least, they won't forget me; they won't deny me. Is that not
happiness enough?''

Whether or not Janacek was overtly unfaithful to Zdenka, he did take pleasure in
his summer visits to the spa at Luhacovice, which he called ''the annual
congress of beautiful women.'' It was there, in the summer of 1917, that he met
Kamila Stossl, the wife of an antique dealer from Pisek in Bohemia.

For the rest of his life, Janacek was obsessed with Kamila. He poured out
extravagant letters to her; he dedicated his works to her; he spent rapturous
holidays with her, and sometimes with her husband, too. One wonders what, deep
down, David Stossl thought of it all.

Apparently, this was a purely emotional relationship, although some recent
Janacek specialists have hinted that the composer's protestations to that effect
may have been more chivalrous than candid. Kamila was affectionate with Janacek,
but - at least to the composer, in his overheated condition - cold, as well.
''Yesterday I wrote to Zdenka telling her all that binds me to you,'' Janacek
confided to Kamila in 1927. ''An open confession. I think she will understand.
She suspected more than is at all possible. Between you and me, there is only a
world of beauty and all is nothing but fantasy. But fantasy is as necessary to
my life as air or water.''

Several important works of Janacek's late period were inspired by Kamila. ''The
Diary of One Who Disappeared,'' a semioperatic song cycle, is about a peasant
lad seduced by an erotic gypsy girl.  ''Katya'' concerns an unhappily married
woman who longs for love, with tragic consequences. The title figure in ''The
Cunning Little Vixen'' is female eroticism incarnate, innocent and amoral, as
well as a symbol of the cycles of nature. Elina Makropoulos, conversely, is the
cold, uncaring beauty, incapable of feeling. And the String Quartet No. 2,
titled ''Intimate Letters'' and originally called ''Love Letters,'' was meant as
a public declaration.
Not all of Janacek's late works can be directly linked with Kamila: The
outpouring was too fecund for that. In every field except that of solo piano,
Janacek achieved his greatest works during his final decade. His sacred and
choral music reached its apogee in the barbaric, impassioned ''Glagolitic
Mass.'' The chamber music found fruition in the wind sextet, ''Youth''; the
Concertino; the Capriccio, and the ''Intimate Letters'' Quartet. Orchestrally,
there was the brilliant Sinfonietta, with its exhilarating brass-and-drum
fanfares.

But opera remained the core of his achievement: ''In operas alone,'' he told the
English, ''can the nation be known as it really is - firm, steadfast,
unflinching - in its true character.'' There are common threads to these operas,
despite their outwardly diverse subjects: a deep emotional commitment to
individual women and to humanity as a whole; compassion for weakness and a love
of nature and place; finally, a nondogmatic but still deeply religious
acceptance of the universe and man's place in it.  Even with his triumphs late
in life, there remained some who had their doubts about his music, and those
doubts echoed earlier reservations expressed during his long decades of neglect.
The conductor Kovarovic's objections to ''Jenufa'' were based on what he
perceived to be the clumsy inconsistency of Janacek's nervous repetitions of
text and melody. Richard Strauss, while admiring ''Jenufa,'' also complained of
Janacek's ''rather mannered'' style, and the critic Ernest Newman, in New York,
was contemptuous of ''Jenufa,'' which he called ''only a cut above the
amateur.''

Part of this resistance stems from the disorientation provoked by any true
original - the tendency for friends and foes alike to perceive the new as a
failed variant of something old. Just as Janacek's enemies resisted his supposed
crudities, his champions busily reshaped his librettos and retouched his
orchestrations, as did the followers of Mussorgsky and Bruckner.

But for all their sometimes overhelpful meddling, Janacek's allies were
invaluable to his international success. For any composer, it is ultimately the
ability to win the allegiance of powerful performers, patrons and critics that
determines success. Only up to a point can this be something a composer plots,
conspiratorially. It is, instead, a natural function of the admiration that
great work engenders. From Max Brod, Klemperer and Jeritza during his lifetime
to the conductors Rafael Kubelik and Sir Charles Mackerras today, Janacek has
not lacked for effective proponents. Kubelik, himself of Czechoslovak descent,
has led many fine Janacek performances and made many fine Janacek records, and
will conduct the Philharmonic's ''From the House of the Dead'' this week.
Mackerras studied in Prague and is now leading a series of near-definitive
Janacek opera recordings for English Decca (American London).

The recent surfacing of Janacek's less familiar operas into the international
repertory has several explanatons, I believe. One is the increasingly urgent
need opera companies feel for something genuinely new at a time when few
composers seem to be producing accessible, critically respectable new works of
musical theater. The steady flow of arresting new singers in the standard parts
seems to be drying up. Audiences are growing testy with eccentric new
productions that only distort classic operas. And so companies are turning to
the byways of the repertory. That can mean early or unusual works by recognized
composers (Donizetti, Verdi, the ''serious'' Rossini). Or it can mean mature
achievements by composers off the beaten operatic path. And nowhere can more
such composers be found than in Eastern Europe, isolated by culture and by
Communism from the modernist mainstream, and hence forced in the best cases into
a kind of postfolkish originality.

The success of Janacek's operas also casts new light on the nonmodernistic
subculture that has persisted throughout this century. The average person thinks
of ''20th-century music'' as inherently dissonant, inaccessible, aggressively
complex. Many composers have indeed responded to the wars, economic crises and
political disruptions of our century by writing just such music.

But there is another tradition or, perhaps better, constellation of traditions,
in which fresh musical thinking has taken place within idioms that remain
accessible to the average music lover. The critical and popular success of
Shostakovich during the last few years is an example of that tradition, and it
is no accident that Shostakovich, too, was a Slav.

Today, nearly 40 years since World War II, the Holocaust and Hiroshima, and more
than a decade removed from the 1960's and Vietnam, composers seem less prone to
dwell on the horrors of their time. Instead, sensibilities as diverse as those
of Karlheinz Stockhausen, David Del Tredici, George Rochberg, Philip Glass and
Laurie Anderson have turned to mysticism, fantasy and quirky, old-fashioned
American optimism as sources of musical inspiration.  And many of them have paid
new attention to the virtues of repetition and even, in the case of Glass,
obsessive repetition.

In this connection, a friend of the composer once described Janacek at work:
''He kept banging out a few notes of a theme as loudly as possible. He repeated
it many times unchanged or else with only a slight alteration. The verve of his
playing made one realize how much he was carried away by the emotional contents
of the motif.

''This was naturally not composing,'' the friend added hastily.  ''By repeating
one and the same motif, he wanted to get into a certain mood, in order to throw
the composition feverishly on paper.'' But maybe, in a sense, this was composing
-the very essence of Janacek's musical spirit that is only now being realized
concretely. One can push such parallels too far; Janacek was not Steve Reich.
Still, the statistics of present-day Janacek opera productions confirm that this
is a propititious time for his music.

His was a strange life, sad and triumphant, full of temperament, eccentricity,
frustration and exultation. Those emotions are mirrored infallibly in his music,
and it is our perception today of the emotional veracity of that music that
makes him so beloved. ''I penetrate because there is truth in my work,'' he
wrote toward the end of his life. ''Truth to its very limit.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Leos Janacek

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The New Vietnam Scholarship

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 333 words


I found Fox Butterfield's article on ''The New Vietnam Scholarship'' (Feb. 13)
both interesting and distressing -distressing because much of this scholarship
seems more concerned with disproving myths and illusions of one part of the
antiwar movement than with asking itself whether the war could have been won
under any circumstances acceptable to the American public and in any way
compatible with other, more vital, American interests abroad.  Distressing also
because his own reporting of some of these new views appears uncritical.

Many of those who opposed the war never believed in the autonomy of the F.L.N.,
in the exemplary virtues of Hanoi, in the overwhelming popularity of the
Vietcong. They simply believed - as one of these new scholars says - that ''you
can't fight something with nothing.'' Nor did they believe that the Tet
offensive had been a military victory of the Communists. Nor did they ignore the
interpretation of American Presidents' behavior. Nor did they think that the
peace movement had played a decisive role. If the new scholarship wants to
refute the views of what were the more deluded, romantic or ideological wings of
the antiwar movement, it wastes its time.

Moreover, it seems to be developing some myths of its own. The idea of the
American Army stopping infiltrations by occupying defensive positions in the
middle of Indochina is one of them: about as realistic a notion as, say, that of
''surgical air strikes.'' American, or American-supported, forays into Cambodia
and Laos turned out, after all, to be just as much ''like a bull charging the
toreador's cape'' as General Westmoreland's search-and-destroy operations in
South Vietnam. The relative ineffectiveness of the peace movement should not
obscure the growing unpopularity of the war, reflected in Congress - a Congress
whose skepticism is so frequently deplored by Henry Kissinger in his memoirs.
STANLEY HOFFMAN, Chairman, Center for European Studies, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 156 words


Fox Butterfield is to be commended for presenting new information on the
extremely important questions of ''America's longest war,'' in the apt phrase of
George Herring. But I urge more attention to the history of the Vietnamese
themselves in drawing conclusions to those questions.

By 1950, for example, when Washington began direct aid to the suppression of the
Vietminh, and where Mr. Herring begins his book, top Communist leaders had
already been fighting for over two decades. Those who had survived at all had
spent an average of close to seven years in French prisons! Therefore, it is
hardly surprising that North Vietnamese leaders were ''not prepared to
compromise.''

Neglect of such facts contributed to Washington's intervention in the tragedy,
and the lessons of the Vietnam experience can only be drawn with knowledge of
that wider history.
JAMES P. HARRISON, Professor of History, Hunter College, New York City

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 52 words


The most important lesson of Fox Butterfield's article on Vietnam is that the
situation was not ''black and white.'' We refuse to accept the complexities, and
we try solutions that are simple-minded and heavy-handed. It is what makes the
nuclear arms race so frightening.
JACK CHURCHILL, Brookline, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 105 words


''The New Vietnam Scholarship'' is a timely presentation of the process of
rethinking and reassessment that is now under way in the United States. What a
pity that, while reciting some of the important manifestations of this, Mr.
Butterfield chose not to mention ''The Vietnam Experience,'' a 16-volume
illustrated history of the American involvement in our longest war and most
traumatic experience since the Civil War. Four of the projected volumes are
already in print.  The remaining volumes will be published over the next two
years by the Boston Publishing Company.
ROBERT MANNING, Boston Publishing Company Inc., Boston

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 130 words


As counsel to the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on security commitments
in 1969-70, I read Fox Butterfield's article with interest. He quotes Col. Harry
G. Summers's reference to a plan to send American forces across the DMZ and Laos
to cut the North Vietnamese infiltration routes. Such a plan was also mentioned
to me by several officials, including Gen. Richard G. Stilwell (now Deputy Under
Secretary of Defense), identifying it under the name Project 22. He said this
had been recommended several times to General Abrams.

But contrary to one comment by Colonel Summers reported in the article, General
Stilwell told me that the plan was turned down, not on military grounds but
because of its political unacceptability in Washington.
ROLAND PAUL, Westport, Conn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 133 words


The gist of the ''new scholarship'' seems to be that the war could have been won
if the United States had been more ruthless and more determined. Yet at the same
time, apparently the only purpose behind the war among Presidents from Kennedy
to Nixon was to avoid the political embarrassment of withdrawal. Does it not
shock any of the new scholars that 57,000 Americans and several million
Vietnamese, Laotians and Cambodians should have died for so trivial a goal?

The new scholars may indeed correct the record on matters of fact, but they risk
distorting it worse than the first generation did unless they keep asking the
crucial questions: What were we doing there? Was it right?
KENDRICK A. CLEMENTS, Associate Professor, Department of History, University of
South Carolina, Columbia, S.C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DE GAULLE IN AN EPIC OF HIS OWN MAKING

BYLINE: By Stanley Hoffman; Stanley Hoffmann is the Douglas Dillon Professor of
the Civilization of France at Harvard.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1620 words


DE GAULLE, By Bernard Ledwidge.  Illustrated. 418 pp. New York.  St. Martin's
Press. $17.95.

TWELVE years after his death, books about General de Gaulle continue to appear.
Most are either studies of specific policies or, more frequently, memoirs by
former aides. What has not appeared yet is a satisfactory biography. Jean
Lacouture, who has written interesting lives of Andre Malraux, Francois Mauriac,
Leon Blum and Pierre Mendes-France, and before these, an incisive essay on de
Gaulle, is currently working on a major biography of the general. But all the
documents one needs in order to go beyond what is already in the public domain -
private correspondence and state papers -are in the French archives, where they
cannot be consulted for another 20 years at least.

Bernard Ledwidge, a British diplomat who was Minister at the British Embassy in
Paris during de Gaulle's last three and a half years as President of the Fifth
Republic, thus undertook his biography of de Gaulle with a serious handicap.
Nevertheless, he has written a useful and thoughtful book. With the help of
previously unpublished American and British documents and interviews with former
officials, diplomats and persons close to the general, he has been able to
clarify or to sharpen several points in the story that interests him most - de
Gaulle's performance on the world stage. In addition, he shows the kind of
empathy with his subject without which it is difficult to write a good
biography. Mr. Ledwidge clearly admires de Gaulle the statesman and de Gaulle
the artist.

The general, as this book confirms in great detail, had very stormy relations
with those whom he called ''the Anglo-Saxons.'' Mr.  Ledwidge, with a splendid
sense of fair play, celebrates de Gaulle's achievements, even (or especially)
those won despite British and American opposition. This book is almost like an
act of reparation from this Englishman to the Frenchman - as well as a subtle
reminder that de Gaulle's relentless distrust of British intrigues was not
always justified.

The reader will not find anything new here about de Gaulle's career or early
life. He entered ''History'' through a grand act of rebellion, his break with
the collaborationist Vichy Government, when France fell in June 1940. He was
almost 50. Much remains obscure about those first 50 years. Recent biographers
tend to quote from the same handful of earlier books, which are not always
reliable. De Gaulle as a private person is hard to grasp. Mr. Ledwidge rightly
notes that he was ''a far more sensitive man in private than he allowed himself
to appear in public.'' But what he was privately most sensitive about was France
(and also, one must add, the retarded daughter whom he loved and who died when
she was 20). What this book is really about is the epic drama of a man who,
through willpower, strength of character, sharpness of vision and a remarkable
mix of skills, succeeded not once but twice in rescuing his nation - the first
time from the worst defeat in its history in World War II, the second time from
the threat of civil war during the French withdrawal from Algeria. Then in May
1968, near the end of his life, he saved his regime from a dramatic challenge by
students and workers that his own imperious style of rule had partly provoked.

MR. LEDWIDGE shows how formidable the obstacles were between 1940 and 1944. Not
only, of course, did de Gaulle have to reckon with the scope of France's defeat
by the Germans, but he also had to fight the tendency of its allies to treat his
country as an ex-great power. In particular he had to deal with the quite
extraordinary and thoroughly unjustifiable hostility of Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Mr.  Ledwidge analyzes the ways in which de Gaulle succeeded in defeating
Churchill's and Roosevelt's efforts to deprive him of some of his power or to
push him aside altogether. Usually de Gaulle survived through a mix of fierce
obstinacy, cunning, the trick of disappearing (and then reappearing as a winner)
and the art of appealing to public opinion against the pressures of the Allied
leaders. Even when he pulled back he never gave up his aims. Mr.  Ledwidge
rightly remarks that de Gaulle could be reckless in private conversations but
was always cool and calculating in action.

The author is particularly good at showing the consistency of de Gaulle's
concerns. Already in 1943, he confided to an aide that he would base his postwar
policy on accommodation with the Russians and the Germans. But he could be
extraordinarily blunt with the Soviets, including Joseph Stalin, and clear about
the limits that Germany would have to accept; and he never gave up the hope that
the British might some day choose to become part of what he called a ''European
Europe'' rather than maintain its special relationship with Washington. On the
whole, despite Roosevelt's (and, later, John F.  Kennedy's) exasperation, de
Gaulle succeeded in what had been his most important objective: restoring,
preserving and strengthening France's independence - the nation's ability to
make its own decisions, amid all the constraints of a troubled world, even when
its power was limited. His complex strategy, aimed at weakening the two
superpowers and at dissolving their camps did not succeed; yet it remains the
only valid goal for any European patriot concerned with freedom of maneuver for
Europe and with the independence of small and middle-size nations.

As for a ''European Europe,'' allied with but not subservient to the United
States, providing for its own defense and diplomacy and practicing detente with
Moscow, de Gaulle did not achieve it in his lifetime, but there was at least a
beginning. Mr. Ledwidge understands perfectly that the foreign policy of the
President of the Fifth Republic was always more concerned with the distant
future than with quick results, more concerned with creating or exploiting
opportunities for major change than with obtaining minor improvements or
adjustments.

IN domestic affairs, Mr. Ledwidge points out several mistakes of de Gaulle, such
as his refusal to form a political party of his own in 1945, his haughty
handling of the election campaign of 1965 and his behavior during much of the
May 1968 student uprising. Mr. Ledwidge shrewdly notes that for de Gaulle to be
able to crush his enemies, they had to be ''open rivals against whom he could
react.'' Against a mass of students and workers, he was in the dark. Even here,
however, he finally triumphed. At the end of May he retreated, this time to
ascertain the loyalty of the French Army in Germany, and, satisfied with what he
found, reappeared triumphantly in Paris on May 30 to turn the tables on his
challengers.

Despite occasional tactical errors in the realm of justice and police action,
and failures in social policy, de Gaulle's domestic record is most impressive.
Not only did he extricate France from Algeria, in circumstances far more
difficult and traumatic than those faced by the United States in Vietnam, but he
gave to his country in 1958 a new constitution around which there now exists a
national consensus and which has proved remarkably effective. He also imposed
civilian control on an army that had gained a dangerous taste for power since
1940, and he ''made his legacy to France more secure'' both by resisting in
1946, 1947 and again 1958 the temptation to impose his will by a coup d'etat,
and by resigning in 1969 when he staked his Presidency on a referendum for
reform: ''He proved once more that he was not interested in holding onto
political power for its own sake but only if he could use it for greater
purposes than day-to-day administration.''

TO the French, what makes de Gaulle fascinating is not only his accomplishments
but his artistry -both his sense of la mise en scene (the style of surprise and
showmanship, the ceremony and protocol, the grand rhetoric) and his impressive
talent as a writer. It is clear throughout his book that Mr. Ledwidge was
profoundly affected by and understands this artistry. He writes that ''to be
valued at their true worth,'' the ''symbolic'' as well as the ''purely material
significance'' of de Gaulle's achievements must be grasped, for ''de Gaulle knew
how to give the maximum symbolic weight to every gesture he made.'' Every act
seemed to be calculated for two effects - on the situation of the moment and on
posterity. (Mr. Ledwidge mentions, in particular, de Gaulle's careful moves when
he returned to liberated Paris in August 1944 and when he advocated independence
from the superpowers on trips to Latin America in 1964 and to Poland in 1967.
De Gaulle, the man of action, was a character in an epic poem written by de
Gaulle, the creator; Mr. Ledwidge quotes from a war diary of August 1914, when
de Gaulle had his baptism of fire: ''I felt I was two people, one leading a
bayonet charge, the other anxiously watching him.''

This pupil of the Jesuits, son of deeply conservative parents, steeped in the
classics and in the study of the past, was a lifelong rebel against mediocrity,
obsolete concepts, humiliating constraints. He was also a thoroughly modern
leader, keenly aware of the opportunities provided by travel and crowds, by
microphones and balconies. Monarchist by tradition, authoritarian by
temperament, nationalist by conviction, he became a democrat through reason and
a champion of self-determination for all peoples. And he was an artist who
believed that whatever the near future might bring, he would always be
remembered because of his appeal to the imagination of later generations. Mr.
Ledwige's book is a fine summary of a great record; it is also both an
explanation of, and a contribution to, a great legend.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STRAIGHT TALK WITH THE RUSSIANS

SECTION: Section 10; Page 16, Column 5; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words


CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, the chief of the Peking bureau of The Times, was a
correspondent in Moscow from 1973 to 1977.

By CHRISTOPHER S.WREN

During a trip to the Soviet Union's Black Sea resort of Sochi some years back, I
found myself billeted with a colleague at a hotel that was undergoing another
breakdown of its hot water boiler.

Our guide from Intourist, the national travel service, was a bombastic young
man, eager to show us what Socialism had wrought in Sochi. Not for us a morning
at the beach. He bundled us into a hired car and spirited us to a new apartment
project, where he discoursed at length about how many square meters were
allotted each worker and how few rubles the rent cost. Then the guide invited
our questions.

''Do the workers have bathtubs in their apartments?'' my colleague asked. ''Do
they have hot water?'' ''Of course,'' our guide said, snickering at such
naivete.  ''Would the workers let us come in and take a hot bath?'' my colleague
inquired. ''Our hotel doesn't have any hot water.'' The guide's response, as I
recall, was some non sequitur about U.  S. aggressors in Vietnam - but hot water
flowed in our hotel rooms before we left. Yet questions, as I learned during a
four-year tour in Moscow, involve more than mischief-making. They are the only
way to slice through the propaganda and learn something about how the Soviet
Union really works.

Candor is hard to come by in Russia, but this is not due necessarily to
deviousness. Russians are intensely patriotic, with a pride tempered by their
wartime ordeal and other privations that Americans have not had to confront.
They may grumble about the system's shortcomings but object to sharing their
complaints with outsiders.

Russians often reveal a compulsion to prove that they are just as good as
Americans and maybe better. I rode an overnight train from Vilna in Lithuania to
Moscow with a burly middle-aged worker who had never met an American before. He
insisted upon arm-wrestling with me.

There are ways of guessing who is honest. In my travels I sometimes carried a
pack of American filter-tip cigarettes. I don't smoke, but most Russians do.
Anyone I met who refused an American cigarette because, he said, Soviet ones
tasted better was invariably unhelpful. If he took one, he was usually willing
to chat. Sometimes, a new acquaintance helped himself to two or more,
squirreling away the spare ones in a pocket, and I could expect his frankness.

But few Russians speak English and a tourist who does not speak Russian must
rely heavily on his tour guide for insights into Soviet society. Intourist
guides can be more sympathetic than the young man in Sochi. I have even heard a
political joke or two from tour guides, though not very often. Their duty is to
tell the tourists what the state thinks foreigners need to know. But this still
leaves some leeway for interesting conversation.

A Muscovite I came across once trained hecklers to harass the young American
guides at touring U.S. exhibitions. The toughest part, he confessed, was getting
his stooges to stand up straight, look their quarry in the eye and be
persistent. American tourists are even more apt to shrink at a confrontation and
to accept a canned response to some awkward question.

It helps to learn all you can by yourself first, if only by walking around and
visiting local stores and markets to find out what Russians can buy. In Moscow,
I found the novels of Mikhail Bulgakov and the poetry of Boris Pasternak for
sale to foreigners at foreigncurrency beriozka shops but not to Russians at
regular bookstores. Two of the 20th-century's finest writers remained too
controversial for the country that produced them.

The ''typical'' collective farm, kindergarten or apartment that you visit will
not be typical at all, but the best that can be shown.  Realizing this will help
you judge what the average must be like.

Sometimes questions get rebuffed with semantics. When I asked a city official in
Novgorod how many of its marvelous old churches still held religious services,
he replied that more than 80 ''religious monuments'' were open. But how many of
them were working churches? ''I already told you,'' he said. Finally, he
admitted that one church was open for worship.

If I were visiting the Soviet Union today as a tourist, these are some questions
that would occur to me:

- Why is it difficult to get dinner in restaurants that look halfempty? The
truth lies in the Russian quip, ''They pretend to pay us a good wage so we
pretend that we are working.''

- Why aren't there any women on the Soviet Politburo? The women in the Supreme
Soviet, or rubber-stamp parliament, that the guide may cite don't count because
the party wields the power.

- Who gets the first shot at tickets to the Bolshoi Ballet or visiting Western
cultural troupes? The audience around you will invariably be drawn from the
Soviet elite, who have ''blat,'' or connections.

- Just what did Yuri Andropov do before he succeeded the late Leonid Brezhnev,
and how did he become the new leader? You could learn something about the scope
of the K.G.B.

- Why does the Soviet Union have trouble producing enough grain to feed itself?
The customary response that its breadbasket lies too far north does not quite
square with harvest results in the Dakotas or Canada.

- Why is Andrei Sakharov exiled in Gorky and where is Anatoly Sharansky? Their
treatment as dissidents says something about the leadership's curious lack of
confidence after 55 years of Soviet power.

It does not hurt to ask questions with curiosity and even humility. The purpose
is to learn something, not to become bogged down in the kind of ideological
harangues that constitute a cottage industry over at Pravda. You may well
trigger some sharp retaliatory queries about problems in the U. S., from racism
to unemployment, that will be fielded best if you answer thoughtfully and
honestly.

Also ask your tour guide where he gets his information. More Russians tune in
foreign radio broadcasts than the Kremlin will admit. In the town of Kaluga, a
local editor lectured me about the immorality of the Watergate affair until I
realized that many of his details had not appeared in the Soviet press. When I
asked how he learned so much much about Watergate, he replied, ''The Voice of
America.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of statue of Lenin

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SOCIAL TOLERANCE OF DRUGS FOUND ON RISE

BYLINE: By GLENN COLLINS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3504 words


Social scientists believe that the level of public tolerance of the use of
illegal drugs is continuing to rise in all levels of American society.

They say, further, that the growing availability and acceptability of these
drugs is effecting profound social changes that have neither been fully
acknowledged nor fully understood.

The signs of the raised level of acceptance are widespread.  At a rehearsal
break in a recent Manhattan practice session of an Ivy League alumni choral
group that counts stockbrokers, lawyers and corporate executives among its
membership, one successful businessman held out a bit of hashish to a fellow
singer, aged 49. ''Have some?'' he asked.

At 9 A.M. the other morning on the Brooklyn Heights promenade, a youth in a blue
windbreaker, out walking his German shepherd, took a deep drag on a marijuana
cigarette. None of the joggers and walkers nearby gave him a second glance.

In an office of a university in New York, a professor who had traveled from the
Midwest for a job interview inquired solicitously about the health of the
sniffling department head sitting behind the desk before her. ''Oh,'' he said
offhandedly, ''that's not a cold.  I've been doing too much cocaine lately.''

''In a very short time, cultural patterns have changed dramatically,'' said Dr.
Richard Jessor, a social psychologist who is director of the Institute of
Behavioral Science at the University of Colorado at Boulder. ''It is now normal
for the majority of young people to have experience with a range of substances
that was unavailable to previous generations. And that raises important and
interesting questions for social policy that haven't been addressed.''

Dr. Norman Zinberg, professor of psychiatry at Harvard University, said:
''Nobody in the United States is more than one handshake away from virtually any
drug they want to get. Drugs are used in every stratum, across the board, from
blue-collar people to professionals.  There is no distinction between 'heads'
and 'juicers' anymore.''

Dr. Jessor's and Dr. Zinberg's views were generally reflected in a series of
interviews and a survey of the opinions and findings of drug-abuse experts,
medical and treatment authorities, drug users and law-enforcement officials
across the nation.

Some of these experts say that drug use has become so widespread that it often
goes unnoticed, and that, in focusing on the dangers of specific drugs like
cocaine, society has overlooked the very phenomenon of drug use itself. They
view with increasing alarm the availability of illegal substances including
cocaine, marijuana, heroin, LSD, angel dust and the nonmedical use of
tranquilizers, Quaaludes and diet pills.

And they are deeply concerned over what they regard as a wide variety of subtle
or hidden costs that result from the pervasiveness of drug use and its
consequent ''acceptability.'' These experts see the effects of such substances
in tragic indicators like emergencyroom statistics and automobile-accident
rates, and insist that there are equally important costs in the workplace,
schools and family life.

Others say, however, that the long-term social effects are not entirely clear.
They contend that most people now using drugs have successfully integrated them
into their lives to help cope with stress, and that the overall results may not
necessarily prove harmful to society.

These authorities, while deploring the misuse, say that people's sophistication
about the dangers inherent in different drugs is increasing. An alarmist view
cannot be supported, they contend, by recent Federal statistics. These studies
show either a decline or a stabilization among American youth in the use of most
types of drugs.

All seem to agree that there is now a basic paradox in social attitudes toward
drugs.  ''Society is giving all of us a double message,'' said Dr. Robert E.
Gould, professor of psychiatry and associate director of the family life
division of New York Medical College. ''On the one hand, we are told, 'Don't
take illegal drugs.' At the same time, this is a drug-taking culture and a
drug-encouraging culture. Look in anyone's medicine chest and see how many drugs
Americans rely on. Drug-taking is often portrayed in the media as glamorous and
chic. And the message the commercials give is: If you have a problem, take a
pill.''

Dependence on Chemistry Seen

Dr. Gould does not suggest that taking aspirin is the same as taking heroin.
''But the cumulative effect of these messages is,'' he said, ''that you won't
have to suffer, chemistry can give you an answer, the route that drugs offers is
the easiest way to get out of anxiety. It focuses on instant gratification, and
not on solving the underlying problems.''

The substances available in this $90 billion-a-year marketplace have become so
diverse, and some so new, that even the experts cannot keep track of them all.

''The selection in the delicatessen of drugs is much greater than it's ever
been,'' said Dr. M. Duncan Stanton, director of research for the Addicts and
Families Program at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and the
Philadelphia Child Guidance Center. He conducted a nine-year study of hard-drug
users.

In some respects, wholesale access to drugs is a situation with little cultural
precedent.  ''Most societies since the beginning of time have had intoxicants
and integrated them into rites of passage like weddings or celebrations,'' said
Dr. Robert B. Millman, director of the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Service at the
Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic in New York.

''But these societies were using the one or two substances endemic to that
area,'' he said, citing alcohol as an example. ''Most people didn't get into
trouble with these substances - they were integrated into the society, in the
sense that people knew how to control them.

''The ominous thing about the present-day Western culture is that we have access
to all intoxicants from all societies, and we don't know how to control them.
This can be very dangerous to those who are at risk: the young, the
psychologically disturbed and the disadvantaged.''

'You Can Get Anything You Want'

That availability cuts across age, class, professional and geographic
distinctions. ''You can get anything you want, anywhere,'' said 15-year-old
Eileen Otero, who grew up in Queens and Manhattan, and now attends a parochial
high school on Manhattan's East Side. ''Drugs are all over. I never go a day
without someone offering me weed.''

Availability is no doubt a key factor in widespread use. In the general
population, the increase in use of illegal drugs has been dramatic in the last
two decades. In 1962, less than 4 percent of the population had ever used an
illegal drug. Two decades later, according to the National Institute on Drug
Abuse, 33 percent of Americans age 12 and older reported having used marijuana,
hallucinogens, cocaine, heroin or psychotherapeutic drugs for nonmedical
purposes at some time.

The increase in cocaine use, particularly, has been substantial, doubling among
those over age 26 in the three-year period from 1979 to 1982. The 1982 survey
was based on 5,624 Americans living in households at a fixed residence and is
projected on national census figures.

Sixty-four percent of American young people have tried an illegal drug before
they finish high school, and more than a third have used drugs other than
marijuana, according to another 1982 National Institute study. The research
showed that 59 percent of the seniors had tried marijuana, 16 percent had tried
cocaine, 10 percent had tried LSD and 1 percent had tried heroin.

Nearly all young people, 93 percent, had tried alcohol. The high use of alcohol
among young people is, of course, not a new phenomenon in America, but its use
in conjunction with drugs is regarded as a growing problem.

Parallel With Alcohol

Some observers say the overall statistics themselves illustrate the new level of
social tolerance and are not overly concerned.  R. Keith Stroup founded the
National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws in 1970, and is now a
lawyer practicing in Washington.  ''I think marijuana gained respectability as
the people who smoked it gained respectability,'' he said. ''The great number of
middleclass recreational drug users use them like their parents used alcohol.''

But many of those who treat the casualties of this quiet transformation are
worried about its effects.  ''The culture just isn't seriously looking at soft
or recreational drug use as a health problem,'' said Dr. Mitchell S. Rosenthal,
a psychiatrist who is president of Phoenix House in Manhattan, the nation's
largest private drug-treatment program. ''Everyone wants to talk about the
newest drug - cocaine or Valium or angel dust. And what that ignores is that the
culture just naturally takes for granted that there will be a new drug.''

Dr. Rosenthal believes that drug abuse is an insufficiently recognized factor in
the national statistics on suicide, auto and other accidents, plane crashes,
mental breakdowns, work-related problems, truancy and teen-age pregnancies.
Since the role of drugs is usually ignored in tallying such statistics, it is
difficult to measure precisely.

Link to Accidents Tabulated

However, 6 percent of those in New York State, 729,000 people, it is estimated,
had in the last six months driven an automobile while feeling the effects of
drugs, according to the most recent study of drug use among state residents. It
is estimated that 58,000 New Yorkers reported having automobile accidents while
driving under the influence of drugs. The study, a 1981 survey of 3,500 New
Yorkers residing in households, was conducted by the state's Division of
Substance Abuse Services.

As a result of using drugs, the study showed, an estimated 618,000 state
residents experienced problems in work or school, 565,000 experienced problems
with family and friends, and 443,000 experienced health problems.

The researchers reported that residents with household incomes of $50,000 or
more had the highest drug use in the state, and 6 percent, an estimated 51,000,
of these residents were considered to be serious abusers.

In specific incidents, drug abuse has caused everything from snowmobile
accidents to drownings.  ''The only subgroup in our society that has showed an
increase in mortality rates is our adolescents,'' said Dr. William Pollin,
director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse. ''That trend is also true for
accidents, homicides and suicides, and many of those trends may be related to
drug and alcohol use.'' Though drug use among the nation's youth has generally
declined, he said, ''We are still the country with a higher level of drug use
among young people than any other country in the world.''

In the workplace, drug use is reported to have been directly involved in
everything from train wrecks by marijuana-smoking engineers to the arrests of
nuclear power-plant guards by the Oregon State police for using marijuana,
amphetamines, cocaine and LSD.

Cost to Employer Estimated

Industry studies have estimated that drug or alcohol abuse costs an employer at
least 25 percent of a worker's salary in loss of productivity, poor attendance
and increased medical benefits. The economic, social, health and crime-related
losses caused by drug abuse in a single year have been placed at $10 billion to
$20 billion, according to the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Associations.

Among professionals, doctors have traditionally been singled out for abuse
problems because of their easy access to drugs. But the problem exists among
other professional groups as well.

''This is in every way a conservative community,'' said a highly placed court
administrator in a major Middle Western state who requested anonymity. ''But I
know prosecutors who regularly prosecute marijuana cases and smoke pot at the
same time.''

She said that although the stresses of their trade had long made trial lawyers
vulnerable to alcohol abuse, younger lawyers were combining alcohol with other
drugs. ''Don't imply from what I'm saying that it's just lawyers,'' she
continued. ''Lots of cocaine is used and sold by other professionals in this
town.

''One sitting criminal court judge,'' she said, ''who has a reputation as a
tough sentencer in cases involving possession of cocaine and heroin, once
lectured me about how provincial I was about not using cocaine myself. He told
me I should grow up.'' In other words, that she should have used cocaine, as he
had.

''What really bothers me is the hypocrisy of it,'' she continued.  ''Sentencing
people to the terrible prisons we have in our state for things the prosecutors
are doing themselves.''

Persistent Problem in Military

For another large employer, the military, drug use has been a matter of concern
since the Vietnam War, and is a persistent problem. According to a 1981 study by
the House Select Committee on Drug Abuse, two thirds of the sailors on the
aircraft carrier Forrestal, including the men who launch F-14 jet fighters,
regularly used marijuana and pep pills to relieve the fatigue of working 16-@
and 18-hour days.

Assertions about the effects of drugs in the workplace are often simplistic,
said Dr. John C. Kramer, who, in the Nixon Administration, was an associate
director of the White House Special Action Office for Drug Abuse and Prevention.

''People tend to forget that lots of jobs are very boring,'' said Dr. Kramer, a
psychiatrist who is an associate professor at the University of California at
Irvine. ''For a carpenter who has to hit the same kind of nail in the same spot
on the same pieces of wood all day, marijuana may be the only thing that makes
his hammering seem new.''

Perhaps the least statistically measurable hidden cost is the effect of drug
abuse on American families. ''Unquestionably there is a cost in family life,''
said Dr. Kramer. ''In all family problems, ordinary conflicts can be exaggerated
when an individual is using drugs.''

Weakening of Parents Seen

Dr. Stanton of the University of Pennsylvania says changes in the structure and
transience of American families have increased their vulnerability to drug abuse
and other problems.

''Social, economic and cultural changes have altered family patterns, taken
supports away from parents and weakened them,'' he said. ''It has blurred the
difference between parents and kids.''

Such abstract social trends are evident in the real-life experience of one
family. ''My drug use forced the family to confront many issues that were not
out in the open,'' said 18-year-old Debbie Marks, a New York University freshman
who lives in Manhattan. She started smoking marijuana and drinking in the
seventh grade, after her parents' divorce.

By the age of 16, she was finishing a bottle of Jack Daniels every night, and
was experimenting with LSD during the day, having tried everything else but
heroin. In 1981, she entered a treatment program at Phoenix House and, after a
four-month battle with her multiple addictions, has been drug-free for 14 months
since.

''I was very naive,'' said Mrs. Marks. In Debbie's treatment, Mrs.  Marks joined
family-therapy sessions with her 20-year-old son Scott, and with her former
husband, Sam, and his wife, Bonnie, and with Debbie.

''I think that parents have to take over and be parents again,'' she said.
''When I was growing up, my parents said no and that was it - but I wanted my
children to be my friends. And that was wrong.''

Dr. Pollin of the National Institute on Drug Abuse says one should remember that
social toleration of some drugs is not necessarily the same as approval. ''There
is much less shock value now involved in, say, seeing someone smoking a joint or
using coke,'' he explained.  ''But there has also been a trend countering that:
the steady and accelerating passage of legislation banning head shops, which has
been a grass-roots movement.''

Closing of Shops Sought

In many communities across the country, antimarijuana organizations have
attempted to shut down paraphernalia outlets, efforts that have paralleled the
attempt to get drunken drivers off the road. The backlash against drugs has
included a network of parent-initiatated support groups, drug-information
meetings and drug-treatment-referral networks.

Dr. Pollin believes that drug use as a phenomenon peaked between 1977 and 79. In
his oranization's student surveys, the 1982 results showed a drop from 1981 in
the number of high-school seniors who used marijuana daily, monthly or had used
it in the last year. And daily use of marijuana among high-school seniors
declined for the fourth successive year, from 10.7 percent in 1978 to 6.3
percent in 1982.

''It may be, as some have speculated, that our young people are beginning to
heed the Government's health messages,'' said Dr. Ira Cisin, professor of
sociology at George Washington University, who directs the Federal agency's
national survey of Americans in households. ''We do not know whether the
downturn in marijuana use reflects a temporary economic slump or a continuing
shift to more conservative behavior.''

Change Is Related to Age

In contrast, though, among those over age 26, the use of cocaine, marijuana,
hallucinogens and stimulants reported in the study is rising, though not
dramatically, save in the case of cocaine. In addition, the number of
emergency-room visits and deaths involving drug abuse have increased among those
age 30 to 39, unlike the patterns for younger age groups.

According to reports from the agency's national Drug Abuse Warning Network,
there was a doubling of reports involving cocaine from 1979 to 81, the most
recent statistics available; and there was a sharp increase, from 1,910 to
3,479, of reports involving heroin.

Dr. Pollin and a number of other experts attribute the contradictions between
declining drug use among the young and rising drug use among older groups to the
lingering effects of the 60'sgeneration culture on the rest of society. ''The
flower children of the 60's are now approaching middle age and they are bringing
with them the residue of habits formed in earlier years,'' said Dr. Cisin.

Not everyone accepts that view, however. ''I don't have the sense that we can
attribute this to a group with a specific problem that is wending its way
through the age pyramid, and then the problem comes to an end,'' said Dr.
Jessor. ''It seems unlikely that the drug problem is going to 'age itself out'
of the population - that's rather wishful. Looking at it from the larger
culture, drug use in general is an institutionalized phenomenon.''

He Sees Process of Integration

Whether or not drug use has reached that status yet, Dr. Zinberg of Harvard says
a number of illegal drugs are undergoing a process of societal integration. ''Of
course it poses problems for those who are vulnerable to abusing these drugs,''
he said, ''but a lot of the use has developed into what I call controlled usage.

''Most of these drugs are introduced with a bang,'' he continued, ''and they are
greeted with enormous hysteria. The process is not complete, but the large
majority of people know how to control them.  Hysteria has been replaced by a
knowledge of the boundaries of these drugs.''

Some drugs are much harder to control than others, he said. ''I'm not happy
about the extreme availability of cocaine,'' said Dr.  Zinberg.

''We can reduce trafficking by making it prohibitively difficult for people to
try it,'' said Francis M. Mullen, Administrator of the Drug Enforcement
Administration.

Dr. Kramer agrees that it is necessary to control the availability of illegal
drugs, but he says that to expect their elimination is unrealistic in an open
society.

''As the stringency of controls increases,'' he said, ''the social problems
associated with the control of drug use become greater and greater. So, as you
lengthen sentences and tighten up, you get more problems involving black markets
and organized crime, and you get more invasion of privacy and fundamental
liberties.''

Sees It as Task in Growing Up

Dr. Jessor of the University of Colorado says coping with the presence of drugs
may have become a kind of rite of passage for young people. ''It may now be a
developmental task that young people need to come to terms with,'' he said,
''like separation from parents, career development, and sexuality. And so we
ought to focus on education and provide the kinds of information and skills for
the least irresponsible use of these substances.''

Dr. Pollin offered a final, disquieting note on the future of the nation's drug
culture: ''The laboratories that produce ever-more potent psychoactive drugs are
going to continue their efforts. The number of drugs out a decade from now will
be twice as great as they were 10 years ago. The problem will never go away. It
will be more complex.''

---

Next: The biological and psychological effects of illicit drugs now widely
available.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: First of two articles.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Dr. Richard Jessor and Dr. Norman Zinberg
table comparing drug use by age groups graph of drug use among high school
seniors

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MARINE SAYS ISRAELIS FIRE INDISCRIMINATELY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 659 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, March 20


The commander of the 1,200 United States marines in Lebanon said today that
Israeli Army units were endangering civilians and marines with indiscriminate
gunfire. He said the situation was due to the Israelis' ''gross lack'' of
discipline.

The complaint by the Marine commander, Col. James M. Mead, was the latest in a
series of confrontations and criticisms that have strained relations between
Israeli and United States forces in Lebanon. The Marines are there as part of a
peacekeeping force that also includes British, French and Italian troops.

Asked about Colonel Mead's remarks, the Israeli military command issued a
statement saying, ''Lately the Marines are publishing data that have no basis.''

(A Marine spokeman quoted by Reuters said that on Saturday Israeli forces were
refused permission to patrol an area on the edge of Beirut controlled by
American and Lebanese forces.

(The spokesman, Maj. William Grein, said Israelis in two jeeps had asked
Lebanese soldiers at a joint American-Lebanese checkpoint for permission to send
tanks and armored personnel carriers into an area out of bounds to Israelis. He
said the Lebanese had refused the request and the Israelis had left without
incident.)

Colonel Mead said Israeli units on the edge of the southern Beirut sector
patrolled by the Marines had engaged in ''reconnaissance by fire'' -
indiscriminate firing into roadside areas to deter ambushes. He said this
practice might be a reason why the Israelis were trying to keep marines from
patrolling the area.

5 Civilians Reported Slain

Hisham Shaar, head of Lebanon's internal security force until early March, said
last month that five civilians had been killed by the Israeli shooting. A
spokesman for the force was unable to provide casualty figures Sunday but said
some civilians had been killed and others wounded.

Israeli military sources who asked not to be identified said the Israeli
authorities had already denied a Lebanese accusation that civilians had been
killed when Israelis had fired along roadsides to flush out ambushers. Shooting
along the Sidon highway is directed only into unpopulated areas, the officers
said.

Colonel Mead said in an interview that for the last two months the Israelis had
''come down the Sidon highway and, without having been fired upon, they just
fire great numbers of rounds to the east of Sidon highway.''

He said the Israelis had originally barred the marines from crossing the Sidon
road ''because they were concerned for our safety.''

''Apparently the Israelis are concerned about their gross lack of fire
discipline,'' he said.  Colonel Mead said the Israelis had been firing to the
west of the highway, toward Marine positions, ''and we were catching ricochets
in our positions.''

''We told them to cease and desist the indiscriminate fire,'' he said. ''So now
the indiscriminate fire only happens to the east.''

'It's the Old Vietnam Tactic'

''It's the old Vietnam tactic of recon by fire,'' he added. ''It's a very poor
tactic. All it does is endanger, via ricochets, other forces or civilians. It
never stopped a terrorist.''

Colonel Mead said the Israelis might have planned recent confrontations in which
Israeli soldiers stopped Marine patrols and taunted the Americans.

''It's my thought that because of the frequency of the incidents it must be
greater than happenstance,'' he said.  He added that the Israelis had been told
repeatedly that the marines, at the request of the Lebanese Government, were
free to patrol anywhere in greater Beirut.

The Commandant of the Marine Corps, Gen. Robert H. Barrow, recently wrote to
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger to complain of what he called Israeli
provocation of the marines, ''complete with verbal degradation of the officers,
their uniform and country.'' Last week Defense Minister Moshe Arens of Israel
urged that better relations be established to avoid friction between Israeli
troops and marines.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW WEINBERGER DIRECTIVE REFINES MILITARY POLICY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1683 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 21


Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has instructed the military services to
integrate plans for employing medium-and long-range nuclear weapons to enable
them to fight a war more effectively, according to a new directive.

The directive represents a refinement of the first such document written under
Mr. Weinberger's supervision a year ago, which provided the foundation for the
Reagan Administration's military policy. The new directive has softened the
wording on fighting a nuclear war, shifted the emphasis and set fresh directions
for some programs.

The directive, known as Fiscal Year 1985-89 Defense Guidance, disclosed a new
focus on chemical arms and on developing exotic directed energy weapons such as
high energy lasers, particle beams and high-powered microwaves.

The Defense Guidance further showed that the Reagan Administration planned to
add a deep underground base for MX missiles in the 1990's. A Presidential
commission is currently seeking a surface base that would be acceptable to
Congress.

At the other end of the spectrum, the document instructed the services to
enlarge their forces for special operations such as commando raids, guerrilla
warfare and counterterrorism. The Joint Chiefs of Staff were directed to devise
a new doctrine for such tasks.

Over all, the directive's five-year budget laid out plans for increasing
spending for each of the military services by more than 80 percent in current
dollars from 1983 to 1989. The Navy, expanding from 13 to 15 aircraft carrier
groups, would get the largest slice.

Continuing Rift Among Leaders

Even with those increases, the guidance disclosed a continuing rift between the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Pentagon's senior civilian leaders. The military
officers asserted that a force far larger than what is currently planned would
be needed to fulfill the Administration's ambitious strategy.

Mr. Weinberger's program calls for Army divisions to remain at 16, while the
Joint Chiefs recommended 23. Instead of the planned 15 Navy carriers, the top
military men proposed 24 and said Air Force tactical fighter wings should rise
from the proposed 27 to 44.

The planning directive, Mr. Weinberger said, was ''the authoritative statement
of Department of Defense policy, strategy, force planning, resource planning and
fiscal guidance'' for the coming five years. The document, which he signed March
1 after long deliberation among senior civilian officials and military officers,
was drawn up to guide preparation of the 1985 military budget.

A senior official familiar with the drafting of the directive said last year's
document sought to stimulate military leaders into fresh thinking about the
Soviet threat. The new guidance, he said, was intended to exert restraint, and
thus the rhetoric in the 106-page document has been toned down.

The document also appeared to have been revised in an effort to preclude the
criticism that arose after the first Defense Guidance became public knowledge
last spring. At that time, Mr. Weinberger established a policy under which the
United States would prepare to fight a protracted nuclear war with the Soviet
Union if deterrence failed. That policy is refined and expanded in the new
guidance, though in less vivid terms.

The senior official said that the objective of ''prevailing'' in a ''protracted
nuclear war'' had been eliminated, but that that did not change the policy of
preparing to fight such a war if deterrence failed. He pointed to the continuing
requirement that the United States emerge from a nuclear exchange, no matter how
long or short, with its offensive nuclear weapons intact.

Departure in Nuclear Doctrine

The departure in nuclear doctrine was the order to integrate plans for using
long-, medium- and even short-range nuclear weapons so that the President, if
necessary, could ''execute controlled-response options.''

''Our nuclear forces must be governed by a single coherent policy,'' the Defense
Guidance said. ''Thus, we must not impose any arbitrary division between
categories of nuclear weapons systems which could constrain their effective,
coordinated employment in retaliation.''

The call for integrating nuclear weapons appeared to be another step in the
evolution of the doctrine governing nuclear weapons that has moved over the last
30 years from massive retaliation to flexible responses.

Mr. Weinberger's instructions also come as the United States has begun to deploy
a new generation of medium-range missiles that fly about 1,500 miles. They
include Pershing 2 ballistic missiles, which are to be deployed in Europe late
this year, and the ground- and sea-launched cruise missiles. The cruise missiles
are flying torpedoes with stubby wings and guidance devices that follow the
terrain to a target.

Secretary Weinberger is currently in Portugal to consult with other defense
ministers on the Pershing and cruise missile issue. Plans for deploying 108
Pershings and 464 cruise missiles in Europe over the next four years have been
repeatedly protested there.

Directive Reiterates Priority

For years, attack plans for intercontinental missiles, long-range bombers and
submarines armed with long-range missiles have been coordinated in what is
called a Single Integrated Operational Plan.  Under the new directive, those
weapons ''capable of executing nonstrategic nuclear options may be tasked for
those missions.''

The directive reiterated the Administration's priority of improving that triad
''to deter nuclear attack on the United States.'' It said provisions would be
made for a secure reserve force ''so that the U.S. will never be without nuclear
offensive capabilities while still threatened by enemy nuclear forces.''

The new emphasis on chemical arms was both defensive and offensive. ''Our forces
will be equipped, trained and provided the special support to enable them to
sustain activities for at least 30 days'' after chemical weapons have been used,
the directive said.

Conversely, the services were directed to be sure they could ''rapidly employ
existing chemical munitions in retaliation worldwide by 1985.'' The Defense
Guidance instructed the Air Force to ''develop binary chemical payloads and
delivery mechanisms for air-to-surface weapons'' for the 1990's. The Army was
ordered to develop ''advanced surface-to-surface binary chemical weapons'' for
all the services for the 1990's. A binary chemical weapon keeps lethal agents
separate until the projectile has been fired or the bomb dropped.

While the United States has conducted research into directed energy, the new
Defense Guidance moves the focus toward developing weapons that would use
electromagnetic energy concentrated into beams to destroy targets.

The Air Force was directed to conduct a space laser program ''to permit decision
on an on-orbit demonstration.'' The Navy was asked to conduct ''a lethality
demonstration program'' to defend potential targets of high value.

Instructions on Laser Arms

The Army, Navy and Marine Corps were all instructed to develop and evaluate
''laser weapons for use against enemy sensors, target acquisition and guidance
systems.'' The Air Force was given the task of developing ''airborne
applications.''

Last year the Reagan Administration ordered a revival of special operations
forces, which had been largely ignored since the end of the war in Vietnam. This
year, the Defense Guidance instructed the services to have units tailored for
special operations ''immediately available.''

The plan said that since special operations forces, such as the Army's Green
Berets, provide the President ''with unique options, they must be ready for
employment in circumstances in which the use of large conventional forces would
be premature, inappropriate or infeasible.''

The Joint Chiefs were instructed to provide for ''habitual inclusion of special
operations forces in all joint plans and, wherever feasible, in joint
exercises.'' The intelligence services were directed to ''provide intelligence
support to the full range of special operations missions, including unique tasks
and targets.''

New Details on Programs

Beyond the new directives and changes in emphasis, the Defense Guidance
furnished new details on existing programs, including the following:

- The Air Force was directed to have in operation in 1987 an antisatellite
squadron that would include 12 F-15 fighters equipped to launch 28 interceptors.
The interceptors are small satellites armed with conventional explosives that
are lobbed into orbit to explode near an enemy satellite.

- The services were instructed to ''intensify cooperative efforts to exploit the
capabilities of Awacs,'' the airborne warning and control system aircraft that
have been deployed in recent years to Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Iceland and to
northern Europe to watch developments in Poland.

- The services were also advised that electronic warfare ''must remain an area
of unique United States superiority.'' They were particularly advised to improve
their capacity for disrupting or destroying the command and communications
networks of an enemy.

- In personnel, the armed forces were told that 75 percent of new recruits who
enlist must be high school graduates and that no more than 20 percent of those
enlisting may fall into the lowest mental category. Actual recruiting today is
surpassing those standards, but this sets a floor on it.

- In maintenance, the services were instructed to eliminate the backlog of
repair work ''by end of 1985 if possible but no later than 1986, and permit no
buildup of backlogs in subsequent years.'' That was in accord with the top
priority given to readiness of the forces.

While the Defense Guidance focused primarily on American military forces, it
also reviewed the threat from the Soviet Union. It reported that the Soviets,
who operate with centralized controls considered cumbersome by American military
analysts, ''have been enhancing their force management.'' That includes
communications, targeting, fire direction and control of units when they engage
the enemy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: chart of budgets for military services chart of proposed
increases in military operations

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: EL SALVADOR COVERAGE ON THE EVENING NEWS

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words


A MONTH'S viewing of the evening news programs suggests that there are
shortcomings in the treatment of El Salvador. Sometimes the programs present the
news about El Salvador tardily, sometimes they get it confused and sometimes
they focus on the rhetoric rather than the reality.

Consider, for example, when the latest crisis started. It may reasonably be
supposed that the Administration, although it didn't actually use the word,
announced the crisis on Feb. 16. Secretary of State George P. Shultz told
Congress then that the insurgents in El Salvador were ''creating hell'' with
Soviet-made weapons. Mr. Shultz, however, never appeared on the evening news.

This was because El Salvador was in remission on all three networks in the
middle of February. It did not return until two days after Mr. Shultz spoke.
ABC's World News Tonight showed some footage then of the battle for Suchitoto.
The film, full of gunfire, established that Suchitoto, 30 miles from San
Salvador, was ''strategically important,'' and that the outcome of the battle
was in doubt. After that, ABC forgot about Suchitoto. On subsequent broadcasts
it was not mentioned again.

A week later, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger told Congress that the
Administration would request $60 million more in military aid for El Salvador.
On the news shows that night, however, El Salvador was again in remission. The
$60 million request was not reported for a few days. Finally, the NBC Nightly
News, the most reliable of the evening news shows, mentioned the $60 million.

''Tonight President Reagan has a new plan to send military aid to El Salvador,''
said Chris Wallace, the anchor, when the program began. Then, Emery King, a
correspondent, reported that ''a White House official'' had ''confirmed'' that
the Administration wanted the extra $60 million. It was as if Mr. Weinberger
hadn't spoken at all.  Then, when Mr. Wallace returned, he reported that ''in El
Salvador tonight, at least 18 peasants are dead, executed by automatic
weapons.'' This seemed to be a reference to a massacre, reported elsewhere, that
had taken place six days before.

On Feb. 28, President Reagan told Congressional leaders that ''El Salvador faces
a difficult situation.'' Late that day, aboard Air Force One, a ''senior White
House official,'' as he would be described in most news stories, said that Mr.
Reagan was considering an increase in the number of American military advisers
in El Salvador.

All three networks used the story that night, each adding a fillip of its own.
ABC, moving a shade past the idea that Mr. Reagan was only considering an
increase, said flat out that the senior official had asserted that ''more
advisers will be needed.'' NBC preceded its report by mentioning that there
would be a cease-fire in El Salvador on the day Pope John Paul II visited. CBS,
meanwhile, got around to the $60 million only cautiously. It said the figure was
''perhaps as much as $60 million.''

The next day, the crisis burst fully into the open. The word ''crisis'' was even
used. Two officials - Thomas O. Enders, an Assistant Secretary of State, and
Nestor D. Sanchez, a Deputy Assistant Defense Secretary - told Congress that El
Salvador faced a ''crisis.'' Mr. Sanchez was specific. ''Depending on the amount
of ammunition expended,'' he said, referring to the Salvadoran army, ''they
could be down to less than 30 days.''

This was a spectacular piece of news, of course - a suggestion that the army was
running out of bullets. Nevertheless, none of the networks examined the
possibility on their programs that night; none, in fact, even mentioned Mr.
Sanchez. On the CBS Evening News, Dan Rather did work in a mention of Mr.
Enders, but mostly it was to connect him to the domino theory.

Still, it was clear the crisis was now headline news. On ABC, John McWethy, the
Pentagon correspondent, attributing his information to ''sources,'' said, ''The
Government there (El Salvador) is thought to be in grave danger of collapsing
because of lack of public support.'' This suggested a more severe crisis then
even Mr. Sanchez had worried about. Bullets, after all, could be sent by plane
and ship. Popular support was something else.

The next day, the State Department disclosed that the Administration had asked
El Salvador to advance its presidential elections from next March to late this
year. The story, rife with political implications, was ignored that night by CBS
and NBC. ABC worked it in with a piece about the Pope.

Two days later, as the White House had predicted he would, Mr.  Reagan said that
he might increase the number of American advisers in El Salvador. Mr. Reagan
also said that if El Salvador fell to the rebels, other countries in Central
America would fall, too.

That night, the sound of collapsing dominoes was heard throughout the networks,
especially at CBS. Mr. Rather said, ''The President's language recalled
Southeast Asia.'' Lesley Stahl asked, ''Is El Salvador turning into another
Vietnam?'' She said that Mr. Reagan had said it wasn't, but that he had ''talked
of Iron Curtain threats and echoed some Vietnam-era rhetoric.''

As commentary, this was permissible, but as straight reporting it wasn't much.
CBS was not telling us what Mr. Reagan had said; it was characterizing it.

That same night, ABC, again citing ''sources,'' contradicted Administration
assertions by reporting that ''insurgents in El Salvador are not getting their
arms from Nicaragua by light planes.'' As with ABC's story about the possible
collapse of the El Salvador Government, this new report was dealt with in a
single sentence, even though it challenged Mr. Reagan's whole case for more
military aid.  Last Friday, for example, the State Department said the
infiltration of weapons by air was ''considerably above anything we've seen
before.''

The evening news programs are better at reporting what the Administration says
it is doing, rather than what it does. Rhetoric is skimmed off the top; the
substance is untouched. A few days after Mr. Reagan spoke about the advisers, he
told Congressional leaders that he would not the conflict in El Salvador. The
networks reported this, although it was no different than anything Mr. Reagan
had said before.

However, at the same meeting with the Congressional leaders, Mr.  Weinberger
said the Administration would ask for $110 million, not $60 million, in
emergency military aid. This was not argument or rhetoric; it was news, a sign
of where the war was going. It was not mentioned that night on the evening news.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 24, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT'S SPEECH ON MILITARY SPENDING AND A NEW DEFENSE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4498 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 23


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's speech tonight, as recorded by
The New York Times:

My fellow Americans, thank you for sharing your time with me tonight. The
subject I want to discuss with you, peace and national security, is both timely
and important - timely because I have reached a decision which offers a new hope
for our children in the 21st century - a decision I will tell you about in a few
minutes - and important because there is a very big decision that you must make
for yourselves. This subject involves the most basic duty that any President and
any people share - the duty to protect and strenghen the peace.

At the beginning of this year, I submitted to the Congress a defense budget
which reflects my best judgment, and the best understanding of the experts and
specialists who advise me, about what we and our allies must do to protect our
people in the years ahead.

That budget is much more than a long list of numbers, for behind all the numbers
lies America's ability to prevent the greatest of human tragedies and preserve
our free way of life in a sometimes dangerous world. It is part of a careful,
long-term plan to make America strong again after too many years of neglect and
mistakes.  Our efforts to rebuild America's defenses and strengthen the peace
began two years ago when we requested a major increase in the defense program.
Since then the amount of those increases we first proposed has been reduced by
half through improvements in management and procurement and other savings. The
budget request that is now before the Congress has been trimmed to the limits of
safety. Further deep cuts cannot be made without seriously endangering the
security of the nation. The choice is up to the men and women you have elected
to the Congress - and that means the choice is up to you.

Debate Over Defense
Tonight I want to explain to you what this defense debate is all about, and why
I am convinced that the budget now before the Congress is necessary, responsible
and deserving of your support. And I want to offer hope for the future.

But first let me say what the defense debate is not about. It is not about
spending arithmetic. I know that in the last few weeks you've been bombarded
with numbers and percentages. Some say we need only a 5 percent increase in
defense spending. The so-called alternate budget backed by liberals in the House
of Representatives would lower the figure to 2 to 3 percent, cutting our defense
spending by $163 billion over the next five years. The trouble with all these
numbers is that they tell us little about the kind of defense program America
needs or the benefits in security and freedom that our defense effort buys for
us.

What seems to have been lost in all this debate is the simple truth of how a
defense budget is arrived at. It isn't done by deciding to spend a certain
number of dollars. Those loud voices that are occasionally heard charging that
the Government is trying to solve a security problem by throwing money at it are
nothing more than noise based on ignorance.

We start by considering what must be done to maintain peace and review all the
possible threats against our security. Then a strategy for strengthening peace
and defending against those threats must be agreed upon. And finally our defense
establishment must be evaluated to see what is necessary to protect against any
or all of the potential threats. The cost of achieving these ends is totaled up
and the result is the budget for national defense.

There is no logical way that you can say let's spend X billion dollars less. You
can only say, which part of our defense measures do we believe we can do without
and still have security against all contingencies? Anyone in the Congress who
advocates a percentage or specific dollar cut in defense spending should be made
to say what part of our defenses he would eliminate, and he should be candid
enough to acknowledge that his cuts mean cutting our commitments to allies or
inviting greater risk or both.

U.S. Defense Policy
The defense policy of the United States is based on a simple premise: The United
States does not start fights. We will never be an aggressor. We maintain our
strength in order to deter and defend against aggression - to preserve freedom
and peace.

Since the dawn of the atomic age, we have sought to reduce the risk of war by
maintaining a strong deterrent and by seeking genuine arms control. Deterrence
means simply this: Making sure any adversary who thinks about attacking the
United States or our allies or our vital interests concludes that the risks to
him outweigh any potential gains. Once he understands that, he won't attack. We
maintain the peace through our strength; weakness only invites aggression.

This strategy of deterrence has not changed. It still works. But what it takes
to maintain deterrence has changed. It took one kind of military force to deter
an attack when we had far more nuclear weapons than any other power; it takes
another kind now that the Soviets, for example, have enough accurate and
powerful nuclear weapons to destroy virtually all of our missiles on the ground.
Now this is not to say that the Soviet Union is planning to make war on us. Nor
do I believe a war is inevitable - quite the contrary. But what must be
recognized is that our security is based on being prepared to meet all threats.

There was a time when we depended on coastal forts and artillery batteries
because, with the weaponry of that day, any attack would have had to come by
sea. Well, this is a different world and our defenses must be based on
recognition and awareness of the weaponry possessed by other nations in the
nuclear age.

We can't afford to believe that we will never be threatened. There have been two
world wars in my lifetime. We didn't start them and, indeed, did everything we
could to avoid being drawn into them. But we were ill-prepared for both - had we
been better prepared, peace might have been preserved.

The Soviet Buildup
For 20 years, the Soviet Union has been accumulating enormous military might.
They didn't stop when their forces exceeded all requirements of a legitimate
defensive capability. And they haven't stopped now.

During the past decade and a half, the Soviets have built up a massive arsenal
of new strategic nuclear weapons - weapons that can strike directly at the
United States.

As an example, the United States introduced its last new intercontinental
ballistic missile, the Minuteman III, in 1969, and we are now dismantling our
even older Titan missiles. But what has the Soviet Union done in these
intervening years? Well, since 1969, the Soviet Union has built five new classes
of ICBM's, and upgraded these eight times. As a result, their missiles are much
more powerful and accurate than they were several years ago and they continue to
develop more, while ours are increasingly obsolete.

The same thing has happened in other areas. Over the same period, the Soviet
Union built four new classes of submarine-launched ballistic missiles and over
60 new missile submarines. We built two new types of submarine missiles and
actually withdrew 10 submarines from strategic missions. The Soviet Union built
over 200 new Backfire bombers, and their brand new Blackjack bomber is now under
development. We haven't built a new long-range bomber since our B-52's were
deployed about a quarter of a century ago, and we've already retired several
hundred of those because of old age. Indeed, despite what many people think, our
strategic forces only cost about 15 percent of the defense budget.

Another example of what's happened: In 1978, the Soviets had 600
intermediate-range nuclear missiles based on land and were beginning to add the
SS-20 - a new, highly accurate mobile missile, with three warheads. We had none.
Since then the Soviets have strengthened their lead. By the end of 1979, when
Soviet leader Brezhnev declared ''a balance now exists,'' the Soviets had over
800 warheads. We still had none. A year ago this month, Mr. Brezhnev pledged a
moratorium, or freeze, on SS-20 deployment. But by last August, their 800
warheads had become more than 1,200. We till had none. Some freeze. At this time
Soviet Defense Minister Ustinov announced ''approximate parity of forces
continues to exist.'' But the Soviets are still adding an average of three new
warheads a week, and now have 1,300. These warheads can reach their targets in a
matter of a few minutes. We still have none. So far, it seems that the Soviet
definition of parity is a box score of 1,300 to nothing, in their favor.

So, together with our NATO allies, we decided in 1979 to deploy new weapons,
beginning this year, as a deterrent to their SS-20's and as an incentive to the
Soviet Union to meet us in serious arms control negotiations. We will begin that
deployment late this year. At the same time, however, we are willing to cancel
our program if the Soviets will dismantle theirs. This is what we have called a
zerozero plan. The Soviets are now at the negotiating table - and I think it's
fair to say that without our planned deployments, they wouldn't be there.

Conventional Forces
Now let's consider conventional forces. Since 1974, the United States has
produced 3,050 tactical combat aircraft. By contrast, the Soviet Union has
produced twice as many. When we look at attack submarines, the United States has
produced 27, while the Soviet Union has produced 61. For armored vehicles
including tanks, we have produced 11,200. The Soviet Union has produced 54,000,
nearly 5 to 1 in their favor. Finally, with artillery, we have produced 950
artillery and rocket launchers while the Soviets have produced more than 13,000,
a staggering 14-to-1 ratio.

There was a time when we were able to offset superior Soviet numbers with higher
quality. But today they are building weapons as sophisticated and modern as our
own.

As the Soviets have increased their military power, they have been emboldened to
extend that power. They are spreading their military influence in ways that can
directly challenge our vital interests and those of our allies. The following
aerial photographs, most of them secret until now, illustrate this point in a
crucial area very close to home - Central America and the Caribbean Basin. They
are not dramatic photographs but I think they help give you a better
understanding of what I'm talking about.

This Soviet intelligence collection facility less than 100 miles from our coast
is the largest of its kind in the world. The acres and acres of antenna fields
and intelligence monitors are targeted on key U.S. military installations and
sensitive activities. The installation, in Lourdes, Cuba, is manned by 1,500
Soviet technicians, and the satellite ground station allows instant
communications with Moscow. This 28-square mile facility has grown by more than
60 percent in size and capability during the past decade.

In western Cuba, we see this military airfield and its complement of modern
Soviet-built MIG-23 aircraft. The Soviet Union uses this Cuban airfield for its
own long-range reconnaissance missions, and earlier this month two modern Soviet
antisubmarine warfare aircraft began operating from it. During the past two
years, the level of Soviet arms exports to Cuba can only be compared to the
levels reached during the Cuban missile crisis 20 years ago.

This third photo, which is the only one in this series that has been previously
made public, shows Soviet military hardware that has made its way to Central
America. This airfield with its MI-8 helicopters, antiaircraft guns and
protected fighter sites is one of a number of military facilities in Nicaragua
which has received Soviet equipment funneled through Cuba and reflects the
massive military build-up going on in that country.

On the small island of Grenada, at the southern end of the Caribbean chain, the
Cubans, with Soviet financing and backing, are in the process of building an
airfield with a 10,000-foot runway.  Grenada doesn't even have an air force. Who
is it intended for? The Caribbean is a very important passageway for our
international commerce and military lines of communication. More than half of
all American oil imports now pass through the Caribbean. The rapid build-up of
Grenada's military potential is unrelated to any conceivable threat to this
island country of under 110,000 people, and totally at odds with the pattern of
other eastern Caribbean States, most of which are unarmed. The Soviet-Cuban
militarization of Grenada, in short, can only be seen as power projection into
the region, and it is in this important economic and strategic area that we are
trying to help the governments of El Salvador, Costa Rica, Honduras and others
in their struggles for democracy against guerrillas supported through Cuba and
Nicaragua.

These pictures only tell a small part of the story. I wish I could show you more
without compromising our most sensitive intelligence sources and methods. But
the Soviet Union is also supporting Cuban military forces in Angola and
Ethiopia. They have bases in Ethiopia and South Yemen near the Persian Gulf
oilfields. They have taken over the port that we built at Cam Ranh Bay in
Vietnam, and now, for the first time in history, the Soviet Navy is a force to
be reckoned with in the South Pacific.

Some people may still ask: Would the Soviets ever use their formidable military
power? Well, again, can we afford to believe they won't? There is Afghanistan,
and in Poland, the Soviets denied the will of the people and, in so doing,
demonstrated to the world how their military power could also be used to
intimidate.

The final fact is that the Soviet Union is acquiring what can only be considered
an offensive military force. They have continued to build far more
intercontinental ballistic missiles than they could possibly need simply to
deter an attack. Their conventional forces are trained and equipped not so much
to defend against an attack as they are to permit sudden, surprise offensives of
their own.

Our NATO allies have assumed a great defense burden, including the military
draft in most countries. We are working with them and our other friends around
the world to do more. Our defensive strategy means we need military forces that
can move very quickly - forces that are trained and ready to respond to any
emergency.

Every item in our defense program - our ships, our tanks, our planes, our funds
for training and spare parts - is intended for one all-important purpose - to
keep the peace. Unfortunately, a decade of neglecting our military forces had
called into question our ability to do that.

Meeting a Crisis
When I took office in January 1981, I was appalled by what I found: American
planes that couldn't fly and American ships that couldn't sail for lack of spare
parts and trained personnel and insufficient fuel and ammunition for essential
training. The inevitable result of all this was poor morale in our armed forces,
difficulty in recruiting the brightest young Americans to wear the uniform and
difficulty in convincing our most experienced military personnel to stay on.

There was a real question, then, about how well we could meet a crisis. And it
was obvious that we had to begin a major modernization program to insure we
could deter aggression and preserve the peace in the years ahead.

We had to move immediately to improve the basic readiness and staying power of
our conventional forces, so they could meet - and therefore help deter - a
crisis. We had to make up for lost years of investment by moving forward with a
long-term plan to prepare our forces to counter the military capabilities our
adversaries were developing for the future.

I know that all of you want peace and so do I. I know too that many of you
seriously believe that a nuclear freeze would further the cause of peace. But a
freeze now would make us less, not more, secure and would raise, not reduce, the
risks of war. It would be largely unverifiable and would seriously undercut our
negotiations on arms reduction. It would reward the Soviets for their massive
military buildup while preventing us from modernizing our aging and increasingly
vulnerable forces. With their present margin of superiority, why should they
agree to arms reductions knowing that we were prohibited from catching up?

Believe me, it wasn't pleasant for someone who had come to Washington determined
to reduce Government spending, but we had to move forward with the task of
repairing our defenses or we would lose our ability to deter conflict now and in
the future. We had to demonstrate to any adversary that aggression could not
succeed and that the only real solution was substantial, equitable and
effectively verifiable arms reduction - the kind we're working for right now in
Geneva.

Thanks to your strong support, and bipartisan support from the Congress, we
began to turn things round. Already we are seeing some very encouraging results.
Quality recruitment and retention are up, dramatically - more high school
graduates are choosing military careers and more experienced career personnel
are choosing to stay.  Our men and women in unform at last are getting the tools
and training they need to do their jobs.

Ask around today, especially among our young people, and I think you'll find a
whole new attitude toward serving their country. This reflects more than just
better pay, equipment and leadership. You the American people have sent a signal
to these young people that it is once again an honor to wear the uniform. That's
not something you measure in a budget, but it is a very real part of our
nation's strength.

It will take us longer to build the kind of equipment we need to keep peace in
the future, but we've made a good start.  We haven't built a new long-range
bomber for 21 years. Now we're building the B-1. We hadn't launched one new
strategic submarine for 17 years. Now, we're building one Trident submarine a
year. Our land-based missiles are increasingly threatened by the many huge, new
Soviet ICBM's. We are determining how to solve that problem. At the same time,
we are working in the Start and I.N.F. negotiations, with the goal of achieving
deep reductions in the strategic and intermediate nuclear arsenals of both
sides.

We have also begun the long-needed modernization of our conventional forces. The
Army is getting its first new tank in 20 years. The Air Force is modernizing. We
are rebuilding our Navy, which shrank from about 1,000 ships in the late 1960's
to 453 ships during the 1970's. Our nation needs a superior Navy to support our
military forces and vital interests overseas. We are now on the road to
achieving a 600-ship Navy and increasing the amphibious capabilities of our
marines, who are now serving the cause of peace in Lebanon. And we are building
a real capability to assist our friends in the vitally important Indian Ocean
and Persian Gulf region.

This adds up to a major effort, and it is not cheap. It comes at a time when
there are many other pressures on our budget and when the American people have
already had to make major sacrifices during the recession. But we must not be
misled by those who would make defense once again the scapegoat of the Federal
budget.

The Taxpayer's Dollar

The fact is that in the past few decades we have seen a dramatic shift in how we
spend the taxpayer's dollar. Back in 1955, payments to individuals took up only
about 20 percent of the Federal budget.  For nearly three decades, these
payments steadily increased and this year will account for 49 percent of the
budget. By contrast, in 1955, defense took up more than half of the Federal
budget. By 1980, this spending had fallen to a low of 23 percent. Even with the
increase that I am requesting this year, defense will still amount to only 28
percent of the budget.

The calls for cutting back the defense budget come in nice simple arithmetic.
They're the same kind of talk that led the democracies to neglect their defenses
in the 1930's and invited the tragedy of World War II. We must not let that grim
chapter of history repeat itself through apathy or neglect.

This is why I'm speaking to you tonight, to urge you to tell your Senators and
Congressmen that you know we must continue to restore our military strength. If
we stop in midstream, we will send a signal of decline, of lessened will to
friends and adversaries alike. Free people must voluntarily through open debate
and democratic means meet the challenge that totalitarians pose by compulsion.
It's up to us in our time to choose and choose wisely between the hard but
necessary task of preserving peace and freedom and the temptation to ignore our
duty and blindly hope for the best while the enemies of freedom grow stronger
day by day.

The solution is well within our grasp but to reach it there is simply no
alternative but to continue this year in this budget to provide the resources we
need to preserve the peace and guarantee our freedom.

The Nuclear Threat
Now, thus far tonight I have shared with you my thoughts on the problems of
national security we must face together. My predecessors in the Oval Office have
appeared before you on other occasions to describe the threat posed by Soviet
power and have proposed steps to address that threat. But since the advent of
nuclear weapons, those steps have been increasingly directed toward deterrence
of aggression through the promise of retaliation. This approach to stability
through offensive threat has worked. We and our allies have succeederd in
preventing nuclear war for more than three decades. In recent months, however,
my advisers, including in particular the Joint Chiefs of Staff, have underscored
the necessity to break out of a future that relies solely on offensive
retaliation for our security.

Over the course of these discussions, I have become more and more deeply
convinced that the human spirit must be capable of rising above dealing with
other nations and human beings by threatening their existence. Feeling this way,
I believe we must throroughly examine every opportunity for reducing tensions
and for introducing greater stability into the strategic calculus on both sides.
One of the most important contributions we can make is, of course, to lower the
level of all arms, and particularly nuclear arms. We are engaged right now in
several negotiations with the Soviet Union to bring about a mutual reduction of
weapons. I will report to you a week from tomorrow my thoughts on that score.
But let me just say I am totally committed to this course.

If the Soviet Union will join with us in our effort to achieve major arms
reduction we will have succeeded in stabilizing the nuclear balance.
Nevertheless it will still be necessary to rely on the specter of retaliation -
on mutual threat, and that is a sad commentary on the human condition.

Wouldn't it be better to save lives than to avenge them? Are we not capable of
demonstrating our peaceful intentions by applying all our abilities and our
ingenuity to achieving a truly lasting stability? I think we are - indeed, we
must!

After careful consultation with my advisers, including the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, I believe there is a way. Let me share with you a vision of the future
which offers hope. It is that we embark on a progam to counter the awesome
Soviet missile threat with measures that are defensive. Let us turn to the very
strengths in technology that spawned our great industrial base and that have
given us the quality of life we enjoy today.

What if free people could live secure in the knowledge that their security did
not rest upon the threat of instant U.S. retaliation to deter a Soviet attack;
that we could intercept and destroy strategic ballistic missiles before they
reached our own soil or that of our allies?

I know this is a formidable technical task, one that may not be accomplished
before the end of this century. Yet, current technology has attained a level of
sophistication where it is reasonable for us to begin this effort. It will take
years, probably decades, of effort on many fronts. There will be failures and
setbacks just as there will be successes and breakthroughs. And as we proceed we
must remain constant in preserving the nuclear deterrent and maintaining a solid
capability for flexible response. But isn't worth every investment necesary to
free the world from the threat of nuclear war? We know it is!

In the meantime, we will continue to pursue real reductions in nuclear arms,
negotiating from a position of strength that can be insured only by modernizing
our strategic forces. At the same time, we must take steps to reduce the risk of
a conventional military conflict escalating to nuclear war by improving our
nonnuclear capabilities. America does possess - now -the technologies to attain
very significant improvements in the effectiveness of our conventional,
nonnuclear forces. Proceeding boldly with these new technologies, we can
significantly reduce any incentive that the Soviet Union may have to threaten
attack against the United States or its allies.

Honoring Commitments

As we pursue our goal of defensive technologies, we recognize that our allies
rely upon our strategic offensive power to deter attacks against them. Their
vital interests and ours are inextricably linked - their safety and ours are
one. And no change in technology can or will alter that reality. We must and
shall continue to honor our commitments.

I clearly recognize that defensive systems have limitations and raise certain
problems and ambiguities. If paired with offensive systems, they can be viewed
as fostering an aggressive policy and no one wants that.

But with these considerations firmly in mind, I call upon the scientific
community in our country, those who gave us nuclear weapons to turn their great
talents now to the cause of mankind and world peace: to give us the means of
rendering these nuclear weapons impotent and obsolete.

Tonight, consistent with our obligations under the ABM Treaty and recognizing
the need for closer consultation with our allies, I am taking an important first
step. I am directing a comprehensive and intensive effort to define a long-term
research and development program to begin to achieve our ultimate goal of
eliminating the threat posed by strategic nuclear missiles. This could pave the
way for arms control measures to eliminate the weapons themselves. We seek
neither military superiority nor political advantage. Our only purpose - one all
people share - is to search for ways to reduce the danger of nuclear war.

My fellow Americans, tonight we are launching an effort which holds the promise
of changing the course of human history. There will be risks, and results take
time. But I believe we can do it. As we cross this threshold, I ask for your
prayers and your support. Thank you, good night and God bless you.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of missile site in Cuba

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 24, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
COURTS IN CONTEMPT

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 820 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, March 23


An 80-year-old Federal judge in Alexandria, Va.  Oren R. Lewis, has just been
sternly criticized in two appellate decisions. His errors were ''glaring,'' the
Court of Appeals said; in one case he had ''predetermined the outcome.''

Newspapers published the story with a certain relish, no doubt because Oren
Lewis has a long-standing reputation as an abusive and intolerant judge.
''Roarin' Oren,'' they call him.

But there is more to it than a funny story about a crusty old judicial tyrant.
Judge Lewis played a part in a case that did more damage to the First Amendment
than any other in modern times. The Supreme Court of the United States magnified
his abuses by the way it handled the case. The whole affair was an ugly example
of the damage judges can do when they use their great power without respect for
the process of law.

The case was that of Frank Snepp, the former C.I.A. agent whose book, ''Decent
Interval,'' criticized the performance of U.S.  officials in the last days in
Vietnam. The Government sued him, claiming that he had violated a promise not to
publish anything - classified or not - without prior official approval.

Judge Lewis rejected Mr. Snepp's request for a jury trial and tried the case
himself. His bias in favor of the Government was unconcealed. More than 20 times
he stopped witnesses from answering defense questions by ''sustaining''
objections when Government lawyers had made none.

The only evidence offered to support the claim that publication of ''Decent
Interval'' had hurt the national security came from Adm.  Stansfield Turner,
then Director of Central Intelligence. He testified that it and other
''incidents'' had diminished ''worldwide confidence in our ability.'' When Mr.
Snepp's lawyer asked whether any source had stopped cooperating with the C.I.A.
specifically because of this book, Judge Lewis would not allow Admiral Turner to
answer.

The judge made findings against Mr. Snepp beyond what the Government had
alleged. Although Mr. Snepp testified that he had gone to a publisher only after
fruitless efforts to get an internal C.I.A. investigation of the mishandling of
the evacuation from Vietnam, Judge Lewis found that he had published the book
not ''to let the American public know all of these things'' but ''for money.''
His strongest critics in the C.I.A. would not have made that absurd charge.

As a remedy, Judge Lewis gave the Government a ''constructive trust'' on Mr.
Snepp's earnings from the book.  What that meant was that every penny he got
from it would go to the Government.  The Court of Appeals disagreed with that
harsh remedy. If Mr.  Snepp's promise to clear manuscripts was a contract, it
said, the most the Government could get was damages - and on that he was
entitled to a jury trial.

The case then went to the Supreme Court, which took an extraordinary judicial
short cut. Acting on the petitions for review without briefs or argument, it set
aside the Court of Appeal's decision and re-imposed the constructive trust
remedy. Moreover, the unsigned opinion for a six-three majority repeated as
Gospel several of Judge Lewis' findings of ''fact.'' No doubt his hateful
comments set the climate for the Supreme Court's curt disposition of the case.

The whole process was a travesty of justice. Mr. Snepp had a trial before an
antagonistic judge. The Court of Appeals seemed to correct that when it ordered
a new trial before a jury. But the Supreme Court reinstated the trial judge's
decision without giving anyone a chance to challenge the way he reached it - or
to argue the law.

For Frank Snepp, the result was a personal disaster. A man who had wanted to do
something about the cruel way he thought we had treated our friends in Vietnam
found himself branded a betrayer. His gross income for three years, $140,000,
was taken from him. He is still hopelessly in debt, laboring under an unjust
stigma, crippled in his ability to write or speak.

But for the country the result was far worse. The case established the precedent
that former Government officials can be prevented from publishing anything about
their work, secret or not, without prior approval. It is an Official Secrets
Act: one not approved by Congress but fashioned by judges in a hasty and
ill-informed way.

The precedent seemed at first to be limited to intelligence agents. But now
President Reagan has extended it throughout Government.  Anyone with access to
''sensitive compartmented information'' - and that means all high-ranking
officials in foreign and national security affairs - must promise to clear
writings and speeches for the rest of their lives. And agencies are free to
impose that draconian rule on all who see ordinary classified information.

Judges play a crucial role in the American system safeguarding our freedom. I
happen to revere the judicial process. But when it is subverted by judges
themselves, the dangers are great.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW GROUP OF CHILDREN LEAVE VIETNAM

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Part of a group of 79 children of mixed Vietnamese-American parentage
and 67 of their relatives leaving a jetliner in Bangkok after the flight from
Vietnam. It is the largest group of children to be allowed to leave the country
for their fathers' homes in the United States. United Press International

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Walden Pell, 80, Dies; Priest and Headmaster

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 259 words


The Rev. Walden Pell 2d, the first headmaster of St. Andrew's School,
Middletown, Del., died of cancer Wednesday at his home in Elkton, Md., after a
brief illness. He was 80 years old.

Mr. Pell was headmaster of St. Andrew's from 1930 to 1957. He was ordained a
deacon of the Protestant Episcopal Church in 1927 and a priest in 1928. He
served at St. Peter's Church, Singapore, from 1958 to 1960; the
Anglican-Episcopal congregations of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos from 1961 to 1963
and the Augustine Parish, Chesapeake City, Md., from 1963 to 1968.

Son of the Mr. and Mrs. Francis Livingston Pell and grandson of the Dr. and Mrs.
Stuyvesant Fish Morris, he was a descendant of Sir John Pell, who transferred
6,000 acres for the founding of the French Huegenot City of New Rochelle, N.Y.

Mr. Pell was the author, with Powel Dawley, of ''The Religion of the Prayer
Book'' and compiler of ''A History of St. Andrew's School.''

Mr. Pell was a graduate of St. Mark's School and attended Princeton University
from 1920 to 1923. He was a graduate of Oxford University, England, where he was
a Rhodes Scholar in 1926, and of Union Theological Seminary, Columbia
University, in 1959.

Mr. Pell is survived by a son, Stuyvesant, of Princeton. N.J., and two
daughters, Melissa Thomson of South Britain, Conn., and Mary Leigh Whitmer of
Fairfield. Conn.; eight grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. He also
leaves a brother, Francis L. Jr., of Chestnut Hill, Pa.

Funeral services will be held at 2:30 P.M., Sunday, at the St.  Andrew's School
chapel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'THE MISSISSIPPI,' NEW SERIES, STARTS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 875 words


TONIGHT at 10, CBS starts a weekly series called ''The Mississippi.'' The star
is Ralph Waite, who has had the role of the father on ''The Waltons'' for the
better part of a decade. This new project is a Ralph Waite Production, and the
actor is also one of the supervising producers.

Mr. Waite is now playing Ben Walker, a nationally known lawyer, who gets fed up
with urban high life and buys a sternwheel towboat to sail up and down the
Mississippi River. Accompanying Walker, for reasons that are never made too
clear, are Stella (Linda G. Miller), his mildly wisecracking, white protegee,
and Lafayette (Lafe) Tate, played by Stan Shaw, a black Vietnam veteran who is
street-smart and strong. Ben is the kind of guy who gets involved in cases
because they interest him. Money has nothing to do with it. Lafe asks,
pointedly, ''Why don't you ever defend rich people?''

This evening, Ben is approached by a very young lawyer, who needs help in
defending a man accused of killing the daughter of one of the community's more
powerful citizens. It seems a lot of people are out to get this particular man
because he is a troublemaker. He is an evironmentalist, a social activist and an
antipolluter. Needless to say, Ben likes the guy and takes the case. In the end,
he gets to remind the police chief, ''Your job is to protect the people of this
community, even the so-called freaks.'' Perhaps old-fashioned liberalism is due
for a revival. Mr. Waite makes a solid salesman.

Shakespeare Play Go to Sunday Afternoon

Public television's scheduling habits are getting curiouser and curiouser. While
old, often worn-out movies are increasingly on display, major productions - the
kind that gave public television a quality reputation -are being given odd
runarounds. The impact of Wagner's ''Ring'' cycle has been considerably
diminished by spreading out the productions over four months in sporadic
presentations. And now, ''The Shakespeare Plays,'' a major undertaking, which
has always been given a prime-time evening slot, is being shunted to 1 o'clock
on Sunday afternoons for several weeks.

Involved in this development are the War of the Roses history cycle. It seems
the three parts of ''Henry VI'' will be shown in truncated segments beginning
this Sunday afternoon and continuing weekly through May 1. The cycle will then
end May 2, a Monday, in the series' normal 8 P.M. time slot, with ''Richard
III.'' As there has already been a famous Laurence Oliver film version of
''Richard III,'' this play is presumably considered easier to digest for public
television's audience.

In any event, the cycle promises to be splendid. Jane Howell, the director,
worked for two years on the project. All the plays have been staged on a single
set, and the approximately 200 speaking roles have been filled by a repertory
company of some 30 actors, who had the benefit of extensive rehearsal time.
These are Shakespeare's earliest works. They are challenging and full of
surprises. Dumping them in terms of scheduling amounts to something like
irreponsibility.

'Color Consciousnness' Among Blacks Discussed

One of the weekend's most provocative presentations is being carried on Channel
31 this Sunday at 8. ''Color,'' written by Denise Oliver, is an original
half-hour video drama by Warrington Hudlin, a member of the Black Film Makers
Foundation and a video documentarian whose previous work has included the widely
praised ''Street Corner Stories'' and ''Black at Yale.'' Mr. Hudlin is not
concerned with what he calls ''the conservative notion of 'positive and negative
images' in the media.'' He sees himself coming from the black tradition of
telling it like it is.

In ''Color,'' he tackles ''color consciousness'' among blacks. He uses the form
of interviews with two black women. Both are relatively successful. Neither is
married. One's skin is dark, the other's relatively light, but each has had
bitter experiences, not only with the white world, but also within her own
community, where a partiality to lighter tones can still be found.

Mr. Hudlin's video treatment is as fierce and unblinking as Miss Oliver's
script. The camera is almost mercilessly intent as the two women review their
lives and talk of their insecurities. There are brief flashbacks to illustrate
key points, and these are also kept unsparingly to the point. The subject is
difficult and painful. The women, as played by Pat Matthews and Linda Thomas
Wright, are fascinating. Mr. Hudlin has succeeded once again in going, vividly
and memorably, beyond the ordinary.

'Thorn Birds' on ABC

Without doubt, the weekend's big production, if only in terms of money spent
($20 million) and publicity generated, is ABC's ''Thorn Birds,'' beginning
Sunday at 8 P.M. on Channel 7, and continuing, for a total of 10 hours, over the
next three evenings. Based on Colleen McCullough's best-selling novel, this is
the story, set mostly in Australia and sweeping over several decades, of a
priest (Richard Chamberlain), his overriding ambition and his forbidden love for
a woman called Meggie (Rachel Ward). An outstanding cast includes Barbara
Stanwyck, Jean Simmons and Christopher Plummer. (A detailed review appears in
Sunday's Arts and Leisure section.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ralph Waite

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
French Aide Skeptical Of Sihanouk-Led Group

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 129 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 26


Foreign Minister Claude Cheysson of France said today that the formation of an
anti-Vietnamese Cambodian coalition under Prince Norodom Sihanouk had done
nothing to end the conflict in Cambodia.

He condemned Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia, but said the coalition, backed by
the non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia, had made no progress toward peace.

He said at a news conference: ''We have not welcomed the setting up of that
coalition. We do not think it has meant any progress in the search for a global
settlement.''

Mr. Cheysson, who flies to Hanoi Sunday, restated France's position at a
conference in Bangkok this week of foreign ministers from European Economic
Community and Southeast Asian nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE COMPANY IT KEEPS PUTS U.S. ON THE SPOT ONCE AGAIN

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The capital continues to be caught up in the moral dilemma over El Salvador:
Should the United States provide political, economic and military support to a
leadership that is threatened by a Communist-backed insurgency, but whose record
in legal and civil rights practices is, in Secretary of State George P. Shultz's
words, ''indefensible''?

The specific current issue, unresolved as the week ended, was whether Congress
would approve another $60 million in military aid to be diverted to El Salvador,
adding to the $1 billion in economic and military assistance already funneled
there over the last several years. The arguments raised are similar to those
heard in the past about American backing for various regimes in South Vietnam,
for the Franco Government of Spain, for the military rulers of South Korea, and
for dozens of other dictatorships whose claim to American friendship was based
primarily on their opposition to Communism.

As the Senate Appropriations subcommittee took testimony last week, it was
evident that history teaches different lessons. Senator Daniel K. Inouye,
Democrat of Hawaii, who announced his decision no longer to support open-ended
funding for El Salvador, warned Mr. Shultz that by aiding the regime in El
Salvador because it was anti-Communist, the United States was repeating the
mistakes of the 1950's when it supported Fulgencio Batista, the Cuban dictator.

''History must have shown us that we have played a part in the creation of Fidel
Castro,'' Senator Inouye said. ''We were well aware of the utter corruption of
Batista. Because he said he was against Communism we supported him throughout. I
am afraid that we may be creating another Castro (in El Salvador). We are
inviting revolution there. I think it is time for us to support those who are
being oppressed, those who are victims of violence, those who are being
slaughtered.''

On the other side, Senator John C. Stennis, the conservative Mississippi
Democrat and a veteran of the lengthy debates in Congress over Vietnam in the
1960's and 1970's, said the lessons of that war led him to believe that more
force should be applied in El Salvador, that a blockade of Cuba, for instance,
should be considered to block the flow of arms to El Salvador. Senator Dennis
DeConcini, a conservative Democrat from Arizona, also cited the lessons of the
past to urge an all-out American military involvement in the region, warning
that piecemeal aid to El Salvador would only be wasted.

The Reagan Administration's approach to this kind of dilemma has been ambiguous
from the start. It has generally been critical of cutting off aid to friendly
nations for human rights reasons, on the ground that no matter how bad the
record may be in a country such as El Salvador it would be considerably worse
under a Communist totalitarian regime. Moreover, in Central America, the Reagan
Administration has argued that national security reasons impel the United States
to prevent Communist takeovers. The so-called domino theory, first put forth by
President Eisenhower in the 1950's to justify American involvement in Southeast
Asia, is very much alive today in Central America.

The Administration repeatedly contends that Nicaragua is a quasi-Communist
state, that tiny Grenada has fallen to the Marxists, and that there are
Cuban-backed threats in Honduras and Guatemala.  The United States has stepped
up military aid to these countries, and may or may not be involved with
anti-Sandinist forces entering Nicaragua from Honduras. Officially Washington
claims the problems in Nicaragua are of Nicaraguan origin, but there are various
reports of backing by the Central Intelligence Agency for Nicaraguan exiles
trying to regain a foothold.

In defense of its human rights policies, the Administration says it has tried to
quietly bring about reforms in friendly countries.  Mr.Shultz argues, as have
other American officials in other times and places, that only by continuing to
provide aid can the United States moderate repressive actions in a country such
as El Salvador.

The Salvador situation is unusual, however, because of the case of the four
American churchwomen - three of them nuns - who were murdered on a lonely road
near San Salvador in December 1980. The Salvadoran military perpetrators of the
crime have allegedly been identified and they are in custody, but the Salvadoran
judiciary has repeatedly delayed bringing them to trial. The case of the nuns
has aroused more concern among Americans than the thousands of Salvadorans who
have been murdered in recent years. And it has made a moral hostage of any
discussion of the Salvadoran aid question.

''You cannot get me to sit here and defend what has happened under the judicial
system of El Salvador,'' Mr. Shultz told the committee.  ''I won't do it. I
don't do it. I don't think it is defensible.'' ''If in the end,'' he declared,
''they don't clean up this act, the support is going to dry up and they've been
told that.''

Mr. Shultz's warning hardly satisfied Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of
Vermont, who feels as strongly on the subject as anyone.  His voice rising in
indignation, he said to Mr. Shultz that ''it is an open and shut case; El
Salvador is thumbing its nose at us. It is saying, 'Give us a billion dollars
and go to hell.' ''

The Senate Appropriations subcommittee approved the $60 million transfer on the
condition that the Administration takes steps to bring the case to a trial, that
it limits military advisers to the current level of 55, and that it tries to
bring about unconditional negotiations between the opposing sides. The Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, whose legal ability to block the aid transfer is
questionable, cut the total to $30 million, with similar conditions.  The House
Appropriations subcommittee put off action until after the Easter holidays, when
the moral debate is likely to be just as agonizing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Schultz photo of Nicaraguan soldiers
patrolling border

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE SILENT POWER OF THE N.S.A.

BYLINE: By David Burnham

SECTION: Section 6; Page 60, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4220 words


David Burnham is a reporter in The Times's Washington bureau. This article is
adapted from Mr. Burnham's book ''The Rise of the Computer State,'' to be
published by Random House in May.

A Federal Court of Appeals recently ruled that the largest and most secretive
intelligence agency of the United States, the National Security Agency, may
lawfully intercept the overseas communications of Americans even if it has no
reason to believe they are engaged in illegal activities. The ruling, which also
allows summaries of these conversations to be sent to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, significantly broadens the already generous authority of the
N.S.A.  to keep track of American citizens.

The decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
involves the Government surveillance of Abdeen Jabara, a Michigan-born lawyer
who for many years has represented Arab-American citizens and alien residents,
and reverses a 1979 ruling that the N.S.A.'s acquisition of Jabara's overseas
messages violated his Fourth Amendment right to be free of ''unreasonable
searches and seizures.'' Even while refusing the plaintiff's request for
reconsideration, the Court curiously acknowledged the far-reaching nature of the
case, recognizing that the N.S.A.'s interception of overseas telecommunications
and their dissemination to ''other Federal agencies has great potential for
abuse.'' The Court, however, held that the problem was ''a policy matter that
lies in the domain of the executive or legislative branch of our Government.''

The N.S.A. is much more than a massive computerized funnel that collects,
channels and sorts information for the President and such organizations as the
Central Intelligence Agency and F.B.I. The National Security Agency, an arm of
the Defense Department but under the direct command of the Director of Central
Intelligence, is an electronic spying operation, and its leverage is based on a
massive bank of what are believed to be the largest and most advanced computers
now available to any bureaucracy in the world: computers to break codes, direct
spy satellites, intercept electronic messages, recog-
nize target words in spoken communications and store, organize and index all of
it.

Over the years, this virtually unknown Federal agency has repeatedly sought to
enlarge its power without consulting the civilian officials who theoretically
direct the Government, while it also has sought to influence the operation and
development of all civilian communications networks. Indeed, under Vice Adm.
Bobby Ray Inman, N.S.A. director from 1977 to 1981, the agency received an
enlarged Presidential mandate to involve itself in communications issues, and
successfully persuaded private corporations and institutions to cooperate with
it.

Yet over the three decades since the N.S.A. was created by a classified
executive order signed by President Truman in 1952, neither the Congress nor any
President has publicly shown much interest in grappling with the far-reaching
legal conflicts surrounding the operation of this extraordinarily powerful and
clandestine agency. A Senate committee on intelligence, warning that the
N.S.A.'s capabilities impinged on crucial issues of privacy, once urged that
Congress or the courts develop a legislative or judicial framework to control
the agency's activities. In a nation whose Constitution demands an open
Government operating according to precise rules of fairness, the N.S.A. remains
an unexamined entity.  With the increasing computerization of society, the
conflicts it presents become more important.  The power of the N.S.A., whose
annual budget and staff are believed to exceed those of either the F.B.I. or the
C.I.A., is enhanced by its unique legal status within the Federal Government.
Unlike the Agriculture Department, the Postal Service or even the C.I.A., the
N.S.A. has no specific Congressional law defining its responsibilities and
obligations. Instead, the agency, based at Fort George Meade, about 20 miles
northeast of Washington, has operated under a series of Presidential directives.
Because of Congress's failure to draft a law for the agency, because of the
tremendous secrecy surrounding the N.S.A.'s work and because of the highly
technical and thus thwarting character of its equipment, the N.S.A.  is free to
define and pursue its own goals.

Despite the impenetrable secrecy surrounding the agency - no public briefings or
access to its premises is allowed - its mission was first discussed openly in
the 1975 hearings of the Senate Select Committee to Study Government Operations
with Respect to Intelligence Activities. Various aspects of the agency's
responsibilities also have been touched upon in a handful of depositions filed
by the agency in Federal courts, several recent executive orders and a few aging
documents found in the towering stacks of the National Archives.

According to these sources, the N.S.A. has two broad goals, one offensive, one
defensive. First, the agency aggressively monitors international communications
links searching for ''foreign intelligence,'' intercepting electronic messages
as well as signals generated by radar or missile launchings. Second, the agency
prevents foreign penetration of communications links carrying information
bearing on ''national security.''

According to an unpublished analysis by the House Government Operations
Committee, the N.S.A. may have employed 120,000 people in 1976 when
armed-services personnel were included in the official count. (According to a
letter from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, overseas listening posts numbered 2,000.)
In comparison, the F.B.I. had one employee for every six working for the N.S.A.
The House report also estimated that the agency's annual expenditures were as
high as $15 billion.

The Senate select committee's study of the N.S.A., one of the most extensive
independent examinations ever made of the agency, was initiated in the wake of
Watergate and the disclosure of other abuses by Federal intelligence agencies.
During the course of the investigation, its chairman, Senator Frank Church,
repeatedly emphasized his belief that the N.S.A.'s intelligence-gathering
activities were essential to the nation's security. He also stressed that the
equipment used to watch the Russians could just as easily ''monitor the private
communications of Americans.'' If such forces were ever turned against the
country's communications system, Senator Church said, ''no American would have
any privacy left. ... There would be no place to hide.'' Over the years, N.S.A.
surveillance activities have indeed included Americans who were merely stating
their political beliefs. The agency first became involved in this more
questionable kind of surveillance in the early 1960's when either Attorney
General Robert F. Kennedy or the F.B.I. asked it to monitor all telephone calls
between the United States and Cuba. This list of international calls was
significantly enlarged during the Johnson Administrtion as Federal authorities
became concerned that foreign governments might try to influence American
civil-rights leaders. The N.S.A. gradually developed a ''watch list'' of
Americans that included those speaking out against the Vietnam War.

According to the subsequent investigation by the Senate Intelligence Committee,
a total of 1,200 Americans were targeted by the N.S.A. between 1967 and 1973
because of their political activities. The subjects - chosen by the F.B.I., the
Secret Service, the C.I.A. and the Defense Intelligence Agency -included members
of radical groups, celebrities and ordinary citizens. When it appeared that
Congress might learn about the eavesdropping, the surveillance halted.

The Senate intelligence committee also discovered a second illegal surveillance
program, under which the N.S.A., and its military predecessors, examined most of
the telegrams entering or leaving the country between 1945 and 1975. The program
was abruptly halted in May 1975, a date coinciding with the Senate committee's
first expression of interest in it.

The records obtained by the committee indicate that from the project's earliest
stages, both Government officials and corporate executives understood that the
surveillance flatly violated a Federal law against intercepting or divulging
telegrams. Certainly, they were aware that such interception violated the Fourth
Amendment, guaranteeing against unreasonable searches and seizures, which also
holds that a court warrant can be issued only when there is probable cause to
believe a crime has been committed.

Using the information thus gathered, the N.S.A. between 1952 and 1974 developed
files on approximately 75,000 Americans, some of whom undoubtedly threatened the
nation's security. However, the agency also developed files on civil-rights and
antiwar activists, Congressmen and other citizens who lawfully questioned
Government policies. For at least 13 of the 22 years the agency was building
these files, the C.I.A. had access to them and used the data in its Operation
Chaos, another computerized and illegal tracking system set up during the
Vietnam War. At its peak, the Chaos files had references to more than 300,000
Americans.

Several months after the hearing, the Senate intelligence committee issued a
report that expressed great concern about both the N.S.A.'s activities and the
failure of Congress and the Federal courts to comprehend them. ''The watch-list
activities and the sophisticated capabilities that they highlight present some
of the most crucial privacy issues now facing this nation,'' the committee
warned. ''Space-age technology has outpaced the law. The secrecy that has
surrounded much of the N.S.A.'s activities and the lack of Congressional
oversight have prevented, in the past, bringing statutes in line with the
N.S.A.'s capabilities. Neither the courts nor Congress have dealt with the
interception of communications using the N.S.A.'s highly sensitive and complex
technology.'' The committee recommended that Congress approve specific
legislation spelling out the precise obligations and limitations of the agency.
With the end of World War II and the start of the cold war, the value of
effective intelligence remained high. In 1952, a special Presidential committee
recommended the establishment of the N.S.A., replacing the four separate
surveillance agencies within the Defense Department, concluding that a unified
effort was essential because electronic surveillance of international
communications ''ranks as our most important single source of intelligence
today.''

The logic of the cold war also dictated that intelligence include not only
secret blueprints for the latest weapon or infiltrating the enemy's ranks with
spies, but also early signs that a blight had hit China's rice crop, indications
that a new oil field had been located in a remote corner of Russia and analysis
of radio traffic at an important Soviet-bloc airport.

The already expansive appetite of American intelligence analysts was further
sharpened by technical advances that were occurring, not entirely by chance, at
the same time. The technology in question was the digital computer, the wondrous
tool diligently developed by American scientists working for such companies as
I.B.M., the RCA Corporation and Sperry Rand, and covertly underwritten in a
major way by the N.S.A. The computers' ability to acquire, organize, store and
retrieve huge amounts of data was an essential factor leading to the agency's
enlarged definition of intelligence.

The importance of the broadest possible intelligence gathering became even more
critical when computer know-how began to spread beyond a technological elite
based primarily in the United States to scientists in many nations. Simply
stated, the spread of advanced computer skills and the related mathematical
concepts meant that governments could reduce the chances that their top-secret
messages would be intercepted and decoded, while at the same time increasing
their ability to collect all kinds of economic and technical intelligence.

As a result of these changes, according to several United States officials, the
intelligence apparatus of the Soviet Union began eavesdropping on millions of
telephone conversations between Washington and New York and several other major
cities in the early 1970's. Because of the unusual sensitivity of the subjects,
however, the Federal Government did not exactly trumpet the news of the Soviet
surveillance.

In 1977, about three years after this surveillance became known to the United
States Government, the Carter Administration formally announced that the
Russians were conducting wholesale eavesdropping from at least four locations in
three different cities, New York, Washington and San Francisco. The targets of
real concern were the Government, defense contractors and other large companies
whose activities would contribute to Soviet collection of economic intelligence.
Henceforth, classified information relating to national defense and foreign
relations would be transmitted only by secure means. The Administration proposed
the immediate purchase of an additional 100 ''voice scramblers'' for what is
called the Executive Secure Voice Network. The central switching point for the
network was determined to be the N.S.A., a fact that was unacknowledged by the
Administration.

President Carter's decision immediately broadened the category of information
requiring Government scrutiny and significantly extended the authority of the
N.S.A. Yet no unclassified document defines what kinds of information would be
useful to an adversary. A timetable of the trains running between Washington and
New York could be useful to an enemy spy. Newspaper articles could serve as
source material for intelligence operatives all over the world. Certainly,
prececent had been established in 1971, when the N.S.A. was the lead agency in
the Nixon Administration's attempt to stop newspapers from printing the Pentagon
Papers, the bureaucratic history of the war in Vietnam. After blocking
publication for 15 days, the Supreme Court ruled that the Government had failed
to show why the material should not be published and that ''without compelling
reasons'' prior restraint would be an unreasonable infringement of the freedom
of the press.

Until that time, the Federal Government sought to control and protect only those
military and diplomatic secrets that had been declared confidential, secret or
top secret under a long-established and formally prescribed classification
procedure. But now, President Carter had decided to create a huge new category
of material worthy of Government protection: information that ''would be useful
to an adversary.''

Telephone links in the areas where Soviet spies were known to be listening were
rerouted via underground cable. To further reduce the leakage of the new
category of information, the President directed the N.S.A. to approach large
corporations and other institutions, collect information about their
communications networks and assist them in safeguarding their material.  The
Carter directive sanctioning the N.S.A.'s involvement in the planning,
organization and development of private communications systems not handling
classified secrets was only one of several ways in which the power of the agency
grew. Within the last few years, for example, the N.S.A. has forcefully moved to
control the development and dissemination of inventive approaches intended to
help the individual citizen, corporation or political organization maintain
privacy.

On April 21, 1978, George I. Davida, then professor of electrical engineering
and computer science at the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, received an
order to keep secret all details of his invention, a computer security device.
The N.S.A. informed Davida that under a little-known provision of the patent law
a violation of the order could subject him to up to two years in jail and a
$10,000 fine. The only problem was that Davida already had violated it by
sending details of his invention to the National Science Foundation, one of the
sponsors of his research, and a number of his academic colleagues. On the same
day Davida received his secrecy order, the N.S.A. also obtained one on a patent
application for a voice scrambler that would let radio and telephone users talk
without being overheard. The inventors, Carl R. Nicolai, William M. Raike and
David L. Miller, responded with a public statement, charging that the restraint
appeared to be ''part of a general plan by the N.S.A. to limit the privacy of
the American people. They've been bugging people's phones for years, and now
someone comes along with a device that makes this a little harder to do, and
they oppose this under the guise of national security.''

After the agency's orders were publicized by several newspapers and magazines,
the N.S.A. decided to pull in its horns. Inman, the N.S.A.'s director, told a
House committee that the two orders exemplified ''not a faulty law but
inadequate Government attention to its application.'' He characterized the
agency's handling of the voice-scrambling equipment as a ''well-meaning attempt
to hold the line that had clearly already been passed by.''

A few years before, the director of the National Science Foundation, Richard C.
Atkinson, and Inman had begun privately discussing whether the role of the spy
agency in supervising cryptographic research should be expanded. The precise
outcome of the talks remains murky, but the N.S.A. apparently won the debate.
Today, the National Science Foundation routinely allows the N.S.A. to review any
request for the funding of cryptographic research. The N.S.A.  also has begun
providing financial support for related unclassified civilian research. The
first recipients of such support were two Stanford professors of electrical
engineering, John T. Gill 3d, and Martin E. Hellman, a code expert who for many
years had been sharply critical of the N.S.A.

''Five years ago, I was very much on the opposite side of the fence from
N.S.A.,'' said Hellman. ''I wouldn't say I have been co-opted.  As a result of
them being more friendly and coming part way, I felt I should be more friendly.
I guess I am now the first guinea pig.''

Hellman is not sure why the agency was interested in funding nonclassified
research, and he acknowledges potential problems. ''One of the fears is that
they are trying to buy people. If they support you, then they own you, and you
really are going against them if they ask you not to publish something and you
do.''

There are, of course, many ways to influence men. In early 1979, Inman spoke to
the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association, the first public
speech ever given by a top N.S.A.  official. Speaking in the guarded language of
his profession, Inman noted that the agency's mission could ''no longer remain
entirely in the shadows.'' One reason for this change, he explained, was that
the protection of communications was no longer of interest just to the
Government; it also had become a major concern to private institutions. Because
of this new interest, tensions, which he did not define, had developed between
''the national-security interests of the Government and the
telecommunications-security interests of both the public and private sector.''
The time had come, he said, to begin a dialogue between the N.S.A. and the
academic and industrial worlds.

The result of this dialogue so far has been the recommendation by a special
committee of the American Council on Education, a prestigious organization of
over 1,400 colleges and universities, that all researchers engaged in
cryptographic research submit their work to the N.S.A. before publication. Only
one of the nine members of the special committee opposed this ''voluntary''
system of prior restraint, George Davida.
Davida, who believes such a system Page 67 is unconstitutional, said, ''The
increase in the computerization of society has led to the construction of a
large number of data bases that are 'electronic windows' into the most intimate
details of people's lives. What is even more disturbing is that it is usually
impossible to know who is looking in. Thus, these data bases are like one-way
mirrors.''

''Encryption,'' he continued, referring to the coding of material placed in
computers, ''can serve as a curtain. Therefore, the need for civilian (or
nongovernmental) effort in cryptography is a strong one.''

Davida noted that the data bases used right now for statistical purposes,
employment records, credit-card operations and many other operations essential
to American life are all subject to possible N.S.A. scrutiny. ''The only
effective method for maintaining separation of such data involves encryption,''
he declared.

Shortly after Inman persuaded the academic community to accept his system of
prior restraint for cryptology, he was named Deputy Director of Central
Intelligence by President Reagan, who replaced him with Air Force Lieut. Gen.
Lincoln D. Faurer.(Later, Inman left the C.I.A. to become the director of the
Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation, a private consortium of 10
high-technology companies.) Inman soon warned that many researchers would face
mandatory Government censorship of their papers unless a system of review was
established to limit the access of the Soviet Union to the benefits of American
technology.

Speaking before the annual meeting of the American As-sociation for the
Advancement of Science last year, Inman said that other areas where restrictions
were required because publication of certain ''technical information could
affect the national security in a harmful way. Examples include computer
hardware and software, other electronic gear and techniques, lasers, crop
projections and manufacturing procedures.''

Many scientists immediately objected. ''If you want to win the Indianapolis 500,
you build the fastest car; you don't throw nails on the track,'' commented Peter
J. Denning, head of Purdue University's Department of Computer Sciences and
former president of the Association for Computing Machinery.

The American Association for the Advancement of Science passed a brief
resolution on the day Inman spoke: ''Whereas freedom and national security are
best preserved by adherence to the principles of openness that are a fundamental
tenet of both American society and the scientific process, be it resolved that
the A.A.A.S. opposes governmental restrictions on the dissemination, exchange or
availability of unclassified knowledge.''

A few months before Inman's speech, Dr. Edward Teller, the physicist credited
with being a major proponent of and contributor to the construction of the
hydrogen bomb, wrote an essay attacking Government attempts to restrict
scientists, saying, ''Secrecy is not compatible with science, but it is even
less compatible with the democratic procedure.''

No laws define the limits of the N.S.A.'s power. No Congressional committee
subjects the agency's budget to a systematic, informed and skeptical review.
With unknown billions of Federal dollars, the agency purchases the most
sophisticated communications and computer equipment in the world. But truly to
comprehend the growing reach of this formidable organization, it is necessary to
recall once again how the computers that power the N.S.A. are also gradually
changing lives of Americans - the way they bank, obtain benefits from the
Government and communicate with family and friends. Every day, in almost every
area of culture and commerce, systems and procedures are being adopted by
private companies and organizations as well as by the nation's security leaders
that make it easier for the N.S.A. to dominate American society should it ever
decide such action is necessary.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Fort Meade, Md. offices of National Security
Agency

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WEST ITS OWN ENEMY

BYLINE: BY ALEXANDER DALLIN; Alexander Dallin is a professor of history and
political science at Stanford University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1381 words


DANGEROUS RELATIONS, The Soviet Union in World Politics, 1970-1982.  By Adam B.
Ulam.  325 pp. New York: Oxford University Press. $25.

ADAM ULAM, a professor at Harvard University, is a prolific writer on Soviet and
Communist affairs. Scarcely a year passes without a new book from his pen. His
latest work is a welcome treatment of Soviet foreign policy since 1970. It is
essentially a continuation of his earlier ''Expansion and Coexistence.'' That
title suggested a tension or ambiguity in Soviet outlook and behavior that Mr.
Ulam never quite dispelled. In this volume new ambiguities appear, and if Mr.
Ulam fails to dispose of them either, it is because they are inherent in Soviet
foreign policy. Moscow's outlook combines growing power and growing anxieties,
Mr. Ulam reminds us; in the Soviet mind during the past decade, belief in the
''struggle between two systems'' incongruously coexisted with a yen for
superpower solidarity. Ironically, the Soviet Union risks becoming a sorcerer's
apprentice, he argues: Having sought to use nationalism and anticolonialism for
its own purposes, it finds these forces turned against it - above all in Eastern
Europe. The greatest setbacks for the West, particularly in Vietnam, he shows,
have not resulted from Soviet action but have been self-inflicted.

The 1970's were the decade of detente, whose rise and fall this volume traces in
some detail. Mr. Ulam's superbly knowledgeable reconstruction of events
-primarily as seen from the Soviet side - provides a plausible and readable
account free of scholarly jargon, unburdened by heavy bibliographic apparatus
and punctuated by his own judgments. He maintains that detente was not a
diabolical Soviet scheme to trap or deceive the United States. Moscow's interest
in it surely included an effort to keep Washington and Peking apart; an attempt
to acquire more goods and services as well as technology from the West as an
alternative to risky reforms at home; and, the Soviet Union having at last
attained strategic parity, some form of arms control agreements with the other
powers.

But such a strategy also implied a Soviet willingness to abandon autarky, or
self-sufficiency, as a basic principle of economic policy, together with a
recognition that relations with the the United States are not a zero-sum game
and a belief that America's society and economy would continue to do well. These
and other instances of Soviet learning amounted to a distinct departure that
eludes Mr. Ulam's attention.

The events of the last 10 years, of course, did not conform to Soviet strategic
intentions. Relations between the United States and China were normalized; the
Soviet Union rejected the 1974 American trade agreement after amendments
requiring free emigration from the Soviet Union and limiting American credit to
the Russians were attached to it; the United States failed to ratify the SALT II
treaty; and recently

American Administrations have tried to isolate the Soviet Union. By the late
1970's the failure of the American connection, as seen from Moscow, led Soviet
policy makers to shift to an alternative attempt to propitiate allies, partners
and clients of the United States in both Western Europe and Asia - a policy that
has ample precedent in Soviet diplomatic behavior.

WHAT caused detente to break down? Mr. Ulam does not tell us in so many words.
He deplores the widespread but utterly unfounded American belief - born of
euphoria after the summit meeting between President Nixon and President Brezhnev
in 1972 - that Moscow had been converted to the maintenance of the international
status quo. Actually, the Soviet Union continued to look for opportunities to
maximize its power position abroad without jeopardizing detente. It discovered
those opportunities primarily in the third world, and, perhaps to its own
surprise, it was able to exploit them in the face of ineffective or inept
American policy in the aftermath of Vietnam and Watergate.  Moscow pursued what
it saw as a low-risk policy by relying on Cuban proxies in the revolutionary
struggles in Angola and Ethiopia in the 70's. But those events, as well as later
crises in Poland and the Russian invasion of Afghanistan, helped convince
American opinion that Moscow had not changed. Mr. Ulam may dismiss too lightly
the calculus of interdependence underlying the detente policy of Henry Kissinger
in the 70's, and some observers may wish to argue that in fact detente was never
fairly tested at all.

Various foreign-policy analysts might dispute any number of particular
interpretations in this book, but no matter. The more serious question is what
it all means. Regrettably, Mr. Ulam nowhere sets out his assumptions or
conclusions systematically, nor does he come to grips with alternative views
except in passing. Thus it will not be clear to the reader what the roots of
Soviet ''expansionism'' are. Mr. Ulam wisely rejects the view that the main
source is to be found ''in the messianic urge to conquer the earth for
Communism.'' On the other hand, his view of the Soviet Union as an old-fashioned
great power scarcely renders compelling the ''expansionism'' that he finds
deeply rooted in Soviet goals and behavior. In the end he would probably
subscribe to the view that, rather than following any master plan, Soviet policy
has been essentially opportunistic.

He posits another intriguing motive for Soviet expansion in the 80's: It must
underpin the regime's legitimacy at home and compensate for the failure of
political promises to come true. But that hypothesis will hardly stand up under
close scrutiny. Adventures such as the imbroglio in Afghanistan are scarcely
advertised in the Soviet media and are never portrayed as victorious pageants.
Nor does it make sense to expand resources abroad as an answer to a shortage of
resources at home. Finally, there is no evidence that Soviet decision makers
reason the way Mr. Ulam suggests.

THIS volume also slights the domestic sources of Soviet behavior abroad
-economic pressures and constraints, political jockeying and diverse perceptions
of the outside world - that have time and again shaped Soviet foreign-policy
preferences. To this day top consultants to Soviet policy makers disagree
seriously over many issues, such as the costs and benefits of involvement in
third world politics, the risks of nuclear war, the best way to deal with China
and the desirability of stabilizing international politics. American officials
need a better understanding of the disputes among Soviet leaders and advisers if
only to correct the American image of Moscow's policy as generally consistent,
monolithic and prescient.

On the whole, Mr. Ulam's picture of American policy is damning. He sees
ignorance, impatience and naivete, combined with a failure of American
intelligence ''in both senses of the word.'' On the other side the Russians'
superior negotiating skills, he argues, make up for the inherent weakness of
their system. Time and again he sees Western failure as the central condition
for Soviet success.

One may well reply that even if that is true, such an explanation greatly
oversimplifies the facts. On the one hand, it fails to recognize the extent to
which American policy has contributed to a siege mentality in the Soviet Union
and thus to a lessening of the chances that Soviet policy might be more
moderate. On the other hand, while Mr. Ulam understandably deplores the growing
inability of the West to implement a concerted policy toward the Soviet Union,
he does not tell us how he would restore Western unity of interest and purpose.
In large part that past unity was the result of the emergence of the United
States after 1945 as dominant in economic, political and military power. But
that dominance was abnormal and could not last, and its inevitable passage has
had very little to do with Soviet actions.

There are, then, many tantalizing, controversial and unanswered questions in
this book. They deserve to be discussed. But even where the book is a bit
frustrating, it is always stimulating. Mr. Ulam rightly reminds us that if
American experts and officials had been better informed, they could have dealt
much more effectively with the Soviet Union. And that should tell us what to do
in the future.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INTERNALIST, EXTERNALIST

BYLINE: By GADDIS SMITH; Gaddis Smith teaches diplomatic history at Yale
University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1575 words


THE AMERICAN STYLE OF FOREIGN POLICY, Cultural Politics and Foreign Affairs.  By
Robert Dallek.  313 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.

WHERE must we look to find the most important forces shaping American foreign
policy? From the days of George Washington to those of Ronald Reagan, those who
have answered this question fall into two camps: externalists and internalists.
The externalists are usually but not always those in power and their supporters.
They tell us to look abroad at the aggressive or immoral actions of other
nations: France, Britain now and again, Mexico, Spain, Germany twice, Japan, the
Soviet Union and its pawns. A relatively rare type of externalist points also to
the legitimate needs and fears of other nations. Internalists of various hues
tell us to look within at politicians inviting international conflict for
partisan advantage, at economic interests seeking to control markets and
resources, at ''the military-industrial complex,'' at bureaucracies out of
control, at naive or disloyal people in government or at the social pathology of
our culture as a whole.

Internalists are almost always critics of those in power and of their policies.
They charge that our foreign difficulties flow from the sins of those they wish
to oust. They tend to ignore or belittle foreign threats, saying that other
nations lack the intent or ability to harm the United States or that they are
reacting principally to American provocation. Thus it was with the Jeffersonians
who blamed Federalists for instigating the quasi war with France in 1798 and
with the Federalists who cursed ''Mr.  Madison's war'' of 1812. Thus it was with
the isolationists who charged that Franklin D. Roosevelt or the merchants of
death or Wall Street bankers or Jews were pushing the nation toward war between
1939 and 1941. And thus it is with the majority of critics of American conduct
in the cold war.

In theory historians should be above partisan passion. They should test the
explanatory power of both the internalist and externalist arguments, noting
objectively the mixture of validity, oversimplification and outright error in
each. But in practice most of us reflect to varying degrees, and not always
consistently, the attitudes of the political actors we most admire. We become
political actors ourselves, either vicariously or in the direct hope that what
we write will influence the future.

One tradition of the historian as political actor agrees that foreign policy is
more often shaped by internal forces than external reality, but as self-styled
realists such historians deplore that fact. They are internalists in describing
what is, externalists in saying what should be. This tradition is exemplified by
Alfred Thayer Mahan at the end of the 19th century (he lieved that the greedy
unwillingness of business to pay high taxes was preventing the United States
from having a Navy adequate to its position in a ruthless world); by the
journalist Walter Lippmann a generation ago (he said foreign policy must deal
with a real world, not a world of our idealistic dreams); by the diplomat and
historian George F. Kennan since the 1940's (Mr. Kennan, like Lippmann, fears
the influence of subjective internal passions); and now by Robert Dallek, who is
a professor of history at the University of California in Los Angeles.

MR. DALLEK, the author of a distinguished study of Franklin D.  Roosevelt's
diplomacy, states that he wrote ''The American Style of Foreign Policy'' in
reaction to a dangerous failure by fellow historians since the end of the
Vietnam war to probe the underlying forces in foreign policy. He is explicitly
committed to explanations of the past that can help make a better future: ''In a
nuclear age, when a wrong turning can lead to global destruction, we cannot
afford the luxury of indifference to fundamental shortcomings in the American
style of foreign policy.''

He dissociates himself at the outset from those who see ''conspiratorial schemes
consciously pursued by unscrupulous men.'' His exploration is of ''those
subjective influences that makers and backers of foreign policy barely glimpse
themselves. It is a study of undercurrents, of mood, tone, or milieu, of a
climate of feeling that almost imperceptibly insinuates itself into concrete
ideas and actions. ... I am concerned with foreign policy as a product of
emotional displacement, of the impulse to make overseas affairs a vehicle for
expressing unresolved internal tensions.''

Mr. Dallek's book is dedicated to the memory of the historian Richard
Hofstadter, author of the influential collection of essays ''The Paranoid Style
in American Politics'' - a title he consciously echoes. Hofstadter's emphasis on
the irrational fears and tensions at home that lead politicians, sometimes
deliberately and sometimes subconsciously, to find release in foreign adventure
is the inspiration of Mr. Dallek's book. As illustration he uses a quotation,
made famous by Hofstadter, from a Texas Congressman to Secretary of State
Richard Olney during a crisis that arose in 1895-96 over a boundary dispute
between Great Britain and Venezuela: ''Why, Mr. Secretary, just think of how
angry the anarchistic, socialistic, and populistic boil appears on our political
surface and who knows how deep its roots extend and ramify? One cannon shot
across the bow of a British boat ... will knock more pus out of it than would
suffice ... to corrupt our people for the next two centuries.''

Mr. Dallek proceeds systematically and frequently mechanically through 80 years
of foreign policy. Time and again he argues that American perceptions and
actions had little to do with foreign reality and much to do with a felt need to
cure domestic disharmony or to prove to ourselves that democracy is alive and
well or to justify cultural and political conformity. Many of his points are
convincing. Woodrow Wilson certainly projected onto a world stage his passionate
commitment to democracy and to victory over selfish interests. His ill-informed
parochialism left a trail of disappointment and tragedy. Forty years later there
were indeed connections between the domestic cultural conformity of the
Eisenhower era and the foreign policy devised by Secretary of State John Foster
Dulles, which was based on a monolithic view of Communism and was incapable of
seeing the world in its true diversity. There are good domestic explanations for
blunders made in those years in Indochina, Iran and Latin American - blunders
whose consequences still afflict the world. And Lyndon Johnson's waging of war
in Vietnam was in part a pathological response to his fears about internal
disunity, unqualified by any deep understanding of Asian realities.

BUT sometimes Mr. Dallek resorts more to assertion and reiteration than
demonstration. It is not convincing to attribute the American effort to unify
all of Korea by force in late 1950 (admittedly a costly error) to a new sense of
''harmony and shared purpose at home.'' Nor is it persuasive to say that the
decision to apply constructive rather than vindictive policies toward Germany
and Japan after World War II was ''less the product of calculated thought ...
than of mass mood or emotions.'' In short, Mr. Dallek goes too far in an effort
to fit everything into the Iron Maiden of the Hofstadter thesis. He sees all bad
policies as the result of the inappropriate and dangerous influence of internal
forces or considerations. He sees good policies, congruent with external
realities, as good largely by chance.

Pressing an argument too far is better than blandness and therefore is no great
flaw. This book should be judged not by details but by its capacity to stimulate
thinking about fundamentals. By that measure it succeeds. It is a worthy
elaboration of Hofstadter and a tribute to the ''realism'' of Lippmann and Mr.
Kennan.

Mr. Dallek concludes with an admonition: ''It seems essential to recognize that
the American style of unrealism in foreign policy is not a sound way to assure
the national well-being. Using outside events in even limited ways for internal
purposes will neither solve domestic difficulties nor serve our external aims.
Indeed, until we detach problems abroad from our social dilemmas at home, we
will continue to jeopardize the security and peace we yearn for in world
affairs.''

That sounds reasonable. But how should this separation of the internal and
external be made? Should we entrust foreign and defense policy to specialists
insulated from our culture and able to act solely on their ''realistic''
assessment of the external world and the American national interest? Something
of this sort has been suggested many times over the years. But what of the
democratic process? Must it stop at the water's edge? Mr. Dallek wrote this
book, as I have noted, because of his fear of nuclear global destruction
stemming from fundamental American shortcomings. Bravo.  But would he wish
American policy to be detached from the ''social dilemmas at home'' that are
reflected in a popular fear of nuclear war and consequent demands for
substantial arms control? It is ironic that Mr. Dallek's argument, taken in its
most general form, will be congenial to those who see arms control negotiations
as a sham reflecting a need to respond to irrational public opinion. The line
between realism and unrealism is not self-evident, nor can the internal and
external be easily separated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COUNTY CHIEF RACE EXPECTED TO BE LONG AND COSTLY

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 1, Column 5; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1286 words


A SMOOTH, modulated voice emerged last Sunday through the earthy sounds of the
fund-raising breakfast for Tony Veteran. It was a radio commercial, prepared by
Tony Schwartz, a media consultant, for the race that Mr. Veteran, the Greenburgh
Town Supervisor, is waging for the Democratic nomination for County Executive.

''We may not have as much money as one of my opponents said he'd need,'' Mr.
Veteran had said, referring to Ogden R. Reid's estimate of $500,000 to $750,000
for the race to oust Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Republican incumbent, ''but we'll
hold our own.'' The radio commercials were intended to demonstrate that.

A few hours later, Mr. Reid, a former six-term Representative, announced his
formal entry into what is expected to be a lengthy, hardfought and costly race
for the county's top post, and he was asked about Mr. Veteran's comments, which
included inferences that Mr. Reid was trying to buy the election.

'We're concentrating on winning the general election,'' Mr. Reid replied,
looking past the April 12 Democratic convention, a likely Democratic primary in
September and Mr. Veteran. ''O'Rourke is a strong candidate and may be financed
by Lehrman,'' he said, referring to Lewis E. Lehrman, the defeated Republican
candidate for Governor, ''and so we'll need financing to unseat O'Rourke.''

Each of the candidates in the race, which is attracting attention beyond
Westchester's borders, has already employed campaign and media consultants based
in Manhattan, and the group of advisers - four so far - is expected to grow. It
could become the most professionally orchestrated race in the county's history,
and its most expensive.

Working for Mr. O'Rourke, and employed by the Westchester County Republican
Committee, is Roger Ailes, of Ailes Communications. He had earlier interviewed
all the candidates for the $81,500 post that was finally awarded to Mr. O'Rourke
by the county's Republican leaders and the Republican-controlled Board of
Legislators, and two weeks ago the consultant videotaped Mr. O'Rourke's State of
the County address.

''It may be of some value for historical purposes,'' Mr. Ailes said, ''and it
may be used later in a commercial, but not to improve Mr. O'Rourke's speaking
style, which is pretty good as it is.'' The consultant said he was largely
marking time now, waiting for the Democrats to pick a challenger, ''and when the
strategy starts, I will be involved.''

Mr. Ailes, who lives in Cortlandt, said he was not a polling expert, nor did he
handle direct mail. His field, he said, was media and political strategy. He was
employed by the Lehrman-for-Governor campaign, has worked on senatorial
campaigns in Minnesota and Wyoming and helped defeat a referendum in Colorado
that would have enabled supermarkets to sell wine.

Did he think Mr. Lehrman would help financially in the O'Rourke campaign? ''Yes,
I think he will,'' Mr. Ailes said. ''Mr. Lehrman supports Andy and would like to
see him remain in the office.'' The use of television remains uncertain,
however, although he conceded that Mr. Reid had strong name recognition.

Mr. O'Rourke is busy, meanwhile, ''getting on as County Executive,'' as Mr.
Ailes put it, in a post that his Democratic opponents acknowledge provides a
wide-ranging incumbency that should become increasingly beneficial to Mr.
O'Rourke as the poltical campaign develops.

The Veteran campaign has hired two consulting firms, Dresner & Sykes Associates,
which is handling polling and media, and New Sounds, which Tony Schwartz said
''represents me and a staff of two.'' Richard Dresner, a Chappaqua resident,
said he has worked for Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and the New York State
Attorney General, Robert Abrams, and for the County Democratic Party when Samuel
Fredman, now a major Veteran supporter, was chairman.

Mr. Schwartz said he has worked on 450 campaigns, including those of former
President Carter, Senators Moynihan and Edward M. Kennedy, and was the author of
a controversial television commercial in 1964 that showed a child picking the
petals off a daisy in a countdown to a nuclear explosion. Withdrawn after one
day, it supported President Johnson against Senator Barry Goldwater's call for
tactical nuclear weapons in Vietnam.

Mr. Schwartz likened campaign consulting to a medical operation: ''the surgeon
is the media adviser, the X-ray technician is the researcher and my work is
designing the tools to do the job.'' He said his speciality was radio, which Mr.
Veteran intends to use, and television, ''where no decision has been made.''

He said he was in a ''holding pattern,'' waiting for the results of campaign
polling done by Mr. Dresner, and of financing. ''The Veteran breakfast raised
$20,000 and an earlier fund raiser brought in $30,000,'' Mr. Dresner said, ''but
a primary costs $300,000 to $400,000, which we can raise - and that's important
because Reid can spend that much.''

At the moment, he said ''we're concentrating on raising money and working on the
convention,'' where Mr. Veteran's backers feel they are strong. Mr. Dresner said
Mr. Reid is better known than Mr.  Veteran, ''but name recognition is a
byproduct of campaigning,'' he said, and that will come later.

A telephone poll by Roger Seasonwein Associates of New Rochelle for radio
station WVOX, where 545 registered voters were asked between March 12 and 17
which candidate they preferred, showed Mr. Reid leading Mr. O'Rourke 40 percent
to 34 percent in one matchup, while Mr. O'Rourke was well ahead of Mr. Veteran,
42 to 28 percent, in another pairing.

That delighted the Reid camp, which has hired Penn & Schoen Associates to do
''general advising, direct mail, strategy and polling,'' according to Mark Penn,
one of the partners. Media consulting, he said, would be handled eventually by
another firm.

The partnership has worked for Mayor Koch and former Governor Hugh L. Carey and
last year it handled the campaign of Frank R.  Lautenberg, who won a United
States Senate race in New Jersey against former Representative Millicent H.
Fenwick.

''We've done our own poll, which is confidential, but it also showed that Mr.
Reid is very well known,'' Mr. Penn said. ''Given the fact that he has been out
of politics for several years, he has tremendous potential to grow, and there
will be a recall of his record once the campaign begins.''

''We'll help raise money, work with direct mail and advise on the campaign in
Westchester,'' he said, where ''we haven't worked recently, although we are
familiar with it from our statewide campaigns.'' The financing, he said, was
crucial because ''any Democratic candidate has to be well funded against Lehrman
and O'- Rourke.''

Mr. Reid's backers have conceded, to some extent, that Mr. Veteran has more
party support for the convention than their own candidate, and that the
Greenburgh Supervisor appears to be well organized for a primary. But they will
seek to persuade party loyalists that Mr.  Reid is the stronger candidate
against Mr. O'Rourke in the general election.

The Veteran team concedes that he is not as well known as Mr. Reid -Mr. Veteran
said at his fund-raising event that ''some say they haven't heard of Greenburgh
and are not sure what a Supervisor is'' - but they will try to show that Mr.
Reid's experience as a legislator is not nearly so helpful in the County
Executive role as Mr.  Veteran's administrative background.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Anthony Veteran photo of Odgen R. Reid

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK AREA IS RECEIVING CARP FROM TOXIN-TAINTED MICHIGAN BAY

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1876 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, March 27


Hundreds of thousands of pounds of carp from Saginaw Bay in Michigan, samples of
which have been found to contain residues of the chemical dioxin, are annually
shipped to markets in New York, Chicago and other Northern cities.

The Federal Food and Drug Administration says that it has not found reason to
stop interstate trade in the fish. But the Michigan Department of Health has
issued warnings that consumption of such fish should be limited.

About a third of the fresh carp sold in New York City comes from Saginaw Bay,
according to wholesalers. Asked whether the fish should be eaten, the New York
City Health Commissioner said people should follow guidelines issued by the
State Health Department on consumption of fresh-water fish caught in New York
State. The guidelines say that no more than one meal a month of fresh-water fish
should be eaten and that pregnant women, women of child-bearing age, nursing
mothers and children under 15 years old should not eat such fish.

Scientists have not been able to establish what level of dioxin ingestion is
harmful to humans, but tiny doses of the compound, a waste product of herbicide
manufacture, are lethal to laboratory animals.

The carp are sold in New York mostly through Jewish and Chinese markets. They
are a major ingredient in fresh-made gefilte fish, which is widely consumed by
Jews, especially on the Passover holiday that begins Monday night. Three of the
largest makers of bottled gefilte fish say they do not use carp from Michigan.

Dow Denies Any Blame

Saginaw Bay is fed by two rivers into which the Dow Chemical Company in Midland
pours 64 million gallons of waste water daily, according to the Environmental
Protection Agency.  Dow refuses to tell Federal environmental officials what the
water contains, maintaining that doing so is not legally required and would risk
disclosing proprietary information. But the company disputes charges by the
E.P.A.'s regional office here that it is the main source of unusually high
dioxin contamination in the rivers and bay, contending that it comes mainly from
ordinary combustion.

The Federal Food and Drug Administration, in finding no cause to invoke its
authority to halt interstate commerce in tainted fish, based its position on its
chemical tests and on surveys of fishconsumption patterns in New York and nearby
states.

Extrapolating from data on animals, the F.D.A. believes that fish averaging more
than 50 parts per trillion of dioxin in their flesh should be avoided. The
agency's tests on the edible portions of Saginaw Bay carp taken in 1979 put the
average levels at only 16 to 20 parts per trillion, or 1,000 billion.

New samples were taken by the F.D.A. in 1981, but the analysis has not been
completed.  But the New York State Department of Health has warned that regular
consumption of fish with more than 10 parts per trillion of dioxin ''poses a
health risk.'' And tests about three years ago on whole fish from Saginaw Bay,
including both edible and inedible portions, by the Federal Fish and Wildlife
Service and by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources found dioxin
contamination at 94 and 61 parts per trillion, respectively.

Despite this and a 1981 advisory from the F.D.A. on potential problems from
Saginaw Bay fish, the New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets has
made no effort to monitor dioxin levels in fish sold in the state. The
department has the authority to seize tainted fish.

Dr. Laurence Crowell, a veterinarian who heads the division of food inspection
services in Albany, said last week that no dioxin tests had been made on any
fish and that his laboratory was not equipped to conduct such tests. He said his
division would ''doubtless'' begin to look into the situation now, given the
growing concern about dioxin.

The Michigan Department of Agriculture has also taken no action.  But the
state's Department of Health has warned sport fishermen that carp and catfish
caught in Saginaw Bay and two rivers that feed into it, the Tittawabassee and
the Saginaw, should not be eaten by women who are pregnant, nursing or expecting
to bear children.

In an official letter sent to then-Gov. William G. Milliken of Michigan on Aug.
26, 1981, Dr. Arthur Hull Hayes Jr., the Federal Commissioner of Food and Drugs,
wrote that Saginaw Bay carp and catfish have ''occasionally'' been found to
exceed the guideline of 50 parts per trillion. But he added, ''At present, there
does not appear to be any species of fish from Saginaw Bay which would
consistently exceed the 50 p.p.t. level.''

Concerned About Area Residents

While he expressed concern about residents of the bay area, who might eat large
quantities of local fish, Dr. Hayes was less concerned about interstate sale of
those fish because consumers in distant states would presumably eat much less of
it.

''We think the fish are wholesome,'' said Asa Wright, a fisheries biologist who
heads the Great Lakes Program at the Michigan Department of Natural Resources.
''The levels do not appear to exceed acceptable F.D.A. levels. We don't want
Michigan to get a bad name, so we would have closed the fisheries down if we had
detected dangerous levels.''

Other authorities are not so confident. Dr. David Stalling is chief chemist at
the Columbia National Fisheries Research Laboratory, an arm of the Federal Fish
and Wildlife Service, in Columbia, Mo. He said he would be very wary of eating
fish from Lake Huron, of which Saginaw Bay is a part.

Bottom feeders such as carp and catfish seem particularly prone to accumulating
dioxin. Dr. Stalling theorized that because dioxin is insoluble, it tends to
settle at the bottom, where carp scavenge.

The fish, he went on, pump large quantities of muddy bottom water over fat-rich
membranes in their gills, and the dioxin molecules attach themselves to the
membranes because they much ''prefer'' fat to water. This capacity for
''bioconcentration'' makes fish a potential route for human ingestion of
chemical waste.

Two Different Levels Found

From a composite sample of ground flesh of whole carp from the bay near Bay
City, Mich., at the mouth of the Saginaw River, Dr.  Stalling's laboratory found
94 parts per trillion of the most potent form of dioxin,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, or TCDD, along with other hazardous wastes,
including dibenzofurans. Another sample of the same kind, taken near Bay Port,
about 20 miles to the east, was measured at 27 p.p.t. One part per trillion is
comparable to 30 seconds in a million years.

Many authorities regard TCDD as the most toxic compound known. It causes death,
cancer, birth defects, liver and kidney disorders in animals in extremely small
doses. But its effects in humans are not well understood.

Dr. James D. Petty, assistant chief chemist at Dr. Stalling's laboratory, said
of the two test results: ''If these levels are typical, then I would assume they
should be of concern. I would not eat those fish. But I cannot point to a study
saying what the danger level is.''

In 1980 scientists with the E.P.A. made an estimate of cancer risk based on
mathematical models using animal-test data. They concluded that a person who ate
a half pound of fish contaminated with 100 parts per trillion of dioxin every
week over a lifetime might face, at the most, a risk of from one in 100 to one
in 1,000 of contracting cancer. But the estimate is highly speculative.

1.7 Million Pound Catch in Bay

About 28 commercial fisheries operate along Saginaw Bay fom Tawas Point to Port
Austin. In 1981, the last year for which figures are available, the total catch
was 1.7 million pounds. This included 693,000 pounds of carp and 500,000 to
600,000 pounds of catfish, which are sold mainly in the Middle West, and lesser
amounts of yellow perch, whitefish, suckers and other species. The other species
are not as subject to dioxin contamination as carp and catfish.

The fisheries are major suppliers of carp to ethnic markets in the Northeast.
Last week one major operator, Richard Beardsley of Standish, shipped 10,000
pounds to New York wholesalers in advance of the Jewish holy days.

Mr. Beardsley said today that he was aware of the Michigan advisory, but that
the contaminated areas of the bay were down near the mouth of the Saginaw River
near Bay City. He said he fished in a clean area up near Standish, about 35
miles to the north.

''They've checked our fish and never come up with anything, Mr.  Beardsley said,
referring to the state and Federal authorities.  Although Saginaw Bay fish have
been supplying these markets for years, concern about dioxin first arose in
1980, when scientists from the Canadian National Wildlife Research Center said
in a published report that they had found unusually high levels of dioxin in
herring gulls, particularly those living by Saginaw Bay. The gulls eat fish.

The Canadians speculated that a major source was the Dow plant in Midland, which
used to make 2,4,5-T, the herbicide used to defoliate jungles in Vietnam. TCDD,
the most potent form of dioxin, is often a waste byproduct of its manufacture.
Gulls on the opposite side of Lake Huron were not highly contaminated.

F.D.A. Recommendation

After consultation with the Canadians, the F.D.A. in August 1981 issued the
following recommendation to health officials in New York and seven other Great
Lakes states:

''If the TCDD levels found in fish average less than 25 p.p.t., F.D.A. believes
that there is little cause for concern. On the other hand, if the average values
exceed 50 p.p.t., the state should seriously consider more stringent methods to
limit the taking of fish from these areas. For those values between 25 and 50
p.p.t., sport fishermen, who generally consume fish only a few times a year,
should restrict their intake to no more than one meal a week. Permanent
residents of these areas, who might consume the fish over the entire year,
should restrict their intake to no more than one to two times a month.''

Given the uncertainty about levels, the F.D.A. is now analyzing a new set of
samples taken in 1981. Also, the Michigan Department of Natural Resources plans
to perform further tests on older samples and to place caged fish for testing in
the bay and other Michigan waters in August.

Sue Carter, press secretary to Gov. James J. Blanchard, said the state felt no
further action was warranted until better information was obtained. ''It is
being very carefully monitored,'' she said.

Dr. Frank Cordle, chief of epidemiology and clinical toxicology at the F.D.A.'s
Bureau of Foods in Washington, said no concrete safety level could be set for
dioxin, only a ''level of concern.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Saginaw Bay

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SCIENCE WATCH;
VIETNAM FORESTS' PROGNOSIS IMPROVES

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 338 words


A scientist who toured forested areas of Vietnam that had been sprayed with
Agent Orange and other herbicides in the Vietnam War has determined that the
wooded areas have recovered at a rate much faster than scientists had estimated.

Carl F. Jordan, senior ecologist with the Institute of Ecology at the University
of Georgia in Athens, reported that the tropical forests that had been sprayed
recovered their growth as fast or even faster than areas that had been disturbed
by logging only.

In a report released by the university, Dr. Jordan noted that tropical forests
that had been clear-cut by traditional logging methods became covered within 15
years by a canopy of fast-growing softwood tree species. And within 20 years,
primary hardwood tree species had become established in the forest floor.

But Dr. Jordan said in a telephone interview that forest areas that had been
chemically sprayed recovered as fast as the clear-cut areas or even a year or
two earlier. Scientists had previously estimated that tropical forests that had
been sprayed with herbicides would need 50 to 100 years to recover, depending on
the plant species involved, the type and amount of herbicide used, the kind of
terrain and other factors.

The ecologist, one of a team of forest scientists who toured Vietnam in January,
found similarities in the growth recovery problems of herbicide-sprayed forests
in Vietnam and in Puerto Rico, whose forests he had studied for 16 years. In
both areas he found that traditional logging practices, using heavy equipment,
compressed the soil so that seeds could not send down roots.

By contrast, the soil of defoliated forests was undisturbed, and microbial
organisms living in the soil-litter area decomposed the herbicides into harmless
residues except for dioxin, a component of Agent Orange. Although dioxin was not
taken up by the plants, it was washed into streams and entered water supplies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 30, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

COLLEGE UNITS ASK CURB ON HECKLING

BYLINE: By GENE I. MAEROFF

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


Alarmed by the disruption of speakers on the nation's campuses, organizations
representing college presidents, faculty members and students urged the academic
community yesterday to ''respect the right of others to listen to those who have
been invited to speak on campus.''

The unusual joint plea was prompted in particular by campus incidents involving
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief United States delegate to the United Nations,
who in recent months has been prevented from speaking several times or has been
compelled to do so under difficult conditions.

Academic officials say they have been worried about their ability to maintain an
open forum on campuses. They fear a dangerous precedent would be set if
dissenters continued to impede Mrs.  Kirkpatrick and other speakers, especially
with the wave of commencement addresses that will soon begin.

''The 'hiss and boo,' when they go beyond brief expressions of opposition and
become instruments to silence those with whom one disagrees, are inappropriate
at any public gathering, but especially in places of higher learning,'' asserts
the statement, ''Invited Speakers and Academic Freedom - A Call to Action.''

The statement was endorsed by the American Council on Education, the American
Association of University Professors, the National Coalition of Independent
College and University Students, the National Organization of Black University
and College Students and the United States Student Association.

''Various college presidents have been wondering whether we are on the way back
to the 1960's,'' said Jack W. Peltason, president of the American Council on
Education, referring to the disruption of speakers in the Vietnam War era.

The council is the umbrella organization representing the presidents of half the
nation's 3,200 colleges and universities.  Mr. Peltason said that the statement
uniting the voices of college presidents, faculty and students was his idea and
that it had not been requested by the Reagan Administration.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick has essentially been the lightning rod for campus protests
against the Administration, especially over its policies in Central America.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick, whose speeches have been a main target of campus protesters,
yesterday interrupted her participation in a Security Council debate on
Nicaragua to hail the statement.

''As Thomas Jefferson, John Stuart Mill, John Dewey, Sidney Hook and others have
emphasized, free inquiry and free speech are the very foundation of innovation,
science and democracy,'' she said.  ''Obviously, it is appropriate that they
should be defended - unequivocally - by persons and associations with a serious
commitment to education.''

Obligation of Respect

''As citizens, we have an obligation to respect the freedom of other citizens to
speak, even those whose ideas we might find abhorrent,'' the statement says.
''As members of the academic community, we have the additional obligation to
maintain academic freedom on our campuses, no less so when attempts to suppress
this freedom come from members of our own ranks.''

Mrs. Kirkpatrick was driven from a lecture platform by the jeers of protesters
on Feb. 15 as she addressed an audience of 800 at the University of California
at Berkeley. She canceled a second address that was to have been given there the
next day.

On Feb. 24, Mrs. Kirkpatrick announced that she was withdrawing as scheduled
commencement speaker at Smith College after being told that her security could
not be assured in the face of possible demonstrations on the campus in
Northampton, Mass.

Then, on March 2, her speech to 4,000 people at the University of Minnesota was
disrupted by shouting.

Other Protests Mentioned

In promulgating the statement, the American Council on Education and the other
groups mentioned not only the recent protests against Mrs. Kirkpatrick but also
those directed against Eldridge Cleaver and Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani, the oil
minister of Saudi Arabia.

Mr. Cleaver, a former Black Panther who fled the country and upon his return
gave speeches extolling conservative causes, was drowned out and unable to
finish a speech at the University of Wisconsin at Madison last October.

When he returned to the campus March 18, hecklers prevented him from delivering
his address to a crowd of 400. Instead, he spent an hour and a half taking
questions from the audience.

Most recently, Sheik Yamani was repeatedly shouted down in a speech Monday at
Kansas State University in Manhattan, Kan.  The statement also says: ''We know
that the line between legitimate dissent and illegitimate disruption is often
difficult to draw and that the rights of peaceful protest must also be
respected. To lessen the tension that is sometimes created on the campuses when
persons come to receive honors, we encourage democracy and dialogue among
representatives of major campus constituencies, especially when choosing
commencement speakers, as they have been the focus for much tension in the
past.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jeane J. Kirkpatrick (Page A19)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 30, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF GROUP INTERVIEW WITH PRESIDENT AT WHITE HOUSE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 5183 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 29


Following is a White House transcript of an interview of President Reagan in the
White House today by the reporters Tom DeFrank of Newsweek, Susan Page of
Newsday, Gary Schuster of The Detroit News, Ben Taylor of The Boston Globe, Paul
West of The Dallas Times Herald and Loye Miller of Newhouse News. The transcript
omits several words of the first question.

Proposal on Missiles

Q. this point about what you may be announcing tomorrow morning in the way of
I.N.F. proposals. But I'd like to try one quick question.  Whatever it is you
tell us tomorrow, are you prepared to proceed with deployment of Pershing and
cruise missiles beginning at the end of this year?

A. We have never retreated from our position that we are going to deploy on
schedule. And it is true - I will be speaking to the NATO Ambassadors tomorrow
and at that time making a statement about this whole matter. Could I just
volunteer that a lot of the speculation that I've been reading, however, is - we
have -yes, we've been in consultation and -as we promised from the very first in
this Administration that we would be on everything with our NATO allies - but
there has been no change in my position or ultimate goal.

Q. So you are going to go forward with deployment?  A. Deployment, I've said,
we've never retreated from that, yes.

Deal With the Russians

Q. O.K. All right. Regardless of what you tell us tomorrow, it seems like
judging from your past statements and the statements of some of your advisers,
any sort of a deal would involve the dismantling of some SS-20's on the part of
the Soviet Union. Is there any reason to believe the Soviets are at all
interested in that sort of a deal? Could Mr. Andropov get his generals to buy
off on that sort of an arrangement?

A. There is one thing you have to remember that, as they themselves made public,
that while they made a proposal that we could not find acceptable, it was based
on their making a sizable reduction in the number of their missiles.

Period of New Cold War?

Q. Mr. President, while we're on the subject of arms control, we seem to be
entering a period of a new cold war with the Soviet Union with the escalation -
with the rhetoric escalating on both our side and their side.

In that sort of atmosphere, is it realistic to think we can reach any sort of
arms control agreement?  A. Yes. I've seen these remarks also as to the return
to a cold war. We are in - we remain in communication with them. And the very
fact that we're sitting in three separate negotiating tables with them on three
different subjects of disarmament. I don't think there's anything particularly
new in the rhetoric that was used by Andropov and has been used by other Russian
leaders before him. In the United States, we have to be used to being called
''imperialists'' and several other things and charges made that we're trying to
seek some advantage or something. I don't think there's really been any
escalation of that at all.

Q. Of course, some critics would say there has been escalation on your part in
recent speeches, in calling the Soviet Union an ''evil empire.'' And in some of
the language that you've used. Do you think that's done any harm in the effort
to reach an agreement with the Soviet Union?

A. No. I think the thing that I said in speaking to that audience was that in
pointing out, on the basis of the comparison of our two social structures or our
- the traditions and what our ideologies were that in contrast to what we viewed
as proper, religious freedom and even belief in religion and in a God, as
contrasted to their own antireligious position, their own refusal to believe in
individual rights and so forth. I didn't think that there were many polemics in
that particular message.

Altered Stand on Proposal

Q. Mr. President, back to the interim proposal that you're going to make
tomorrow, without asking you to reveal the details further, I'd like to ask a
little bit about how we got there. Because as recently as your last press
conference in the East Room, which was the 16th of February, you rather firmly
rejected any idea of an interim proposal. Both Larry Barrett and I asked you
questions and you indicated that you were not at all - did not at all intend to
make any new proposal; that there was an interim proposal, it would have to come
from the other side. What's changed to lead you to change that?

A. Well, I think when you refer back in that other question, the way it came at
the time had to do with asking things that would have required me to state in
advance negotiating positions. And I've had a lot of years experience in
negotiating before I was ever in public life. I negotiated for about a quarter
of a century the basing contracts of our union, the Screen Actors' Guild, with
management.  And you don't - you can't talk about negotiating positions, because
if you do, then they're no longer positions; you've compromised your own
strategy. And this is what caused me - and has caused me in the past - to make
answers about - that you're really making the answer with the knowledge that the
other fellow is going to read it or hear it.

Q. Well, are you saying you were headed in that direction but just didn't want
to -A. Well, I want to point out that -and by real intention, back when I made
at the Press Club public the first statement about the zero-zero option, I very
specifically said that we would negotiate in good faith on any legitimate
proposal. Now, we had stated our goal and what it was that we would like to
have. But I made that other statement deliberately so that it would not be taken
by - everyone has, well, a complete take-it or leave-it proposition.  In that
instance, then, there is no negotiation. They either give in or you go home. So
to that extent, I don't think that - well, let me just put it this way. We've
made no change in our ultimate goal. But beyond that, I can't speak before
tomorrow.

Pressure on Russians

Q. On that same subject, Mr. President, do you subscribe to the view held by
some European leaders and by some in your own Administation that the Russians
won't bargain in earnest until we deploy the Pershing and cruise missiles in
Europe?

A. Well, I believe one of our problems in the past and why, during the period a
decade or so in the 70's when we were unilaterally disarming and they were at
fever pitch in the rebuilding or the building of - probably the greatest buildup
of military strength in world history, that one of the reasons why there was no
prospect - if you will remember, President Carter sent his Secretary of State to
make an arms reduction proposal in Moscow and he was home in 48 hours. And I
have always felt that there's no reason for the other side to negotiate if
they're out ahead and we are apparently disarming ourselves without asking any
compensatory reduction on their part. And I believe that the reason we have
three negotiating teams now at three different tables negotiating with them has
been our determination over these little more than two years to refurbish our
own military.

And I've said before - I think it was summed up in a cartoon about the late
Leonid Brezhnev when he was cartooned in one of your publications. The
cartoonist had him speaking to a Russian general, and he said, ''I liked the
arms race better when we were the only ones in it.'' I think that you have to -
if you're going to negotiate, you have to have some strength on your side. You
have to have some reason for them to look at and weigh the value of reducing
their own weaponry.

Space Defense Plan

Q. Mr. President, on that general subject of defense, won't your plan to develop
antimissile weapons in outer space set off a new round in the arms race? Won't
it just be a destabilizing force?

A. I think to the contrary. I think that - and I tried to make it as plain as I
could in that address. I've been amazed at some of the fevered rhetoric and
editorials that I have been reading. And I think some of them are quite
irresponsible.

But, no, I made it plain that we are going to continue. And I am determined to
continue and do everything I can to persuade them that legitimate arms reduction
is the only path to follow. To look down to an endless future with both of us
sitting here with these horrible missiles aimed at each other, and the only
thing preventing a holocaust is just so long as no one pulls the trigger, this
is unthinkable.

In my opinion, if a defensive weapon could be found and developed that would
reduce the utility of these or maybe even make them obsolete, then whenever that
time came, a President of the United States would be able to say, ''Now, we have
both the deterrent, the missiles - as we have had in the past, but now this
other thing that has altered this -'' And he could follow any one of a number of
courses. He could offer to give that same defensive weapon to them to prove to
them that there was no longer any need for keeping these missiles. Or with that
defense, he could then say to them, ''I am willing to do away with all my
missiles. You do away with all of yours.''

Q. But what would you expect the Soviets to do in this period while we are
developing this weapon. They are not going to sit just idly by and let ourselves
- let the United States make itself invulnerable to their missiles.

A. On the other hand, I think there is every indication that they have been
embarked on this same kind of research themselves.  Q. Mr. President, you said
that some of the editorials that you had read criticizing your new defensive
initiative had been irresponsible. What did you mean by that? How,
''irresponsible?''

A. Oh, I have just been reading a collection of them over there.  There have
been charges that this was a smoke screen on my part to avoid a discussion of
the arms buildup. There have even been - some of them have charged that, in my
speech the other night on television, I did not give any facts, that I obscured
the truth.  Well, I think those charts were pretty factual and based on actual
count and actual figures.

Other statements - that I was proposing something that never was and never could
be a defensive weapon; and I had to remember that Vannevar Bush - one of our
truly great scientists - was asked by President Eisenhower, with regard to the
feasibility of creating a missile in which the delivery of an atomic weapon
could be by missile - and this great scientists after his own study said to the
President that the image of a missile that could be launched from a silo,
pretargeted on a target on another continent just was an impossibility and could
never happen.

Well, today, the thing we are talking about are thousands of those on both sides
of the ocean, targeted on each other. And so for someone to say that what I was
talking about was a ''fairy tale'' - they even used that term -that it could
never take place, I think is irresponsible.

Cost of Space Defense Plan

Q. Mr. President, can I ask you just one question about that program that you
annnounced last week? The cost of it - everybody seems to be, sort of, moving
around it. Nobody is really getting into what it is going to cost. We spend a
billion dollars; we do not know what it is going to cost in the out years. One,
do you know what it is going to cost in the next few years or what kind of money
has been put aside for it? And two, because of the trouble you have been having
on the Hill with the Defense budget as it is being too high, why should the
Congress go along with approving a program like this that is going to cost a lot
more money, presumably? Do you have a cost figure on it?

A. No, because, first of all, this is not a crash program. There, I think you
would have to have - well, a crash program such as the development of the atom
bomb in wartime. I have said I do not know how long this would take. I do not
know in what direction that research would go. To all of those who, also,
editorialize that this was truly outer space and so forth, I do not know. I am
not a scientist.

Q. But to start it, sir, you are going to have to put some money with it. What
kind of money are you going to put with it?  A. Yes. Well, we already have about
a billion dollars that is in the budget for research in the Defense budget now.
And some of that would be diverted to this research. Now, you would have to see
what direction this took and what was needed to further that research. But I
don't think that it would be the tremendous immediate cost that a crash program
would be.

Q. You mentioned just a minute ago, Mr. President, that some future President
might have the option of providing this defensive weapon to the Soviets, if he
so chose. What about some sort of an interim arrangement now? Do you think
there's any merit to the idea of some sort of a joint venture where the United
States might be willing to share the research data on this system with the
Soviets so that - to reduce any chance of escalating tensions in this area?

A. I have to tell you I haven't given that any thought. That's something to
think about and look at. And, incidentally, Gary, as for our defense budget
being too high, I think your paper editorialized that it isn't.

Q. Well, that may be, sir. But the Congress has to vote on it and I'm still
curious on what you think - the Congressional reaction will be to a program like
this that some have said, including the Speaker and others, that it's pie in the
sky. Why should we vote for funding for a program like this. They're going to be
called on to do it and you can propose it but they may dispose of it as fast as
you do that.

A. I would assume that it would take the same place in the budget.  It would be
part of the - in every defense budget there is a sum, as I've said before,
there's already in this one about a billion dollars in various research and it's
just a case then of the direction of the research and where you direct it to go.

Q. Would you like to see it doubled or tripled or, I mean, do you think -A. I
don't see any need for that, no.

U.S. Role in Nicaragua

Q. Mr. President, could we move on to another area - Central America? You
consistently refuse to discuss reports of covert U.S.  aid to anti-Government
forces in Nicaragua. In recent days, a number of our allies have indicated at
the U.N. that they believe the United States is working to overthrow the
Nicaraguan Government. My question is, why don't you either acknowledge or deny
these reports of U.S. activity? Aren't you in danger of losing credibility in
the same way that the U.S. Government did with its secret war in Cambodia?

A. I think this is something - intelligence matters and, covert or overt
activity, whatever are things that are never discussed and - not going to
discuss them now. But we have tried to get along with the Government of
Nicaragua and tried from the first. As a matter of fact, they had in these
efforts some time ago when the new revolutionary government was installed, they
made pledges to us that they would not involve themselves in El Salvador. And we
found them in direct violation of that which they could not deny - that they
were arming the guerrillas in El Salvador.

Now, what we're seeing in Nicaragua is the fact that it was a revolution by a
coalition of groups that were all opposed to the dictatorial Somoza rule. And as
happens so often in that kind of a coalition, when the revolution was over, one
faction, and it turned out to be the extreme leftist faction, simply took
control and ousted the other revolutionary partners and created a
Marxist-Leninist government openly acknowledging their ties to Cuba and the
Soviet Union, openly arming and providing weapons and supplies to the - and
training to the guerrillas in El Salvador. And what we're seeing now are the
other revolutionary factions totally ousted from any participation in the
government now fighting back on that.

Q. Sir, but my question was don't you think that the recent events at the U.N.
in which our allies have indicated that they don't believe that we are not
involved and this continued proliferation of reports from the area that say that
there is some involvement, isn't this damaging the credibility of the U.S.
Government?

A. I don't think so because some of the few allies who have been critical of
this, others of them understand very well what's going on in El Salvador and
all, but some of the others have even been critical of what we're doing in El
Salvador. We have made every effort to point out to them that they've been
subjected to quite a wave of worldwide propaganda based on the Salvadoran
conflict. And I think we have convinced a number of them that what we're doing
is valid.

Nuclear Test Ban Treaty

Q. Mr. President, if I could jump back to our original subject of our relations
to the Soviets for the minute, something that you said a couple of times, that
we have three different sets of negotiations going with them. I've been told
that, in one of these sets of negotiations, the United States has proposed
modifications of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and the Peaceful Nuclear Exchange
Treaty that make verification, in particular, and other procedures of carrying
those treaties out more effective, and that their response was very
disappointing to us. Can you confirm that, and what do you -A. Yes.  This is not
one of the three I was thinking of. I was thinking of Start, the I.N.F., and
then our negotiation on conventional weapons.

Q. - a lot of -A. But, yes, we had proposed some improvements to the testing
treaty and so forth, and they rejected our proposals.  Q. What's your reaction
to that?  A. I think that the treaty we're talking about is the Test Ban Treaty.
Q. Yes.  A. It isn't all that important because the treaty, as it is now - and
this is what we want to strengthen - is so restricted as to verification that we
have reason to believe that there have been numerous violations. And, yet,
because of the lack of verification capacity, we could not make such a charge
and sustain it. We just were wanting to improve it so that maybe both sides
could be sure.

Q. Are you considering letting that treaty lapse since it's not -A. No. Q. Since
that treaty has not done what it's supposed to be doing because of verification
problems, are you considering letting the treaty lapse?

A. No. As a matter of fact, I think that we've extended it.

Cutting Arms Outlays

Q. Mr. President, on defense spending, you recently were quoted by your aides
and by Senator Domenici saying how you couldn't promise anything, but you might
be able to show some, might be willing to show some flexibility on defense after
the Easter break. The House has cut real growth from 10 percent, in your
proposal, to 4 percent.  Domenici's people are talking about 7.5 percent.
They're talking about maybe a compromise with the House at 5 to 6 percent. Could
you settle for that? Would that be flexible enough? Could you be flexible
enough?

A. I think it would be violating what the Government is intended to do. The one
prime responsibility of Government is to protect the lives and freedom of its
citizens. The budget we submitted and the budget figure we believed was the
absolute minimum that was necessary to continue redressing our defensive
capability, which had been allowed to deteriorate so badly in the previous
decade.

When I spoke to the Senators with regard to some flexibility this was because we
were still reviewing every possibility and some things that, without actually
reducing our capability, that there might be some reason to believe that we
could some up with a changed figure, not to the extent they're suggesting
changing it. And I don't have the answer and I can't comment yet. We will by the
time they come back, I think, know whether there is any flexibility by not. I
was very careful not to make a promise. And whatever, if we have been able to
find this flexibility, we certainly will give them the figure on it.

Q. Just to follow up on that, couldn't - I mean, this might be decided for you,
in a sense, in that - I mean, if the mood of the Congress is that we have to cut
below the 10 percent, you're not going to have any choice, are you, sir?

A. I'm going to fight as hard as I can for what we've proposed in the line of a
defense buildup. We could not go back down to those figures without reducing our
readiness, reducing even the size of our military, number of men, and without
eliminating and cutting back on weapons systems that I believe are necessary.

Tax on Interest

Q. Can we switch back to domestic policy, Mr. President? I want to ask you about
your support for withholding of interest and dividends. Stories running around,
or circulating, I should say, that the Republican leaders came down here last
week and almost pleaded with you to bail out on that one. There are some stories
to the effect that they told you that, if you persist, and if you persist in
vetoing it, that you'll lose an override vote. Is that what they said, and
what's your reaction to that?

A. They were telling me what, the reaction that they were getting from many
people, the mail count and so forth. We have to recognize that there was a very
successful lobbying effort going on, still going on, for that matter. The truth
of the matter is - and I told them - that probably the majority of the people
that they were hearing from as opposed to this were people who were actually so
mislead that they believed that either this was a new tax being imposed or that
they were all going to be victimized in great losses in their interest and so
forth. Well, it isn't a new tax. Interest and dividends are taxed now. We're
only asking for withholding of this tax in order to close a gap through this
people who legitimately owe a tax are able to avoid payment of that income tax.

Q. But, Mr. President, if it looked like you were going to lose on that fight -
you would veto it and it would be overridden - would you agree to some other way
to close that gap, for instance, to hiring more I.R.S. agents?

A. The thing is before we ever came up with the proposal was when we explored
all those ways, and the cost was so tremendous. It gets down in this age of
computers to a really hand-to-hand, personal comparison of reports and so forth.

We're talking anywhere from $5 billion to $7.5 billion a year that is being
lost. But the other thing that the people don't realize yet - and we're going to
try to inform them as much as we can - they don't realize that the bulk of these
people who are protesting are not going to be affected. We're not withholding on
the bulk of dividend and interest holdings because we have set a limit below
which we don't go.

And where the senior citizens are concerned, and they are very much concerned
because so many of them now are counting on savings and so forth, where they're
concerned, they're not going to be affected at all. They're exempt. So, there's
only a limited number of people.

Now, the other thing is this fear of some loss of return on their interest.
Someone with $10,000 of savings and a 9 percent interest rate - the withholding
of their interest a little in advance, as this would do, thus, maybe reducing
the compound interest return - would amount to about $4.25 a year on a savings
account of $10,000, 9 percent interest -Q. Mr. President, did you give thought
to going on television to make your case on this, as you did on another subject
the other night?

A. I don't know. We've talked about all the things we can do. We're trying to
refute this. I've been encouraged by some surveying that's been done that
revealed that the people out there are more evenly split than they seem to
realize. The only trouble is they're only hearing from one side. We're trying to
get them to hear from the other side.

Is Watt a Liability?

Q. We're down to some short time here, sir. I wonder if you could tell me, one,
do you consider Jim Watt a political liability as Fahrenkopf said yesterday. We
had lunch, and he said that, you know, on a scale to one to 10, Watt was a
political liability right now. Do you see Jim Watt as that?

A. No, I don't. And what I see is very necessary, is that a perception that has
been created, that is absolutely false. I will match this Administration's
record with regard to environmental matters against that of any other
Administration. And we have been far more successful. We're spending more money
on parks and on acquisition of parks and so forth than the previous
Administration had spent in all its four years, in these two so far.

And I think what Jim Watt is the victim of is not the rank and file out there of
environmentalists - I think I'm one - but the victim of those professionals in
some of the various organizations who make me wonder sometimes whether they
really want the problem solved or whether they haven't recognized that as long
as they can keep the people impressed that there is a problem, their careers
will go on.

Decontrol of Natural Gas

Q. I have one other quick one, Mr. President. On the decontrol of natural gas,
you want that.  A. Yes.  Q. But utilities are really legal monopolies. There is
no competition, so to speak. I mean, prices don't come down like they do for
sugar or coffee or anything else. Would you be opposed to the legislation that's
now going around on the Hill to postpone from 1985 to 1987 the decontrol of half
the natural gas supply and also roll back the prices?

A. No, we've made a proposal, and it's based on the fact that control resulted
in increases. They weren't even depending on where the gas came from and so
forth throughout the country. But there are something like some 28 different
price levels in natural gas now, and the most recent increase for much of the
country was 20 percent.  And this is with conrols.

Q. That's right.  A. Now, we believe - and we believe that with the decontrol of
oil -we've proved it - that everyone told us that world gasoline price were
going to go to $2 a gallon. Well, they're lower than they were before we
decontrolled. They went down because there was an immediate upsurge of
exploration and development of oil. We think the same thing is going to happen
because today there are great supplies of natural gas that, under controls, are
sealed, are capped there in the ground and they're not using -utilizing them
because of the price controls and their low-priced gas. And we also have in our
legislation a provision against passing on any increases - Somebody's went
click.

Q. - trying to tell us something.  A. Well, this one will get it. That we have a
provision in that that they cannot pass on a tax increase. But you'll also find
out there at the state level most states recognizing utilities are basically a
monopoly. You have public utilities commissions with authority at the state
level to regulate prices.

Q. If I could just ask one quick question -LARRY SPEAKES: This will probably be
the last.

One-Term Presidents

Q. Without talking about your own re-election plans, do you think that it - does
it cause you any concern that this country has had a succession of Presidents
who have not been re-elected to a - have not been re-elected to a second term,
the succession of one-term Presidents? Is that the cause of any concern, do you
think?

A. I have read many people who say it is. And I have to say, yes, I think it is,
because I think it creates an instability. And it should be - the whole subject
should be looked at. Having been eight years in - as a Governor -and this isn't
in any way to tip off what I may or may not do, because it's going to have to
depend on each individual and whether that individual thinks they can continue
to be effective in the job. But you really can't in your years carry through
programs that may be necessary.

Missing Servicemen

Q. Mr. President, one super quick question here. Since you've just talked a
little bit about P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s, you've signed a proclamation for next
week, do you personally believe any American servicemen from Vietnam are still
alive in Southeast Asia?

A. I don't think we can afford to believe there aren't. And I know that this is
the attitude that the Defense Department is taking also. We do know that there
are some more than 2,000, close to 2,500 around there, names of individuals
missing in action, that there's no record. And a number of those - there have
been returned prisoners who say that they had seen them, they saw them alive,
they knew they were there. And I think we have to - we just have to keep on
following every lead. I think there also may be some people who might have
voluntarily chosen to stay. And all of this, we just have to keep after it with
every resource that we can devote to it.

Q. Well, we're not going to keep after it, but - on this subject.  We appreciate
it very much, Mr. President, the chance to chat with you. Hope some of our
colleagues will have a chance to do it again one of these days.

A. Oh, I hope so, too, and I'll look forward to it myself. I know there's a lot
of subjects we didn't get to, but I know also that we're over time, aren't we?

Q. Right.  A. All right.  Q. Thanks again, Mr. President.  THE PRESS: Thank you.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan with reporters

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 30, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

3 NEW BISHOPS TO SERVE MILITARY

BYLINE: By CHARLES AUSTIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 406 words


Three new Bishops have been appointed to assist Terence Cardinal Cooke in his
role as chief pastor to Catholics in the military services, the Archdiocese of
New York announced yesterday.

Pope John Paul II named Msgr. Joseph T. Dimino, 60 years old; Msgr. Lawrence J.
Kenney, 53, and Msgr. Francis X. Roque, 55, as Auxiliary Bishops in the church's
Military Ordinariate, which is headed by Cardinal Cooke and supervises all
military chaplains and related services.

Consecration to Be May 10

Their consecration May 10 at St. Patrick's Cathedral will bring to five the
number of Auxiliary Bishops in the Military Ordinariate.  Archbishop Joseph Ryan
is co-adjutor of the office with Cardinal Cooke.

Monsignor Dimino said the office was being expanded because the church
recognized the need for a permanent ministry to people in the military services,
so that they can be provided with such things as courses of instruction,
counseling and a marriage tribunal.

The non-geographical diocese serves 2.1 million service men and women and their
dependents, nonmilitary Government employees outside the United States and
patients in Veterans Administration hospitals, church officials said.

More than 1,000 full-time chaplains and 900 part-time chaplains are at work on
military bases and in Veterans Administration hospitals, church officials said.

Monsignor Dimino and Monsignor Roque both have long careers as military
chaplains, and Monsignor Kenney has been an aide to Cardinal Cooke since 1973.

Monsignor Dimino retired from military service in 1978 after 24 years as a Navy
chaplain. Born in the Bronx, he is a graduate of St.  Joseph's Seminary in
Yonkers and of Catholic University in Washington. He has been a chancellor with
the military vicariate since 1977.

Monsignor Kenney is a native of New Rochelle, N.Y., and was ordained in 1956. He
has accompanied Cardinal Cooke on his regular visits to military posts.

Monsignor Roque, an Army colonel who has been a chaplain since 1961, is a priest
of the Diocese of Providence, R.I., and is stationed at the Carlisle Barracks,
in Carlisle, Pa. Ordained in 1953, he served parishes in Rhode Island before
becoming a chaplain.  He has been assigned to Army posts in Korea, Vietnam,
Germany and the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 31, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THOUGH ANDROPOV IS BACK ON JOB, U.S. OFFICIALS SEE HEALTH PROBLEM

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 30


Yuri V. Andropov, the Soviet leader, is now visibly back on the job, but
American officials say they believe that his recent disappearance from public
view points to problems that could complicate his taking full control.

His disappearance for nine days ending March 25 prompted a flurry of rumors that
he was hospitalized with a serious and perhaps fatal kidney illness. In 1966,
Mr. Andropov suffered a heart attack and is reported by Western diplomats to
have taken long vacations since then, evidently combined with rest or medical
treatment.

The best estimates are that he was not seriously ill this month, but rather was
taken down by influenza and fatigue. Officials discount reports from Moscow that
he was forced into a hospital by recurrence of a kidney ailment known as
nephritis or Bright's disease.

Nonetheless, American officials see the quick spread of rumors as evidence of
nervousness in Moscow after the prolonged and politically debilitating illness
of Leonid I. Brezhnev and before the reshuffling of top jobs among his
successors has been completed.

Sense of Instability Is Seen

One line of reasoning is that, if Mr. Andropov disappears again, it could revive
a sense of instability in spite of the ease with which he seemed to assume
political command on Mr. Brezhnev's death in November.

Speaking of Mr. Andropov, one American Government analyst said: ''I would say
his health is going to be a political problem for him and also for the
leadership in general. It suggests some urgency for them in developing an
alternative to Andropov in case something happens to him. He could last 10 or 15
years, but since he has had a heart problem, it would be no surprise at his age
if he had a fatal heart attack any day.''

The analysts say that, given Mr. Andropov's age of 68, his heart problems and a
pale and seemingly frail appearance in recent meetings with foreign visitors, it
would have been normal for his doctors to prescribe a short period of rest for
flu to prevent complications.

His absence from view spanned nine days between a meeting on March 15 with
Communist officials from Eastern Europe, Cuba, Mongolia, Laos and Vietnam, and
meetings on March 25 with Daniel Ortega, the Nicaraguan leader, and Prime
Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau of Canada.

Politburo Meeting Canceled

Mr. Andropov's absence led to the apparent postponement of the principal
ceremony marking the centennial of the death of Karl Marx on March 17, a day on
which the normal Thursday meeting of the ruling Politburo was canceled.

The regular communique on the Politburo meeting the following Thursday did not
mention Mr. Andropov specifically, but the announced promotion that afternoon of
Foreign Minister Andrei A.  Gromyko to the post of a First Deputy Prime Minister
was read here as an indication that Mr. Andropov probably attended the meeting.

During Mr. Andropov's public absence, American analysts saw indications that his
former rival for power, Konstantin U. Chernenko, assumed the role of second in
command. For example, Mr. Chernenko received a personal message from Kim Il
Sung, the North Korean leader, delivered by the North Korean ambassador.

Some specialists see evidence that Mr. Andropov is encountering limitations on
his power. They point to the slowdown in personnel shifts after an initial
flurry in which one Deputy Prime Minister and four ministers were dismissed and
some party officials were demoted.  They also cite conflicting articles in the
Soviet press on proposed changes in the Soviet economy, suggesting that there
are unresolved divisions within the Politburo.

The assumption is that Mr. Andropov's state of health was known in November to
other members of the Soviet leadership and was not regarded as acute enough to
prevent his selection as party chief.  Nonetheless, analysts believe that the
stress of his new position could add to his past health problems and affect the
political situation.

In 15 years as head of the K.G.B., the intelligence and internal security
agency, Mr. Andropov often dropped from public view. Last year, for example, his
activities were not reported for a month or two on three occasions - Jan 29 to
March 1, March 25 to April 22, and Sept. 1 to Oct. 26. In 1981, he was out
during the vacation period of early July to late August and then again for 73
days, from Aug. 25 to Nov. 6.

A former Soviet diplomat has told American officials that Mr.  Andropov
sometimes goes to Krasnye Kamni, a health resort for the elite near Kislovodsk
in the Caucasus.

----

Marx Celebration is Held

MOSCOW, March 30 (UPI) - Eight Politburo members gathered today in the Bolshoi
Theater to mark the centennial of the death of Karl Marx.  Boris N. Ponomarev, a
party secretary, delivered the keynote speech.  The Politburo members were Yuri
V. Andropov; Prime Minister Nikolai A. Tikhonov; Konstantin U. Chernenko, party
secretary; Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko; Defense Minister Dmitri F.
Ustinov; Mikhail S. Gorbachev, party secretary; Geidar A. Aliyev, a First Deputy
Prime Minister, and Viktor V. Grishin, Moscow city party chief.

The only Moscow-based Politburo member absent was Arvid Y. Pelshe, 84 years old,
who may be ill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Yuri Andropov

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 258 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 31, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. 'MUGGING' FAILS

BYLINE: By Jeane J. Kirkpatrick

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y.


Usually Israel is cast as villain and victim in political melodramas played out
in the Security Council, but this past week, in the Nicaraguan matter, the
United States was the intended victim of what has become an all-too-familiar
scenario that features one victim, many attackers, a great deal of verbal
violence and a large number of indifferent and/or intimidated onlookers.

In these carefully staged productions, the Security Council serves as the stage,
the presence of the world press insures an audience, the solidarity of the
''blocs'' provides a long procession of speakers to echo, elaborate and expand
on the original accusations.  The goal is isolation and humiliation of the
victim - creation of an impression that ''world opinion'' is united in
condemnation of the targeted nation. The enterprise more closely resembles a
mugging than either a political debate or an effort at problem solving.

In the process, states that have no economic, strategic or political stake in
the issue except their common bloc membership become involved. The charges
become progressively outrageous, the denunciations progressively hyperbolic.
Thus, Ghana, say, or Zimbabwe, Grenada or Vietnam may join an Arab bloc
accusation against Israel for ''complicity'' in an attack on Arab holy places,
and before they are through ''discussing'' the case the original charge may be
lost entirely in accusations of ''genocide.''

Those who believe that ''sticks and stones may break my bones but words can
never hurt me'' will shrug off the whole process as a typical piece of
''U.N.ery'' in which the third world ''lets off steam.'' Those who hold the
Turkish-bath view of the United Nations may find this plausible, but others will
notice the vulnerability of the accused and the political strength displayed by
the attackers.  They may also note that the attackers, encountering no
obstacles, grow bolder, while other nations become progressively more reluctant
to associate themselves with the accused - presumably out of fear that they
themselves will become a target of bloc hostility.

Although this carefully orchestrated drama, now as stylized as a Chinese opera,
was perfected in the campaign to delegitimize Israel, it has been used three
times against the United States during the past year -most recently in this
week's Nicaraguan complaint. This time, however, the drama did not develop as
planned.

Nicaragua came to the Council arguing that it is legitimate for Commu-
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Jeane J. Kirpatrick is the United States' chief delegate to the United Nations.
nist guerrilla movements to operate against non-Communist governments but
illegitimate for guerrillas to oppose Sandinist repression; that it is
legitimate for Nicaragua and Cuba to arm and train guerrillas to operate in
Central America, but illegitimate for the United States or Honduras to do so.
Nicaragua argued, in sum, that everything is permitted to Communist movements
and governments and nothing is permitted their targets. Especially, the
Sandinist Deputy Foreign Minister insisted that Nicaragua's internal problems
(which feature Nicaraguans fighting Nicaraguans on Nicaraguan soil) are not
relevant either to its repressive internal policies or its aggressive support of
guerrilla movements in neighboring countries. Nicaragua expected, and had every
reason to expect, active support from the Soviet and nonaligned blocs, and
virtually no opposition. The process began as usual, but the drama did not
unfold as planned. Although there is some confusion among those who presumably
gave up watching after the first day, the facts are clear. Neither the United
States nor Honduras was isolated and the Nicaraguans did not secure broad
support for their preferred bilateral approach. Instead, support developed for a
regional approach to what are clearly regional problems. Venezuela backed the
concept of a conference of the Central American countries plus five neighboring
democracies to discuss the region's problems. (Costa Rica, Honduras, Nicaragua,
El Salvador and Guatemala - and Colombia, Panama, Mexico, the Dominican Republic
and Venezuela.) The Dominican Republic extended an invitation for the meeting
and many Latin American and Western European governments offered support for
this type of solution. The United States has indicated it would pose no
objections. The important fact about the last three days in the Security Council
meeting on the Nicaraguan complaint was that they did not conform to the pattern
in which the selected victim is helpless and the attacker in firm control. The
losers in this unconventional United Nations drama were those who seek to use
United Nations arenas and procedures to polarize nations, spread hostility and
exacerbate conflict for short-range political advantage. The winners are all
those who hope it is not too late to restore the Security Council as an arena
for their rational discussion and management of international disputes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
